Y’all know I was born and raised on Southern food and made my name sharing
my version of down-home cooking with the world. But the funny thing is that
until I began to travel outside of my own little town of Albany, Georgia, I
couldn’t have told you what Southern cooking is all about. Sure, my mama,
grandmama, and Aunt Peggy taught me just about everything there was to know
about the traditional dishes I grew up eating: the pork chops and gravy, the
chicken and dumplin’s, the fried peach pies. And when I moved to Savannah as
an adult, I learned mighty fast how differently folks eat there, with all the fruits
of the sea—beautiful blue crab and sweet shrimp—just swimming right outside
their back doors. When I married Michael, I married into Savannah red rice,
shrimp and grits, and a big old Low-Country boil full of seafood.
Southern food is simply not one thing or another. In fact, it’s about as regional
as you can get: drive around the South and you’ll soon discover that the gravy,
the barbecue sauce, and the corn bread change with the countryside. You haven’t
eaten Southern food until you’ve had a taste of the Tennessee mountains’ stack
cakes and chowchow, North Carolina’s hill-country barbecue, South Carolina’s
Low-Country dirty rice, and a she-crab soup from the beautiful port cities of
Charleston and Savannah, not to mention Cajun blackened fish, Creole gumbo,
and soul food like hoppin’John and collards from southern Louisiana.
All of this good food comes out of a rich history. In Louisiana, for instance,
exiled French refugees known as the Acadians arrived in South Louisiana from
Nova Scotia, Canada, in the mid-1700s. They were known for their use of wild
game, seafood, wild vegetation, and herbs. But when those Acadians, who later
became known as Cajuns, started mixing with the Native Americans, they
learned techniques for using what was available from the swamps, bayous, lakes,
rivers, and woods. Nowadays, Cajun food is a cuisine all its own, famous for its
one-pot meals, such as gumbo, and its sausages, like andouille and tasso.
Creole food, on the other hand, is also Louisiana-based but traces its roots
back to the early 1700s. Originating with Spanish immigrants and later blending
with Native American, French, Spanish, English, African, German, and Italian
cuisines, Creole cuisine gave us such traditional favorites as jambalaya, which
probably descended from a Spanish paella. Creole food also tends to be fancier
and closer to European cuisine than Cajun, since many of the Creoles were rich
planters, and their chefs came from France or Spain.
Each time I learn something new about what all the great cooks of the South
have simmering, I hold my head a little higher. I am just so proud to count
myself among them.
Good, down-home Southern cooking isn’t fancy, but when y’all sit down to a
simple plate of crisp fried chicken; a fluffy, warm, just-buttered biscuit; a mess
of greens cooked down with a bit of ham; and a tall, handsome banana cream pie
topped with ice-cold whipped cream afterward, well, you’ll have to agree: there
is just nothing better.
This book is my way of celebrating the wonderful food I grew up on, and
many of those classic dishes are included in these pages. I didn’t stop there,
though. I was eager to share the recipes I’ve learned and loved over the years as
I’ve met other cooks all across the South, and all the amazing people and stories
behind all that great food. There’s so much good eating from Louisiana to
Kentucky, from Virginia to Florida. So what I wanted to put together was my
Southern cooking bible.
I could spend the rest of my days crisscrossing the states south of the MasonDixon with my cast-iron skillet, and I still wouldn’t be able to round up even a
fraction of the wonderful, traditional recipes out there. Heck, you can get in a
war down here over barbecue sauce: Do you like a mustard base like the folks do
in South Carolina, a vinegar base from eastern North Carolina, or a red tomato
base from eastern Alabama? Or maybe you like a sweet and spicy base made
with ketchup, like they do in western North Carolina? Sometimes, you just got to
pick sides. I love it all, but my daddy’s tangy barbecue sauce is the one true
sauce I could never do without. Still, you got to keep trying ’em, because when it
comes to Southern food, it’s especially true that variety is the spice of life.
Most anytime you put two Southern cooks in the same kitchen, you will sense
a little cordial disagreement. For example, I would never put sugar in my
vegetables. But some folks in the South do like their vegetables sweet. And even
though you won’t find two Southerners with identical recipes, I do believe that
the recipes in the Southern Cooking Bible contain the essential ingredients that
bring together all great Southern cooking, from the deep, dark beefy flavor of
Louisiana’s Cajun Grillades and Grits (page 149) to the cheese and turkey melt
known as a Kentucky Hot Brown (page 99). I’ll tell you, even if a comforting
meal of South Carolina Chicken Bog (page 169), simmered with rice and
sausage, might not seem to have much in common with a big ol’smoking platter
of Memphis Dry-Rub Ribs (page 225), you can be sure they are served up with
the single most important, most commonplace ingredient used throughout the
entire South: hospitality.
The first thing a Southerner will ask when somebody walks into the house is,
“Are y’all thirsty? Y’all hungry?” Now, probably it has something to do with
how dirt poor many parts of the South were at one point or another in history.
Offering their guests a meal was a Southerner’s way of sharing as much as they
could even if they didn’t have much in the bank. Putting out a big, ample spread
is a point of pride for every Southern hostess: that’s her way of letting her guests
know they’ll be taken care of, and they don’t need to hold back. That’s why our
meals tend to be served family style, with big old bowls on the table heaped full
of corn, slaw, fried okra, sweet potatoes, beans, sliced tomatoes, cucumbers, and
onions. It doesn’t matter how much meat you serve once you got your fresh
vegetables, your pickles, relishes, biscuits, butter, and syrup set out: there will be
fine food for all. And of course, as sure as day follows night, you can be sure
there will be plenty of dessert to come.
In fact, even when times were hard, Southerners typically used their
resourcefulness and the bounty of berry bushes, streams and brooks, and a
kitchen garden to get them through. So many of the beloved recipes in these
pages were born through the combination of a talented cook and a scant pantry:
flour, shortening, cornmeal, maybe a bit of smoked ham, and the occasional old
laying hen, plus a bushel of homegrown fruits and vegetables. These are the
main ingredients in the majority of recipes in this book.
It is so interesting to think about how many different foods come from the
simplest items in the Southern pantry. We got our cornmeal, introduced to
European settlers by the Native Americans, along with beans, peppers, and
squash. And right there you can make a meal out of hoecakes, those little skillet
corn breads that Southerners just adore with a plate of vegetables.
Of course corn doesn’t go just into corn bread: we also turn it into hominy
and, maybe the most uniquely Southern ingredient of all, grits. Oh my, it’s no
wonder that folks call the area from Louisiana to the Carolinas the Grits Belt.
Down here, we could eat grits from sunup to sundown. And we do. There’s grits
and eggs and bacon for breakfast, maybe with some steaming buttered biscuits
on the side. Grits with gravy makes a side dish for anything at lunch or dinner or
can even be its own meal in harder times. And if you haven’t had a dinner of
shrimp and grits, you’ve got to get yourself down to Charleston and try some
out: simple, hearty, and filling, that is a meal that fishermen invented and you
will not find a better way to end the day. Once you have grits in your cabinet,
you’re ready to do like any good Southern cook and just keep on cooking them: I
make grits cakes with leftover grits just like my mama used to, all buttery and
crisp around the edges. And I have even invented a Down-Home Grits Pie (page
327)!
African-American traditions are another great big piece of Southern cooking.
Cooking with produce like black-eyed peas, okra, yams, benne seeds,
watermelon, and peanuts—all grew roots in African soil. Techniques like
smoking meat, preparing pot greens with their liquor, and deep-frying existed in
Africa before crossing the Atlantic. And now, Southern fried chicken, fish, and
fruit fritters are just about the pinnacle of our cooking, y’all.
Biscuits and gravy (pages 276 to 277); She-Crab Soup (page 80); Jambalaya
(page 114); Chicken with Drop Dumplin’s (page 165). Oh, my goodness, I was
like a kid in a candy shop trying to fit everything wonderful about the Southern
table into this cookbook, and, y’all, I have hardly scratched the surface. I mean,
what Southern cook worth her salt—or sugar—would feel content with only five
dessert chapters? You’ll see that beyond the Divinity (page 414), the Lemony
Chess Pie (page 324), the Nutty Brittle (page 418), and the Coconut Cake (page
363), there is an infinity of other beautiful treats just waiting to be discovered.
All my recipes are big on flavor—because in the South, as my mama always
told me, your seasonings need to be scared of you, not the other way around.
We’re not afraid to pull out that ham hock and that butter and do to a dish what
needs to be done. Now, Southerners can be big, loud, and passionate, and we are
never more that way than when we’re talking food—cooking or eating it.
Because when you come right down to it, whether you think your dumplings
should be rolled or dropped, whether you make a white milk gravy or a redeye
gravy, and whichever way you make your chili, your corn bread, or your
barbecue, whenever you are cooking Southern food, you are cooking from the
heart.
So, y’all, get cookin’ and find your own favorites. And, as always, I’m
sending you best dishes and best wishes from down South!


Have y’all ever been to a party in the South? If you have, then you will surely
know that a Southerner will greet you at the door with two things: a smile and a
plate. No matter how big or small a gathering, a party just cannot be said to have
started without the appetizer course being served—it just isn’t done. And that
holds true if we’re talking about a cocktail bash, a sit-down dinner party, or just
having the girls over for cards and conversation. Little nibbles eaten with one
hand leave the other hand free for an adult beverage of some sort, and the corner
of the mouth available for chitchat. They are a Southerner’s way of saying,
“Y’all come in and set a spell.”
At any get-together, the first bites you serve set the tone. Sure, you could cook
every dainty fresh-out-of-the-oven treat you know, but the message you’d be
sending when you answered the door would be something like this: “Listen, I am
freaking exhausted. Y’all better enjoy this damn party. I am going to bed.” You
want to plan your cooking so you open that door with a big wide smile that says,
“Come on in and let’s get this party started!” That means having delicious, fussfree recipes that you can serve right away.
To make things easier, I divide up my appetizers between hot and cold. You
can make most cold dishes ahead and have them out as your first guests arrive,
which is a big stress reliever. Then, I choose a few hot appetizers to do lastminute. And I’m not shy about grabbing friends who love to feel helpful and set
them to work on those. It always goes smoother when I cook things I’ve made
before. And I always assume there will be a vegetarian showing up (it takes all
kinds, after all). Finally, I like to stick to what’s fresh and available—no need to
go chasing down tomatoes in January.
If you’re making a whole meal, you need only about three different appetizers.
For a cocktail party, do eight or nine. If your party is timed so folks are likely to
skip dinner, serve heartier choices like the Family Reunion Deviled Eggs (page
25) and the Hot Crab Dip with Cheddar (page 8). And I always go for variety.
You want only one or two bread-based appetizers, like Tomato Sandwiches
(page 36), which you prep in advance, then assemble last-minute, or Benne Seed
Canapés (page 24), which are so easy and out-of-this-universe delicious. Then
serve some sort of fruit, like Pecan and Cream Cheese–Stuffed Dates (page 7),
some sort of vegetable, maybe Bubblin’ Brown Artichoke and Cream Cheese
Dip (page 13), and one or two meats—and if you haven’t had the Sizzlin’
Jalapeño Sausage Balls (page 11), y’all just ain’t from around these parts.
I always figure people will eat about ten bites of appetizers each, so there’s no
need to overdo the quantities. Then again, if you’ve got a roomful of Michael
Groovers, you might want to up that a bit. Oh, and my Two Little Piggies in a
Blanket (page 16)? Folks lose count with that one, so I just keep ’em coming.
Setting out a “little something” is kind of like giving somebody a hug when
they walk into the house. And I like to make it a bear hug.
PECAN AND CREAM CHEESE–STUFFED DATES
This perfect Southern party starter is as easy as one-two-three. Because if you
tell any Southern cook that there are people coming over, the first thing she’ll do
is reach into the refrigerator and grab a block of cream cheese. The second thing
she’ll do is get out the bacon. And number three is she’s just got to find
something in the pantry to go in between the cream cheese and the bacon—in
this case, plump dates. To make this an extra-memorable nibble, I mix the cream
cheese filling with finely chopped pecans and a dash of freshly ground black
pepper.
MAKES 12 STUFFED DATES
3 tablespoons (1½ ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
3 tablespoons finely chopped pecans
¼ teaspoon black pepper (optional) 12 Medjool dates
4 slices bacon, cut crosswise into thirds
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a baking sheet with foil.
2. In a bowl, stir together the cream cheese, pecans, and black pepper (if you
are using it—the pepper adds a little heat). Using a teaspoon, stuff each date with
some of the cream cheese mixture. There should be enough to fill each date
without the mixture spilling out and making a mess.
3. Wrap a piece of bacon around each date and secure the bacon to the date
with a toothpick. Place the stuffed dates on the foil-lined baking sheet and put
them in the oven for 8 minutes. Then, if you’re like me and have been cooking
for long enough to develop some calluses on your fingertips, go ahead and use
your fingers to flip each date—otherwise, use a pair of kitchen tongs. Then
return the dates to the oven and bake until the bacon is crisp, 4 to 7 minutes
longer.
4. Lay the stuffed dates on a paper towel–lined plate to drain off some of the
bacon fat. Serve them while they’re still hot.
WHEN SELECTING DATES, BE CHOOSY!
I specify Medjool dates in this recipe because they are bigger and more tender
than your average supermarket date. But if you can’t find them in your area,
don’t fret. All you got to do is choose the plumpest dates to stuff, no matter what
kind.
HOT CRAB DIP WITH CHEDDAR
In the past twenty years since I have called Savannah, Georgia, my home, do you
know how many events I have attended where a crab dish was not on the menu?
Zero! Because when you have the blessing of abundant seafood, you simply
have to find a way to serve it at every gathering.
This hot crab dip is a tried-and-true crowd-pleaser. Crab is such a rich-tasting
shellfish, I think it goes extremely well with a little extra creaminess—and that’s
why I mix in cream cheese, mayonnaise, and sour cream for a smooth and
decadent dip that is impressive enough to serve at even your fanciest soirees.
And a little bit of hot-sauce kick lets your taste buds know that this hearty starter
still has plenty of good, down-home flavor in its soul.
SERVES 10 TO 12
1 pound crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see box)
1½ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (6 ounces)
8 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
¼ cup mayonnaise
¼ cup sour cream
4 scallions, white and light green parts finely chopped, dark green tops
reserved
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
1½ teaspoons Worcestershire sauce
1 teaspoon hot sauce, or to taste
½ teaspoon mustard powder
Tortilla chips or crackers, for dipping
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F.
2. In a bowl, stir together the crabmeat, Cheddar, cream cheese, mayonnaise,
sour cream, chopped scallions, garlic, lemon juice, Worcestershire sauce, hot
sauce, and mustard powder.
3. Scrape the mixture into a wide baking dish—one that’s pretty enough for
serving. Bake until the dip is golden and bubbling, 45 to 55 minutes.
4. Chop the dark green scallion tops and sprinkle over the dip to add a little
color. Serve hot, with a bowl of tortilla chips or crackers to use as dippers.
NO SHELLS IN THE DIP, PLEASE
Believe me, crunching into a stray bit of shell is no way to experience a
mouthful of crab dip. Here’s a little trick I learned in the restaurant business:
Spread the crabmeat onto a baking sheet in an even layer and place in a low oven
(about 200°F) for about 3 minutes. The heat will turn the shells red, making
them so much easier to pick out of the white meat.
Loosen the peel by pressing down firmly on the garlic clove with the side of
a large, heavy knife. The skin will split open, and the clove will slip easily
from the peel.
READY WHEN YOU ARE
Everybody loves to dig into hot, rich, fresh-out-of-the-oven dips, but last-minute
cooking when you’re expecting guests can be a recipe for disaster. That’s why I
love appetizers like this one, which you can put together in your baking dish a
few hours ahead. Just cover and refrigerate it until about 30 minutes before your
guests come, then pop it in the oven and put your feet up.
SHORE IS GOOD SEAFOOD DIP
This is another wonderful bubbling-hot dip along the same lines as my Hot Crab
Dip with Cheddar. This has been a mainstay on the menu of The Lady & Sons
from time immemorial. In fact, it has become so popular at the restaurant that we
have started selling it all across the country at Costco stores. So if you just don’t
have the time to make this recipe for your next party, I recommend you make a
trip to your local Costco and pick some up in the frozen foods section!
SERVES 12 TO 16
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1 medium green bell pepper, diced
1 medium yellow onion, diced
2 celery stalks, diced
Half of a 10¾-ounce can condensed cream of shrimp soup (discard the
top half and use the bottom part of the soup)
1 cup mayonnaise
2 cups grated Parmesan cheese (8 ounces)
6 ounces crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see box
opposite)
6 ounces cooked peeled shrimp, fresh (see box, page 33) or canned
½ teaspoon white pepper
Toast points or crackers, for dipping
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Lightly grease a 2½ - to 3-quart baking dish.
2. In a skillet, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the bell pepper, onion,
and celery, and cook, stirring often, until soft ened, about 2 minutes.
3. In a bowl, combine the soup, mayonnaise, Parmesan, crabmeat, shrimp, and
white pepper. Stir the vegetable mixture into the seafood mixture.
4. Spoon the mixture into the baking dish and bake until bubbling and golden
brown, about 30 minutes. Serve with toast points or crackers for dipping.
HOT CHILI AND CHEESE DIP
Now, sometimes a party might mean puttin’ on your fancy dress and laying a
table with canapés and cocktails. But other times it means having the gang over,
turnin’ on the game on TV, opening some cans of beer, and puttin’ out the best
hot chili and cheese dip in all of creation. Both kinds of parties are all right with
me. Believe it or not, I keep all the fixings for this fantastic hot dip in the house
just in case I can wrangle a free evening to spend with my daughter-in-law,
Brooke, and my niece, Corrie. And without the boys around, we get that dip (and
the clicker) all to ourselves!
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 can (15 ounces) chili with beans
8 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 cup shredded pepper Jack cheese (4 ounces)
Tortilla chips, for dipping
1. In a medium saucepan, combine the chili, cream cheese, and chili powder.
Cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until the mixture is smooth. Stir in
the pepper Jack and cook until the cheese melts and the dip is hot, 3 to 5
minutes.
2. Very, very carefully pour the hot dip into a bowl for serving. Make sure
there are plenty of tortilla chips on hand for dipping.
COUCH POTATOES
If you end up with leftover dip (hah!) or if you just love potatoes as much as I
do, try this as a baked potato topping, along with sour cream, scallions, and
maybe some crumbled crisp bacon.
SIZZLIN’ JALAPEÑO SAUSAGE BALLS
Now, y’all, I swear sausage balls have been around since just about the dawn of
time. And can I make a confession? I have grown just the tiniest bit tired of
them. But for heaven’s sake, I wouldn’t dare leave them off my table when I’m
entertaining, because Southerners have just got to have their sausage balls with
some kind of sauce for dipping right alongside. So I say if you can’t beat ’em,
join ’em. And my recipe for sausage balls packs such a spicy sizzle that you
wouldn’t ever get tired of popping one of these in your mouth—that pepper will
wake you right up!
MAKES 60 SAUSAGE BALLS
Mustard-Mayo Dipping Sauce
1 cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
Jalapeño Sausage Balls
3 cups Bisquick baking mix
2½ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (10 ounces)
1 pound sweet Italian sausage, casings removed
3 tablespoons cold butter, cut into small bits
1 jalapeño pepper, seeded, if desired, and finely chopped
SPICE THINGS UP
If you don’t like chopping up chilies but still want a dip with a kick, try using
hot Italian sausage here.
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Grease two baking sheets well with butter or
coat with cooking spray.
2. To make the dipping sauce: In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise
and mustard. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate until the sausage balls are
ready to serve.
3. To make the sausage balls: In a large bowl, knead together all of the
sausage ball ingredients until well combined. If the mixture seems dry, add 1 to 2
tablespoons water, as needed, to bring the mixture together.
4. Form the mixture into 1¼ -inch balls (a little smaller than a Ping-Pong ball)
and place them on the prepared baking sheets. Take care that the sausage balls
don’t touch, as that will make them take longer to cook through. Bake until they
are golden all over, about 25 minutes.
5. Set the sausage balls on paper towels to drain off extra grease, and then
place them on a pretty platter with some cocktail sticks so people don’t have to
eat them with their fingers. Serve warm, with the mustard-mayo sauce for
dipping.
BACON AND SPINACH–STUFFED MUSHROOMS
Every good Southern bride has her secrets, and I am about to share one of mine
with y’all. The secret of how I get my charming husband, Michael, to eat his
vegetables is that I hide spinach in these tasty little stuffed mushroom caps. And
with the crumbled bacon and cheesy Parmesan topping, they are so easy to eat,
he doesn’t even mind that he’s getting a helping of leafy greens in every bite.
Just one more reason to serve these beauties at your next party, or whenever your
man turns up his nose at the salad course!
MAKES 20 STUFFED MUSHROOMS
20 large white mushrooms, stems removed
1 package (10 ounces) frozen chopped spinach, thawed
6 slices bacon, cooked and crumbled
8 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
½ cup chopped scallion
Salt and black pepper
½ cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 2 ounces)
TWO FOR ONE
In a rush? Some stores stock scallion cream cheese, which will save you the step
of chopping scallions. Just use a heaping ½ cup of scallion cream cheese in place
of the plain.
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.
2. Put a little water on a paper towel and wipe those mushroom caps clean. Put
the spinach in a sieve, set it over the sink, and squeeze out as much liquid as you
can. You don’t want that extra spinach juice making your mushroom caps soggy.
3. In a large bowl, mix together the spinach, bacon, cream cheese, scallion,
and salt and black pepper to taste. Fill the mushroom caps with the mixture and
set them on a baking sheet. Sprinkle the Parmesan on top.
4. Bake until the topping is golden brown, about 15 minutes. Let the
mushrooms cool a little bit on the baking sheet. Then, while they’re still warm,
arrange them on a pretty platter and serve.
THE CRUNCHIEST BACON IN THE UNIVERSE
Y’all, I have a deep-fat fryer in my home kitchen and I like to use it. Just follow
the manufacturer’s instructions for the crunchiest, crispiest bacon you’ll ever
taste.
BUBBLIN’ BROWN ARTICHOKE AND CREAM CHEESE DIP
This is a dip I learned to make from my darling Aunt Peggy and Uncle George,
who had it out at every family get-together since I was a very little girl growing
up in southwest Georgia. And you know what? That very same bubbling-hot
appetizer that I loved to scoop up when I was barely big enough to reach the
table is still the one I like to serve to my family and friends at our Savannah
table—and in my own restaurant!
SERVES 6 TO 8
8 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
1 cup mayonnaise
1¾ cups grated Parmesan cheese (about 7 ounces)
1 can (14 ounces) artichoke hearts, drained and coarsely chopped
3 scallions, finely chopped
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
¾ teaspoon hot sauce
¼ teaspoon black pepper
⅛ teaspoon salt
Crackers, tortilla chips, or crusty bread, for dipping
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. Using an electric mixer, beat the cream cheese until it is smooth. Beat in the
mayonnaise until combined. Add 1½ cups of the Parmesan, the artichoke hearts,
scallions, garlic, hot sauce, black pepper, and salt and mix with a spatula until
combined.
3. Scrape the mixture into a wide, shallow gratin or baking dish that’s pretty
enough for serving and top with the remaining ¼ cup Parmesan. Bake until the
dip is bubbling and the top is golden, 30 to 40 minutes. Serve hot, with crackers,
tortilla chips, or crusty bread for dipping.
DIPPING DETAILS
Here is something I used to make to serve with artichoke dip when I first started
out in the catering business in Savannah. Take slices of white bread, cut off the
crusts, then cut each slice into four squares. Then get out your mini-muffin tins,
brush the bottom of each cup with a little butter, and poke the bread squares into
them. Put them in a 350°F oven for about 5 minutes, until they crisp up and form
little buttery cups, the perfect party dippers.
HOT PIMIENTO CHEESE DIP
I am always amazed when I go around the country and I hear people say,
“Pimiento cheese? What’s that? I’ve never heard of it.” Well, I say y’all haven’t
lived until you have tasted good old homemade pimiento cheese—and for
goodness’ sake, if I ever left the pimiento cheese sandwiches out of Jamie’s and
Bobby’s lunch boxes, you can be sure they would trade their tuna fish or egg
salad until they got their hands on one of their classmates’ pimiento cheese. It is
a classic Southern ingredient.
This is the perfect way of serving it up hot and ready for a party. Why, it’s just
like dipping into the melted insides of one of my all-time favorite grilled
pimiento cheese sandwiches. Yum.
SERVES 6 TO 8
2 cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (8 ounces)
2 cups shredded Monterey Jack cheese (8 ounces)
1 jar (4 ounces) chopped pimientos, well drained
½ cup mayonnaise
1½ teaspoons grated yellow onion
¼ teaspoon garlic powder
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
½ cup diced tomato
Tortilla chips or crackers, for dipping
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer, stir together the cheeses by hand. Measure
out ½ cup of the cheese mixture for the topping and set aside.
3. Pat the pimientos dry with a paper towel and add them to the mixer bowl
along with the mayonnaise, onion, garlic powder, salt, and black pepper. Mix at
medium speed until the ingredients are well combined. Use a spatula or wooden
spoon to fold the tomato in by hand.
4. Scrape the mixture into a gratin dish or wide, shallow baking dish that’s
pretty enough for serving. Sprinkle the top of the dip with the reserved cheese
mixture. Bake until the dip is bubbling and golden, about 25 minutes. Let cool
for 5 minutes before serving with plenty of chips or crackers.
GIVE IT A WHIRL
To make quick work of dicing a tomato, I must confess I often reach for my food
processor. Pulse that beauty a few times, and it’s done. Plus, you can transfer it
to the dip with a slotted spoon to leave behind some of the tomato juices. I say a
smart cook is one who knows a good shortcut.
BAKED BRIE WITH FIG JAM
This is one of my favorite foods in the whole world: creamy Brie cheese and
figs. I just love that salty-sweet combination. And when you serve it like this, all
wrapped up in a flaky, buttery puff pastry, it’s not just delicious but a real beauty,
too. I always serve this when I want to make an especially good impression—in
fact, it’s what I taught Jamie to make for his beautiful wife, Brooke, the first time
he had her over to his house for dinner.
SERVES 8 TO 10
All-purpose flour, for dusting
1 sheet puff pastry (from a 17 ½-ounce package), thawed if frozen
1 wheel (2 to 2 ¼ pounds) Brie
½ cup Fig Jam (page 421)
1 cup chopped toasted walnuts
1 large egg, lightly beaten
Crackers or crusty bread, for serving
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F.
2. Sprinkle a little flour onto a work surface and gently roll out the sheet of
puff pastry until it is big enough to cover the wheel of Brie, about a 9-inch
square. Place the Brie in the center of the dough. Spread the jam thickly on top
of the cheese and sprinkle with the nuts. Close the ends of the pastry over the
cheese like a package, pinching the edges to seal, and transfer to a rimmed
baking sheet.
3. Brush the pastry all over with the beaten egg and bake until golden brown
with no white spots, 35 to 40 minutes. Carefully transfer the cheese to a platter
and serve while still warm with crackers or crusty bread.
WRAP IT UP!
Is there anything more deliciously rich and flaky than puff pastry? And no matter
how many times you shrug your shoulders and confess that you just thawed a
package, folks will insist on praising you to the skies for your baking. Well, let
them. This is one of those dishes that’s a stunner on a holiday table. For a fun
presentation, I take my kitchen twine and, instead of folding over the ends of the
pastry, I bring it all up around the Brie and tie it closed so it looks like a gift bag.
So pretty.
TWO LITTLE PIGGIES IN A BLANKET
Pig in a blanket is a classic American appetizer, what I remember having at all
the best parties when I was growing up. When I started making them for Jamie’s
and Bobby’s birthday parties, I just had to put my own Paula-spin on it. So
what’s better than one little piggie in a blanket? Well, nothing but two little
piggies in a blanket, of course! And that is the way Jamie and Brooke still make
them for their sweet little boy, Jack.
MAKES 16 LITTLE PIGGIES
8 slices bacon
1 package (8 ounces) crescent rolls
16 cocktail wieners
6 tablespoons ketchup
¼ cup Dijon mustard
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Coat a baking sheet with cooking spray or line it
with parchment paper.
2. In a large skillet, cook the bacon until golden but still pliable. Remove from
the skillet and halve crosswise.
3. Separate the dough into 8 triangles. Cut each dough triangle in half
lengthwise (you will end up with 16 slender triangles). Wrap each wiener in a
half slice of bacon. Place each wrapped wiener on the wide end of a dough
triangle and roll the dough over the wiener. Place the rolls on the prepared
baking sheet, 2 inches apart. Bake until golden, about 15 minutes.
4. Meanwhile, whisk together the ketchup and mustard. Serve alongside the
piggies, for dipping.
PIGGIES ON ICE
Before the holidays, do yourself a favor and roll up a double recipe of these
babies. Freeze them, unbaked, on parchment-lined baking sheets, then transfer to
an airtight container. They’ll keep in the freezer for a few months and can be
baked from frozen (just add a few minutes to the cooking time). Now, who’s the
hostess with the mostest?
HAM BISCUITS
Now, I learned this recipe from the good folks in Kentucky. Ham and biscuits is
a classic taste of the South, no matter where you go, but over in Kentucky they
mince the ham with butter and spread it on good cream biscuits, which to me is
just absolutely out of this world. I would not have a ham biscuit any other way.
MAKES 12 BISCUITS
Cream Biscuits
2 cups self-rising flour, plus more for dusting
1 tablespoon sugar 1
½ cups heavy cream
Ham
½ pound cooked country ham, or any cooked ham, coarsely chopped
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1. Preheat the oven to 500°F. Lightly grease a rimmed baking sheet with butter
or coat with cooking spray.
2. To make the biscuits: In a large bowl, mix together the flour and sugar. Pour
in the cream and fold together until a soft dough forms. Turn the dough out onto
a surface that’s been lightly sprinkled with more flour. With the palms of your
hands, knead the dough gently 6 or 7 times, adding just enough flour as needed
to keep the dough from sticking to your hands.
3. Roll or pat the dough out until it’s about ½ inch thick. Dip a 3-inch round
biscuit or cookie cutter in flour and cut out the biscuits, placing them at least 1
inch apart on the prepared baking sheet. Bake until golden brown, 10 to 12
minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool slightly.
4. Meanwhile, to make the ham filling: Place the ham and butter in a food
processor and pulse until combined and the pieces of ham are finely chopped.
5. Split the hot biscuits in half and fill each with about 1 tablespoon of the
ham mixture. Serve them up while they’re still warm.
CUT TO THE CHASE
I know a lot of cooks who will take any old juice glass out of the cupboard to cut
their biscuits, and I’m sure their biscuits rise plenty even and tall, but let me just
tell you that the blunt edge of a glass can sometimes press down your dough at
the edges and keep those biscuits from rising up to their lightest, fluffiest selves.
So use a sharp metal cutter, or, in a pinch, grab a clean empty tin can for the job.
SWEET SALTINES WITH BACON
If y’all are anything like me and love that sweet-salty combo, you are just going
to love this recipe. In any pantry in the South you are sure to find a box of saltine
crackers, and you are certainly sure to find a package of bacon in the fridge. So
whenever guests drop by unexpectedly, just whip up a batch of these
showstopping snacks, and believe me, those drop-in callers will be singing your
praises all over town.
MAKES 24 CRACKERS
24 saltine crackers
¼ cup maple syrup
12 slices bacon, halved crosswise
1. Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil.
2. Arrange the crackers salt side up on the prepared sheet. Brush each cracker
top with the maple syrup and wrap a half slice of bacon around each cracker,
with the ends meeting in the middle (not at the edge) of the unsalted side. Brush
the bacon with the remaining maple syrup.
3. Bake the crackers for 5 minutes, then remove the baking sheet from the
oven and carefully flip each cracker. I just use my bare fingertips for this, which
you can do if you’re real quick, or else use a pair of kitchen tongs. Return the
sheet to the oven and continue baking until the bacon is crisp, another 8 to 10
minutes.
4. Allow the crackers to cool slightly on the baking sheet, then arrange them
on a platter, seam side down, and watch them go!
SWEET AS A SOUTHERN BELLE
I call for maple syrup here because you can find it easily. But if you’re in the
South, go ahead and use cane syrup instead. Darker than motor oil, with a sweet
molasses flavor, that is one of our finer foods, and it’s only a matter of time
before you start seeing it above the Mason-Dixon Line.
BATTER-FRIED COUNTRY HAM BITES
Ham steak is such a convenient way to get yourself a ham fix without having to
commit to a great big country roast. I love it with a spicy-sweet glaze. Well, one
thing leads to another in a Southern kitchen, and at some point I began making
my ham steak in a skillet, by breading and frying it in cubes, with spicy-sweet
Jezebel Sauce for dipping.
SERVES 12 TO 14
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
One 2-pound ham steak (1 inch thick)
1 cup all-purpose flour
½ teaspoon baking powder
1⅓ cups buttermilk
Jezebel Sauce (page 431)
1. In a large, heavy pot, heat 1 ½ inches of oil to 360°F. Preheat the oven to
200°F.
2. Meanwhile, cut the ham into 1-inch cubes. In a medium bowl, whisk the
flour and baking powder together and then whisk in the buttermilk.
3. Drop about 10 ham cubes into the batter. Lift out, letting any excess drip
back into the bowl. Fry in the hot oil until deep golden, about 1½ minutes.
Remove with tongs or a slotted spoon to a paper towel–lined baking sheet to
drain.
4. Repeat with the remaining ham cubes. As you finish each batch of ham
bites, they can be kept warm in a 200°F oven. Serve the ham bites with the
Jezebel Sauce.
PUT IT TO GOOD USE
Now, remember what I keep telling you about us Southern chefs being smart and
economical about our ingredients? Here’s a perfect example. This is just the
recipe for your leftover ham after a big family gathering.
Carefully insert the thermometer into the hot oil, angling it away from the
bottom of the pan so that it does not touch the pan base but remains
suspended in the oil.
CAJUN POPCORN ROYALE
One of my favorite things to do with my precious grandbaby Jack is to snuggle
up on the couch and watch movies. We each get out our own big bowl of
popcorn—I make his with just a little butter and salt for a topping, but I like to
have more flavor than that in my bowl. So I load it up with some Cajun
seasoning and grated Parmesan cheese. That way even if we’re watching the
same Disney cartoon for the zillionth time, I will still be interested.
I’ve even started serving bowls of this on my party buffet table. It makes a
nice change from salty mixed nuts, one of those easy little twists that will make
your party a smash.
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
⅓ cup popcorn kernels
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1 teaspoon Cajun seasoning
⅓ cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 1 ounces)
1. In a large skillet with a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add 2
kernels of the corn and cover the skillet. When one of the kernels pops, add the
remaining popcorn to the pan. Cover and shake until the popping stops, then
transfer the popcorn to a large bowl.
2. Melt the butter in a small saucepan or in the microwave, then stir the Cajun
seasoning into it.
3. Toss the popcorn with the seasoned butter. Add the Parmesan, toss again,
and serve in small individual bowls—or in one big bowl and have everyone dig
in.
MIX IT UP
This is one of those wonderful recipes that you can adapt to almost any taste. I
love to sub in different kinds of cheeses, like shredded Cheddar or blue cheese
crumbles. Sometimes I’ll even skip the cheese and the Cajun seasoning
altogether and have myself a piping-hot bowl of cinnamon-sugared popcorn.
DR PEPPER PECANS
Here in the South we love our soda pop, and every time I open up a bottle, I am
instantly brought back to my school days when I’d stop at the corner store for an
icy-cold Coke with my baby brother, Bubba. And though I do have a fondness
for Coca-Cola–glazed ham, I think these Dr Pepper Pecans are my number one
favorite way to enjoy a pop without sucking it through a straw. Surprisingly, they
are not too sweet but have that certain peppy flavor that will have people
wondering just what could be the secret ingredient in these nuts. I love to watch
their eyes light up when I tell them!
MAKES 1 CUP (4 SERVINGS)
1 cup Dr Pepper
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1 cup pecan halves
Salt
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil.
2. In a small saucepan, bring the Dr Pepper and butter to a boil over mediumhigh heat. Simmer until the liquid reduces by half, about 15 minutes.
3. Stir in the pecans and continue to cook until the liquid becomes a sticky
glaze, 3 to 4 minutes. Add a big pinch of salt, stir, and transfer the nuts to the
prepared baking sheet. Bake, stirring once or twice, until toasted, about 10
minutes.
NOT EVERYBODY’S A PEPPER
If Dr Pepper is not your soda pop of choice, this recipe works just fantastically
with any variety of cola or root beer.
CHEESE STRAWS
If you lay out only one appetizer on your Southern party table, I really think it
should be this one. I don’t think any party should be without a glass (or basket)
of these beautiful cheese straws.
My smart-as-a-whip cousin, Johnnie Gabriel (the proprietress of Gabriel’s
Desserts, in Marietta, Georgia), serves the most fantastic cheese straws I’ve ever
had. She was kind enough to share her recipe with me, which I have adapted
slightly over the years. These straws are a true taste of the South and, for me, a
true taste of family.
MAKES 12 DOZEN CHEESE STRAWS
3 ½ cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
4 cups shredded extra-sharp Cheddar cheese (16 ounces)
3 sticks (¾ pound) butter, at room temperature
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Lightly grease three baking sheets or coat with
cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, sift together the flour, salt, and cayenne pepper. In another
large bowl, use an electric mixer to cream together the Cheddar and butter. With
the mixer at low speed, add the flour mixture to the cheese and butter in two
batches just to combine. Once the flour mixture is evenly mixed in, increase the
speed and beat the dough until well combined. Scrape the dough into a cookie
press or pastry bag fitted with a star tip.
3. Pipe the dough in 2-to 3-inch strips onto the prepared baking sheets and
bake until lightly browned, 12 to 15 minutes. Allow the cheese straws to cool for
about 5 minutes on the baking sheets before transferring them to wire racks to
continue cooling. Cheese straws are best served warm or at room temperature on
the day they are made, but they will keep for up to 3 days in an airtight
container.
BREAKING UP IS EASY TO DO!
Cheese straws are just so darn delicate—it’s part of their charm. But if you end
up with a ton of broken-up pieces of cheese straws, please, for the love of
cheese, do not toss them in the trash! Instead, toss them onto a baking sheet,
sprinkle them with grated Parmesan cheese, and pop them into a 350°F oven
until the Parmesan is golden. Let these little cheese bites cool, then serve them in
a pretty bowl for nibbling. Folks will think you meant to serve them that way!
BENNE SEED COCKTAILERS
Like the Cheese Straws, these are another classic Southern nibble, and they are
just right as a base for a spread or dip. They can even be enjoyed just on their
own. The benne seeds (which I understand are known as sesame seeds in other
parts of the country) have a subtle, nutty flavor that is so very enjoyable in this
buttery cracker. In fact, I like to make up a batch of these crispy treats to have in
the house just for the sake of snacking, no matter if I happen to be planning a
get-together or not.
MAKES 30 CRACKERS
2 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
1 cup sesame seeds (benne seeds), lightly toasted (see box)
Pinch of cayenne pepper
Salt 1
½ sticks (6 ounces) cold butter, cut into pieces, or ¾ cup vegetable
shortening
3 to 5 tablespoons ice water
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Lightly grease two rimmed baking sheets or coat
with cooking spray.
2. Place the flour, sesame seeds, cayenne pepper, and 1 teaspoon salt in a food
processor. Add the butter or shortening, and pulse until chickpea-size crumbs
form. Pulse in the ice water, 1 tablespoon at a time, until the dough comes
together.
3. Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured surface and roll it out to a
thickness of about ¼ inch. Dip a 2-inch round biscuit or cookie cutter in flour
and cut the dough into rounds. Gather the scraps and reroll to cut out more
biscuits. (Do not roll a third time, because the dough will be too tough.) Transfer
the dough rounds to the prepared baking sheets and sprinkle each round with a
very small pinch of salt. Bake until the crackers are pale golden, 20 to 25
minutes. Transfer the crackers to a wire rack to cool completely. The crackers
will keep, in an airtight container at room temperature, for up to 3 weeks.
A TOAST
To toast sesame seeds perfectly, have a large, shallow bowl ready by your elbow.
Shake those seeds continuously in a large dry skillet over medium heat until they
start popping and they smell nice and nutty. Then shake them right into the bowl
to stop the cooking and let them cool.
BENNE SEED CANAPÉS
Now, if for some reason you’ve forgotten to make your Benne Seed Cocktailers
(or, more likely, if you’ve made them and they have gotten all eaten up), have no
fear: these Benne Seed Canapés can be thrown together in no time at all. Or, if
you’re a benne seed lover and you just want to skip the work of the Cocktailers,
this is the recipe for you! Seriously, folks, these quick and yummy canapés are
so good, so salty and buttery—everyone will swoon.
MAKES 24 CANAPÉS
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
1 box (5 ounces) melba toast
¾ cup sesame seeds (benne seeds)
Salt
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Butter one side of each melba toast generously
and place them, butter side up, on a rimmed baking sheet. Sprinkle the sesame
seeds on top of the toasts (they should stick to the butter) and add a small pinch
of salt.
2. Bake until the seeds are golden brown, 10 to 12 minutes. Arrange the
canapés on a pretty platter and serve them while they’re still warm.
SAY “CHEESE”
Now, I can’t be the only person who adores melba toast—it’s in every
supermarket I’ve ever checked. For a change, you can make this recipe with
finely grated Parmesan or sharp Cheddar in place of the benne seeds, and you’ll
have yourself the tastiest little cheese toasts you could want. Just top the buttered
toasts with a sprinkle of cheese and a grind of black pepper, then toast until the
cheese is golden.
FAMILY REUNION DEVILED EGGS
When I was a child and we would go on family picnics, there were three things I
knew I could always find in the basket. One was the tomatoes to make tomato
sandwiches, two was fried chicken, and three was deviled eggs. I swear, Bubba
and I just didn’t know which one to eat up first!
MAKES 24 DEVILED EGGS
1 dozen large eggs
⅓ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
¼ teaspoon hot sauce
Salt and black pepper
Paprika, for garnish
1. Place the eggs in a large pot and cover them with cold water. Bring the
water to a boil over high heat. Immediately remove the pot from the heat, cover
it, and let stand for 10 minutes. Uncover the pot and let the eggs cool in the
water.
2. Peel the eggs and halve them lengthwise. Pop the yolks out into a large
bowl and arrange the whites on a pretty serving platter.
3. Mash the yolks with the mayonnaise, mustard, hot sauce, and salt and black
pepper to taste until everything is thoroughly combined and smooth. Spoon the
filling back into the egg whites and serve lightly dusted with paprika.
AVOIDING THE EGG ROLL
If you entertain much in the South, you probably have yourself a deviled egg
serving dish or container: something with little oval indents to keep those stuffed
eggs from sliding all around. But if you don’t have one, you can keep those eggs
in their place by cutting a tiny slice from the base of each halved egg white to
create a flat surface (just don’t slice too deep, or you’ll make a hole). A bed of
lettuce will also help the eggs stay put.
Create a homemade piping bag by spooning the filling into a plastic bag.
Twist the top of the bag closed to the level of the filling. Snip off a corner
of the bag with scissors and squeeze the filling out of the hole.
CHEDDAR, PEPPER JELLY, AND PECAN CHEESE BALL
Y’all, this is a little variation on my friend Mr. Jimmy Carter’s favorite cheese
ring. His is shaped in a tube pan with strawberry jelly at the center. But mine is
shaped into a ball and filled with pepper jelly. If y’all like Mr. Jimmy’s favorite
recipe, try this one; it’s a kicked-up version that’s sure to please all spicy-food
lovers.
SERVES 8 TO 10
2 cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (8 ounces)
3 tablespoons (1 ½ ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
1 cup finely chopped pecans
⅓ cup mayonnaise
2 scallions, finely chopped
1 small clove garlic, finely chopped
⅛ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon black pepper
¼ cup red pepper jelly
1. In a food processor or with an electric mixer, blend the Cheddar, cream
cheese, ½ cup of the pecans, the mayonnaise, scallions, garlic, salt, and black
pepper. Scrape the mixture onto a sheet of plastic wrap. Shape it into a ball, wrap
with the plastic, and chill for 2 hours.
2. Unwrap the cheese ball and cut it in half. Use your fingers to press a deep
well into the bottom half and fill the well with the jelly. Top with the upper half
of the cheese ball and press the edges of the ball together to seal. Roll the cheese
ball in the remaining ½ cup pecans. Serve immediately or refrigerate until ready
to serve (up to 3 days).
HOT STUFF
Taste your pepper jelly. Some have kick, and some taste about as spicy as a jar of
grape jelly. If you like a little more bite, mix a dash of hot sauce into the jelly
before you fill your cheese ball. Or try my Pepper Jelly (page 434). That one has
guaranteed heat!
EVERYONE’S FAVORITE PIMIENTO CHEESE
This recipe was featured in my first-ever cookbook, but back then it was known
as Bobby’s Pimiento Cheese because it was always my youngest son’s favorite.
Well, since my business has grown from The Bag Lady sandwiches and catering
to The Lady & Sons restaurant, I have been making this same pimiento cheese
recipe all along the way and now it is everyone’s favorite. So I reckon it was
about time for a name change.
SERVES 12 TO 16
1 package (3 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
1 cup shredded Cheddar cheese (4 ounces)
1 cup shredded Monterey Jack cheese (4 ounces)
½ cup mayonnaise
½ teaspoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
2 to 3 tablespoons mashed pimientos
1 teaspoon grated yellow onion (optional)
Pinch of salt
Black pepper
Using an electric mixer, beat the cream cheese until fluffy. Add the Cheddar,
Monterey Jack, mayonnaise, House Seasoning, pimientos, onion (if you are
using it), and the salt and black pepper to taste and beat until smooth. The cheese
may be refrigerated, covered, for up to 1 week.
GRATE JOB
Finely grating onion is not only a sure way to bring tears to your eyes, it’s also a
little secret for adding real savory flavor to just about any dressing or spread
with mayonnaise in it. Try adding a teaspoon next time you make coleslaw and
you’ll see what I mean.
BUTTERMILK GREEN GODDESS DIP
If you love ranch-style dressings and dips, you are going to go absolutely wild
for this. All of the good, garden-fresh herbs that go into this recipe make it so
tasty and fragrant, not to mention pretty and green. And the anchovies give it
that certain something, a saltiness and depth of flavor that wows. Now, I
wouldn’t necessarily tell people that there are anchovies in this dip—go ahead
and let them fall in love with this dip first, then let them in on the secret
ingredient.
SERVES 4 TO 6
¾ cup mayonnaise
¼ cup buttermilk
¾ cup packed fresh basil leaves
3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh chives
3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh parsley
1 ¼ teaspoons fresh lemon juice
2 anchovy fillets
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
⅛ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon black pepper
Baked chips or raw vegetables, for dipping
In a food processor or blender, combine the mayonnaise, buttermilk, basil,
chives, parsley, lemon juice, anchovies, garlic, salt, and black pepper and process
until smooth. Scrape the dip into a bowl and serve, with plenty of baked chips or
raw vegetables for healthful dipping.
DRESS IT UP
Leftover dip can be thinned with a drizzle of buttermilk to make the most
scrumptious salad dressing. It will keep for a day in the refrigerator.
EASY GUACAMOLE
Y’all, it just does not get any easier than this. Over my many years of working in
the kitchen, of throwing parties and catering, I have tried all sorts of guacamole
recipes, most of them fancier than this one. But you know what? I receive just as
many compliments with this simple preparation as I do with the more timeconsuming and labor-intensive ones. So next time you want to serve guacamole,
whip up a big bowl of this recipe, open up a bag of tortilla chips—then get
yourself out of the kitchen and join the party.
SERVES 8 TO 10
4 large Hass avocados, halved and pitted
½ cup store-bought salsa
Tortilla chips, for dipping
Scoop the avocado flesh right into the serving bowl. Use a fork to mash it,
then mix in the salsa. Serve with sturdy tortilla chips for dipping.
THE RIPE STUFF
Choosing avocados can be tricky. You want to buy them a day or two ahead so
they have time to ripen. Find firm, dark, unblemished avocados and then let
them sit out a day or two until they have just a little give. Anything soft or spotty
is going to let you down. Since they’re so tasty, I usually buy a few extra
avocados when I’m planning to serve guacamole. That way, if I open one up and
it’s got too many brown spots, I don’t have to send Michael running around town
looking for ripe avocados right before the party starts.
CRAB AND AVOCADO DIP
Here is a fresh take on crab dip. This is especially wonderful in the warmer
summer weather, when you may not want to have a bubbling-hot crab dip on
your appetizer menu. The tomato and basil are like a little taste of summertime,
and the ripe avocado is creamy without being too heavy. It’s delicious, pretty,
and just the thing for when your guests expect crab on the table but you would
prefer not to run the oven and the air-conditioning.
SERVES 12 TO 16
2 Hass avocados, halved and pitted
1 pound canned crabmeat
¾ cup sour cream
¼ cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
½ cup chopped fresh basil
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
1 jalapeño pepper, seeded and chopped (leave the seeds in if you want
more heat) (optional)
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
1 cup chopped tomato
Tortilla chips or crackers, for dipping
Scoop the avocado flesh straight into a bowl pretty enough to serve in and
mash with a fork until smooth. Fold in the crabmeat, sour cream, mayonnaise,
lime juice, basil, garlic, jalapeño (if you are using it), salt, and black pepper. Just
before serving, gently fold in the tomato. Serve with tortilla chips or crackers for
dipping.
PARTY-READY DIPPING CHIPS
As a last touch before my party guests arrive, I like to spread my tortilla chips on
a baking sheet and crisp them up in a 350°F oven, just long enough to get them
warm and toasty without giving any extra color. I think it’s a nice touch that
makes folks feel more welcome and gets everybody in the dipping mood.
SOUTH GEORGIA “CAVIAR”
In the South we laughingly call this redneck caviar, because a lot of poor folks
couldn’t afford caviar spread to set out with their crackers and we just thought
black-eyed peas would make a perfectly good substitute. And do you know
what? I think they’re even better! For one thing, fish eggs taste pretty awful on
tortilla chips. But this mix of beans, spicy Ro*Tel tomatoes (a Southern staple
that I am seeing more and more in supermarkets across the country), and Italian
dressing makes for a dip that is classy in its own special way.
SERVES 12 TO 15
2 cans (15 ounces each) black-eyed peas, rinsed and drained
1 can (15 ounces) corn kernels, drained
1 can (14 ½ ounces) spicy diced tomatoes, such as Ro*tel
2 cups chopped red bell pepper
½ cup chopped jalapeño pepper
½ cup chopped yellow onion
1 bottle (8 ounces) Italian dressing
1 jar (4 ounces) chopped pimientos, drained
Tortilla chips or crackers, for dipping
In a large serving bowl, mix together the black-eyed peas, corn, tomatoes, bell
pepper, jalapeño pepper, onion, Italian dressing, and pimientos. Cover and
refrigerate for at least 4 hours or overnight to let the flavors come out. Serve
with tortilla chips or crackers for dipping.
DON’T FEEL THE BURN
If you’re chopping fresh chilies, you want to have some respect for those little
seeds and white veins inside, because that’s where all the spice is, and it will
burn your hand just like it burns your mouth. To play it safe, wear latex gloves to
chop the chilies, then wash your knife and board right away. If you want it real
hot, chop the whole chili, seeds and all; but to tone it down, first scrape the seeds
and white veins away and discard them, and then chop the chili.
SAVANNAH SHRIMP DIP
We love our shrimp here in Savannah, and this shrimp dip is a real favorite.
Why, I believe that shrimp was one of the very first things my husband, Michael,
a long time Savannahian, ever made for me when we were first courting. So it
really has a special place in my heart.
To really make this dip correctly, be sure to have a light touch with the food
processor. You do not want to overchop the shrimp. In fact, you could just go
ahead and chop the shrimp by hand and fold it into the dip after everything else
has been mixed. That way you’ll get the meaty shrimp texture and flavor in
every bite, which is the way we serve it here.
SERVES 8 TO 10
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, at room temperature
3 tablespoons finely chopped shallot
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
1 bay leaf
1 pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons sherry
6 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
Tabasco or other hot sauce
Crackers or toasted bread, for serving
FOR BIG SHRIMP LOVERS
If you adore shrimp and you don’t live in a coastal place like Savannah, frozen
shrimp are a very convenient option. Stock the freezer with a few boxes and
thaw them overnight in the refrigerator before your party. You can get your
shrimp fix any time.
1. In a large skillet, melt 2 tablespoons of the butter over medium-high heat.
Add the shallot, garlic, and bay leaf. Cook until the shallot and garlic are
softened, about 4 minutes. Stir in the shrimp, ¼ teaspoon of the salt, and the
black pepper and keep cooking, stirring occasionally, for 2 minutes.
2. Take the skillet off the heat (you want to be sure the alcohol doesn’t come
into contact with the gas flame) and stir in the sherry. Return the skillet to the
heat and cook until the shrimp are cooked through, about 2 minutes. Discard the
bay leaf and let the mixture cool.
3. In a food processor, combine the remaining 6 tablespoons butter and the
cream cheese and process until smooth. Add the chives, lemon juice,
Worcestershire sauce, remaining ¼ teaspoon salt, and hot sauce to taste, and
pulse just to combine. Scrape in the shrimp mixture and pulse several times just
until the shrimp is coarsely chopped.
4. Scrape the mixture into a serving crock or bowl. Cover tightly with plastic
wrap. Chill for at least 1 hour. Serve with crackers or toasted bread.
SHRIMP RÉMOULADE
This is a starter that is served everywhere along the Southern coastal region, but
especially in New Orleans. What I really love about it is that special pickle-y
pucker the vinegar and seasoning give to the inside of my mouth. It’s such a fun
way to enjoy shrimp and a wonderful addition to every Southern-style party
table.
SERVES 6
½ cup vegetable oil
⅓ cup Dijon mustard
¼ cup distilled white vinegar
¼ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons drained pickle relish
¼ teaspoon garlic powder
Dash of hot sauce
Salt and black pepper 1
½ pounds shrimp, cooked and peeled
About 3 cups shredded lettuce, for serving
1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the oil, mustard, vinegar, mayonnaise,
relish, garlic powder, hot sauce, and salt and black pepper to taste. Cover and
refrigerate for at least1 hour or up to overnight.
2. Toss the shrimp with the rémoulade and serve, chilled, over the shredded
lettuce.
IN THE PINK
To cook your own shrimp, toss headless, deveined shrimp in a big pot of boiling
water until they just turn pink—it takes only a couple of minutes. Then transfer
them to a bowl of ice water to stop the cooking. Drain well, remove the shells,
and you’re done. Or speed things along by spending an extra buck at the fish
store to buy precooked shrimp.
PAULA’S SHRIMP COCKTAIL
Traditionally, cocktail sauce is just ketchup mixed with horseradish and a
squeeze of lemon. But I like to serve this gussied-up version, which, with the
addition of mayonnaise, grated onion, and mustard, is almost a combination of
cocktail sauce and tartar sauce. I find it goes just beautifully with chilled jumbo
shrimp or any of the fruits of the sea.
SERVES 6 TO 8
¾ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons horseradish
1 teaspoon grated yellow onion
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
Juice of 1 lemon
2 pounds jumbo shrimp, cooked and peeled
In a bowl, combine the mayonnaise, horseradish, onion, mustard, and lemon
juice and mix well. Refrigerate the shrimp and cocktail sauce separately. Serve
chilled.
KEEP IT COOL
It is very important that the shrimp cocktail stays cold while it’s out on the buffet
table. I like to serve this in small amounts, arranging the shrimp in a pretty little
bowl that’s nestled inside a pretty big bowl filled with ice.
To peel shrimp, remove the head (if it’s still there) and legs first, then gently
pull off the shell, starting from the underside at the head end, until the entire
shell is removed, leaving the tail intact if you’d like. Devein by making a
shallow cut along the back with a small knife. Using the tip of the knife,
remove and discard the vein.
SMOKED SALMON MOUSSE
I cannot tell a lie: This is not a traditional Southern recipe—but it is so good I
could not stop myself from including it. I first got to try hot smoked salmon on
one of our Paula Deen Cruises that stopped in Alaska. But you can’t get that
kind of fish everywhere, certainly not at my local Piggly Wiggly. So I had to
lock myself in my kitchen for a spell and do some experimenting with the
ingredients I could get my hands on, to try to re-create that marvelous one-of-akind flavor. What I came up with is mighty tasty, if I do say so myself.
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 can (6 ounces) salmon, drained
2 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
¼ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
¼ teaspoon liquid smoke
Salt and black pepper
Crackers and celery sticks, for dipping
In a food processor, combine the salmon, cream cheese, mayonnaise, lemon
juice, liquid smoke, and a pinch each of salt and black pepper and blend until
smooth. Taste and add more salt and pepper if you’d like. Serve the mousse at
room temperature or chilled, with crackers and celery sticks for dipping.
LIQUID SMOKE
Liquid smoke is a popular Southern flavoring. It adds a smoky barbecue flavor
to your foods in just a few squirts. You can find it in large supermarkets.
DON’T STRING ME ALONG
There is nothing more bothersome than trying to deal with stringy celery while
you’re making small talk. If your celery stalks are big and tough, run a veggie
peeler over the outside of each stalk before you slice the celery. Your guests will
thank you.
TOMATO SANDWICHES
You just don’t call it a party in the South if you don’t serve tomato sandwiches.
But even though this recipe is easy, you do have to stick to the technique.
Otherwise, a few things could really go wrong. You do not want the bread to dry
out, so keep it covered while you are filling the sandwiches. You don’t want the
bread to get too soggy, so drain the tomatoes really well between layers of paper
towels. And for the prettiest sandwiches, the tomatoes should be just a little bit
smaller than the size of the bread circles so they don’t hang out the sides. If you
follow all these simple steps, you will be rewarded with a truly magnificent
Southern treat.
SERVES 4 TO 6
4 to 6 small tomatoes, such as Roma (plum) tomatoes
8 slices white bread
½ cup mayonnaise, plus extra (optional) for garnish
Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
Fresh parsley leaves for garnish (optional)
1. To prepare the tomatoes, thinly slice crosswise and drain thoroughly
between layers of paper towels. You can stack up the slices on top of each other
with paper towels in between to soak up the moisture.
2. Use a biscuit cutter or cookie cutter (a little larger than the diameter of the
tomato slices) to cut rounds from the bread. Spread the mayonnaise onto one
side of each bread round.
3. Sprinkle the tomato slices with the House Seasoning to taste. Place a
tomato slice on a bread round, mayonnaise side up, and top with another bread
round, mayonnaise side down. (Make sure the tomato has good contact with the
mayonnaise; it’s the glue that keeps everything together.) For a fancy touch,
place a dab of mayonnaise in the center of the top of each sandwich, then press a
parsley leaf on for decoration (this is optional). The sandwiches may be prepared
several hours before serving. Cover well with a damp paper towel and refrigerate
until ready to serve.
DON’T BE BLUNT
To slice a ripe tomato thinly, you need to have respect—and a good knife.
Otherwise, you’ll end up with a bruised tomato and smushed, uneven slices. Use
a very sharp knife for the task, or, better yet, choose a good serrated knife, such
as a bread knife. The teeth on a serrated knife do a perfect job of cutting through
the tough skin of a tomato without harming the tender and juicy insides.
SHRIMP BUTTER AND TOMATO SANDWICHES
This is a wonderful recipe, one that I learned to make in the years since I made
my home in Savannah. When I serve these sandwiches at parties, I like to take
off the crusts and cut the bread into quarters. That way you can pile them high on
a pretty platter. When folks take them, they can hold the sandwich in one hand,
leaving the other free for a glass of punch or a cocktail.
SERVES 12
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, at room temperature
½ teaspoon freshly grated lemon zest 1
½ teaspoons fresh lemon juice 1
½ tablespoons chopped fresh chives
Cayenne pepper
Salt and black pepper
½ pound shrimp, cooked and peeled
1 medium tomato, thinly sliced
12 slices white bread
1. In a food processor, combine the butter, lemon zest, lemon juice, chives, a
pinch of cayenne pepper, ¼ teaspoon salt, and ⅛ teaspoon black pepper. Process
the mixture until smooth. Pulse in the shrimp until it reaches the desired texture,
slightly chunky to silky smooth. Taste and add more salt, black pepper, or
cayenne pepper if you’d like.
2. Drain the tomato slices on several layers of paper towels. You can stack up
the slices on top of each other with paper towels in between to soak up the
moisture.
3. Spread 1 tablespoon shrimp butter on each slice of bread. Top half the bread
slices, butter side up, with a tomato slice. Sprinkle with salt and black pepper to
taste and cover with another bread slice, butter side down. (You’ll have shrimp
butter left over, but see box below for great ways to use it.) Cut the crusts off the
sandwiches and cut the sandwiches into quarters to serve. If you are not serving
these right away, cover them with a damp paper towel and refrigerate. They will
stay fresh for 2 or 3 hours.
BUTTER ME UP
I adore this shrimp butter, so of course I’m always trying to find other uses for it.
I love to stuff fish with it (see Grouper with Shrimp Butter, page 200) or simply
spread it on melba toast. It even makes a great filling for celery sticks—a perfect
way to get some extra veggies into my boys!

Salad is one of those foods that we think we need to eat because we have to eat
our vegetables. Oftentimes I’ll ask, “Can I fix you a salad first?” and my
husband, Michael, will say, “No, actually, I’m on a diet, so I’ll just have the meat
and potatoes.” Well, he doesn’t get away with that one. When I say the word
salad, I could be talkin’ about a good old pasta salad, chicken salad, or potato
salad, so I tell him don’t start turnin’ up your nose until you find out just what
kind of salad we’re talking about.
A nice salad can be the most delicious way to start a meal, whether it’s my
mama’s simple, refreshing Iceberg Wedge with Homemade Thousand Island
Dressing (page 61) or an irresistible Wilted Salad with Hot Bacon Dressing
(page 57). Then there are all the heartier salads I love to make, like Black-Eyed
Pea Salad (page 43), or the Fried Chicken Salad (page 44) I serve just often
enough to remind Michael (and all you others like him) that you can’t afford to
turn down the salad, because, honey, you might miss out on the main attraction!
Down South, salad means so much more than a side plate piled with lettuce
and cucumbers. We break out the great big tub of mayonnaise for picnics and
suppers; we’ll shred cabbage, cook macaroni or potatoes, or even open up that
box of Jell-O to make a salad, slaw, or mold that’ll steal the show. Southern
salads stand on their own. A bowl of Warm Macaroni Salad (page 60) on a buffet
table will disappear before anything else. And a nice slaw will turn your
sandwich into something out of this world. Top your next barbecue sandwich
with a scoop of zippy, creamy Hot Slaw (page 47) and you’ll be in hog heaven!
For the cook, of course, salad is a true gift. Most salads can be made ahead,
and when you have weather as hot as we do in Savannah, believe me, you’ll be
craving chilled recipes like Corn, Tomato, and Shrimp Salad (page 52) or 7-
Layer Molded Salad (page 62) for every meal.
Fixing your own dressing makes even the simplest salad special. Now, I know
that many people use fancy olive oil, but I don’t particularly enjoy a real virgin-y
flavor. I prefer a light, mild one, or a good fresh vegetable oil. To me, whatever
else you’re adding to the dressing should be the star. That’s what makes salad so
much fun. Pecans? Raisins? Shredded carrots? A nice healthy dollop of my
favorite, Kraft mayonnaise? So to all you Michaels out there who think salad is
for health nuts, I’m telling you, you do not want to miss out on these recipes.
BLACK-EYED PEA SALAD
Black-eyed peas are a classic Southern ingredient that can be found all over
these United States. I find this salad makes a fantastic dish to bring to potluck
events. When Jamie and Bobby were young kids, I would just never know when
I needed to show up with a covered dish for a school fund-raiser. Well, I say I
would never know, but it was because those two rascals always forgot to tell me
they needed to bring something until the very last minute! But that’s what it’s all
about when you’re a mama; you got to have a recipe like this tucked up your
sleeve!
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 cans (15 ounces each) black-eyed peas, rinsed and drained
1 can (15 ounces) diced tomatoes, drained
1 jar (4 ounces) pimientos, drained and chopped
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
¼ cup olive oil
3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
2 tablespoons finely chopped red onion
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
2 teaspoons chopped pickled jalapeño pepper
1 teaspoon sugar
¼ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
Place all the ingredients in a large salad bowl and toss well to combine. Taste
the salad and add a sprinkle more salt if you think it needs it, then serve.
THE MIGHTY PIMIENTO
Now, you may have noticed by now that the pimiento likes to pop up in my
ingredient lists. That’s because it’s one of the most beloved ingredients in
Southern cooking. It adds tang and color to any dish, especially pimiento cheese
(see Everyone’s Favorite Pimiento Cheese, page 27).
FRIED CHICKEN SALAD
This is a fun recipe I created just for my darling husband, Michael. It seems
whenever I would put a big green salad on the table, you could count on Michael
not being able to find room for it on his plate. Well, with this dish I believe I
have fixed his wagon. Homemade fried chicken strips with tangy buttermilk
dressing served on top of a garden-fresh salad—Michael (and the salad avoider
in your family) will always make room for this.
SERVES 4 TO 6
Buttermilk Dressing
⅓ cup buttermilk
¼ cup olive oil
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
3 tablespoons chopped fresh chives
Fried Chicken
1 pound boneless, skinless chicken breasts
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
1 cup self-rising flour
Black pepper
Vegetable oil, for deep-frying
Salt
Salad
12 cups mixed greens
2 plum tomatoes, chopped
½ small Vidalia onion, thinly sliced
1. To make the dressing: In a small bowl, whisk together the buttermilk, oil,
lemon juice, salt, and black pepper. Whisk in the chives.
2. To make the chicken: Cut the chicken into 1-inch strips. In a wide, shallow
bowl, whisk the eggs with ¼ cup water. In a separate wide, shallow bowl, whisk
together the flour and ½ teaspoon black pepper.
3. In a large saucepan, heat 3 inches of oil to 350°F.
4. Coat the chicken with the eggs and let the excess drip back into the bowl.
Dip the chicken in the flour and shake off any excess. Add the chicken to the hot
oil and cook until it is golden and cooked through, 3 to 4 minutes. Then set it on
a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Season the chicken with salt and black pepper
to taste.
5. To make the salad: Toss together the greens, tomatoes, onion, and twothirds of the dressing in a large bowl. Divide the greens among 4 to 6 serving
plates, depending on how many people you want to feed. Top the greens with the
fried chicken and drizzle with the remaining dressing. Serve immediately.
EASY DOES IT
Salad greens need to be treated gently! To keep the greens from wilting, be sure
to dress the salad just before serving. And take care not to overdress your salad.
You can always add more dressing, but you can’t take it away once you pour it
on.
CHICKEN, RICE, AND AVOCADO SALAD
This is such a pretty little salad and so suitable as a main course at fancy
luncheons. It’s a light dish, but, with all the chicken and rice, it is more filling
than it looks. I think chopped avocados are so fun to use (they don’t always have
to make an appearance on your table as guacamole, you know), and their texture
gives the salad a wonderful creaminess without being too heavy. This recipe
dates back to my Bag Lady days, and it’s just as good today.
SERVES 8
Dressing
1 large Hass avocado, halved and pitted
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 1 cup mayonnaise
½ cup sour cream
⅓ cup coarsely chopped onion
2 cloves garlic, coarsely chopped
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
Pinch of cayenne pepper
Salad
2 Hass avocados, pitted, peeled, and coarsely chopped
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
3 cups chopped cooked chicken
3 cups cooked white rice
1 cup mayonnaise
¾ cup diced yellow onion
¼ cup chopped fresh parsley
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon black pepper
1 lemon, cut into wedges, for serving
1. To make the dressing: Scoop the avocado flesh into a food processor. Add
the remaining dressing ingredients and blend until smooth. Pour the dressing into
a small bowl or a pretty little pitcher and chill until serving.
2. To make the salad: Toss the chopped avocados with the lemon juice in a
large bowl. Add the chicken, rice, mayonnaise, onion, parsley, salt, and black
pepper, and toss just to combine. Chill the salad for at least30 minutes or up to 4
hours before serving. Serve in individual bowls with the lemon wedges and pass
around the dressing.
Quickly pit an avocado by slicing it in half lengthwise along the pit.
Carefully but firmly, strike the pit with a large knife, then twist out.
IT AIN’T EASY BEING GREEN
There’s nothing more unsightly than a salad with brown avocado. Keep your
avocados bright green by tossing them with lemon or lime juice as soon as you
cut into them. And if you’re using only part of the avocado, keep the remainder
fresh by wrapping plastic wrap tightly over the leftover pieces.
TACO SALAD
Taco salad is a great example of the Southwestern flavors that we have come to
love here in the South. Now, it’s called a salad, but really this is a full meal in a
bowl. You’ve got your meat and plenty of vegetables, plus tortilla chips for a
crunch. And believe me, even the pickiest eaters at your table will not turn their
noses up at this dish.
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 pound ground beef
1 packet (1 ¼ ounces) taco seasoning
1 head iceberg lettuce, shredded
2 cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (8 ounces)
2 plum tomatoes, chopped
1 Hass avocado, pitted, peeled, and chopped
4 scallions, chopped
2 cups crumbled tortilla chips
⅓ cup fresh or store-bought salsa
⅓ cup sour cream
2 teaspoons fresh lime juice
1. Heat a large skillet over medium-high heat. Add the beef and cook it,
breaking it up with a fork, until browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in the taco
seasoning and ⅓ cup water; simmer until the liquid is just about gone, 3 to 5
minutes.
2. In a large salad bowl, combine the beef, lettuce, 1 ½ cups of the Cheddar,
the tomatoes, avocado, and scallions. Toss in 1 ½ cups of the crumbled tortilla
chips.
3. In a small bowl, whisk together the salsa, sour cream, and lime juice. Pour
over the salad and toss to combine. Sprinkle the top with the remaining ½ cup
Cheddar and ½ cup crumbled tortilla chips and serve. This salad tastes great hot
or cold.
SWITCH IT UP
No ground beef in the fridge? Here are two more yummy options. Try this salad
with some shredded cooked chicken tossed in a pan with the taco seasoning. Or
o
p
e
n
a
c
o
u
p
l
e
c
a
n
s
o
f
b
l
a
c
k
o
r
r
e
d
b
e
a
n
s
a
n
d
h
e
a
t
t
h
e
m
w
i
t
h
t
h
e
t
a
c
o
s
e
a
s
o
n
i
n
g
HOT SLAW
Here in the South we love our coleslaw, and you will certainly find it on our
tables, especially in the summer months when that crunch is just what you want
in the heat. But I just love the taste of a good slaw too much to eat it only when
the temperature is above 70 degrees. Now, here’s a recipe I like to serve when
there’s a chill in the air because it’ll make you feel all warm and toasty. It’s a
nice, warm coleslaw with crispy, crumbly bacon and just a dash of hot sauce.
SERVES 4 TO 6
3 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
2 teaspoons sugar
¾ teaspoon salt
¾ teaspoon hot sauce
⅛ teaspoon black pepper
4 slices bacon
1 cup chopped yellow onion
½ cup chopped green bell pepper
½ teaspoon garlic powder
¼ teaspoon celery seed
4 cups shredded green cabbage (½ medium head)
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the vinegar, sugar, salt, hot sauce, and black
pepper.
2. In a large skillet, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, 5 to 7
minutes. Set the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. Reduce the heat to medium-low and add the onion and bell pepper to the
skillet. Cook, stirring, until softened, about 5 minutes. Stir in the garlic powder
and celery seed. Cook for 1 minute. Add the cabbage and cook, tossing, until
softened, about 5 minutes. Carefully pour in the vinegar mixture and cook until
the liquid has evaporated, 2 to 3 minutes. Take the skillet off the heat and
crumble in the bacon. Taste and adjust seasoning, if needed, then serve the slaw
while it’s hot.
HEADS UP
Go ahead and substitute shredded coleslaw mix if you like. It’s easier, and then
you won’t have half a cabbage sitting around in your fridge!
EASY COLESLAW
This classic recipe for Southern-style coleslaw is something that can be served as
a side dish to almost any kind of meat. We’ll put a bowl of it on the table and
folks will just help themselves—as they would in just about any part of the
country. But do you know the sign of a true Southerner? That’ll be the one who
makes up this coleslaw just to use as a condiment for sandwiches—slathered on
top of some juicy pulled pork, sandwiched in a fresh roll.
SERVES 6 TO 8
¾ cup mayonnaise
¼ cup apple cider vinegar
1 tablespoon sugar
8 cups shredded green cabbage (1 small head)
Salt and black pepper
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise, vinegar, and sugar.
2. Place the cabbage in a large salad bowl. Pour the dressing over the cabbage
and toss well to coat. Season to taste with salt and black pepper. This salad can
be kept in the refrigerator for up to 3 days before serving it.
LET IT SIT A SPELL
Classic slaw is a complete do-ahead dish. Unlike a delicate green salad, coleslaw
should definitely sit a spell. I like to make it well ahead, at least 2 hours, so that
the flavors develop and the cabbage softens up a bit.
COLESLAW WITH RAISINS, DILL, AND HONEY-ROASTED
PEANUTS
This is the coleslaw I make when I want to serve it all on its own in a pretty
bowl on the table. It’s a gussied-up version of Easy Coleslaw, and I think the
extra ingredients make a world of difference. Raisins in a salad always seem to
me to be an extra-special touch. And I just love to use the chopped fresh dill to
give it a hint of springtime. But you know, I think it’s the honey-roasted peanuts
that I chop up and sprinkle on top that make this dish such a guaranteed crowdpleaser. I swear, whenever I set it on my buffet table, I barely have to wash the
bowl at the end of the meal!
SERVES 6 TO 8
½ cup mayonnaise
2 teaspoons distilled white or apple cider vinegar
1 teaspoon sugar
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
4 cups shredded green cabbage (½ medium head)
1 cup grated carrot (1 large)
¼ cup finely chopped Vidalia onion
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill
¾ cup raisins
¼ cup chopped honey-roasted peanuts
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise, vinegar, sugar, salt, and
black pepper.
2. In a large salad bowl that’s pretty enough to serve in, combine the cabbage,
carrot, onion, dill, and raisins. Stir in the dressing and toss well to combine. Let
the slaw stand for 10 minutes for the flavors to develop before sprinkling with
peanuts to serve.
ROCK AND ROLL
Chopping nuts can be tricky—they have a tendency to roll all around your
cutting board. Your best bet is to lay them in a compact circle and rock the blade
back and forth in a seesaw motion over the nuts while rotating the knife in a
circle. Take care to always leave a part of the knife in contact with the board.
Because you want the pieces nice and chunky, don’t use a food processor.
AMBROSIA CHICKEN SALAD
Ambrosia salad is what we call our fruit salad here in these parts, which we
make with cherries and tropical fruit like pineapple and coconut. Sometimes we
add marshmallows, too. One day I got to thinking that ambrosia salad needed
something savory in there to help it all come together. So I added some cooked
chicken breast and slivered almonds just to see what would happen—I left out
the marshmallows; they just didn’t seem right anymore. I think it’s absolutely
slap-your-mama good. Some people say they have a sweet tooth, but I swear I
have a salty-sweet tooth!
SERVES 4
4 cups chopped cooked chicken breast
1 can (20 ounces) crushed pineapple, drained
1 cup sweetened shredded coconut
½ cup slivered almonds, lightly toasted
¾ cup mayonnaise
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
Salt
8 maraschino cherries, for garnish (optional)
In a large bowl, combine the chicken, pineapple, coconut, almonds,
mayonnaise, and lime juice, tossing well. Add salt to taste. This salad can be
served immediately or refrigerated for up to 8 hours and served chilled. Serve in
individual bowls topped with pretty little maraschino cherries, if desired.
HOW EASY IS THIS?
Make this a total no-cook meal by buying yourself a rotisserie chicken from the
supermarket. It is just about the handiest thing to have in the fridge. Just cut off
some thick pieces of the white meat and chop them into this salad. Use the
remaining chicken meat in sandwiches, tossed into rice dishes, or even just
warmed up with a little gravy.
SOUTHERN SHRIMP AND RICE SALAD
This is something I did not learn to make until I came to live in Savannah, for
here shrimp is so plentiful, we always find a way to serve it at every meal. What
I really love about this recipe is that you cook the rice using the same water that
you’ve already cooked the shrimp in, so the rice comes out tasting extra
delicious. That is the thing about Southern cooks—we know how not to waste
one bit of flavor!
SERVES 6
2 tablespoons Old Bay seasoning
2 pounds shrimp, peeled and deveined
1 cup long-grain white rice
½ cup finely chopped yellow onion
½ cup chopped pitted green olives
1 cup mayonnaise
Black pepper
1. In a saucepan, combine the Old Bay seasoning and 4 cups water. Bring to a
boil, add the shrimp, and boil for 4 minutes. Use a slotted spoon to transfer the
shrimp to a cutting board, leaving the cooking water in the pot. When cool
enough to handle, chop the shrimp into bitesize chunks.
2. In the reserved shrimp cooking water, boil the rice until tender, 15 to 20
minutes. Drain in a colander and allow to cool.
3. In a large bowl, combine the rice, onion, olives, mayonnaise, and black
pepper to taste. Mix in the shrimp just before serving with a smile!
A PERFECT PAIR
Shrimp and Old Bay seasoning—has there ever been a more perfect pairing? The
Southern shrimp boil (which is just shrimp that’s been boiled in a pot of
seasoned water) has featured Old Bay for the past seventy years or so. I’m not
sure what they did before then, but I’m sure glad that today we’ve got those
zesty spices and herbs to make our shrimp really sing. But don’t just use it with
your shrimp; it’s great with all seafood, from snapper to crab. And you can’t beat
an Old Bay Bloody Mary for Sunday brunch.
CORN, TOMATO, AND SHRIMP SALAD
This dish is a favorite of my beloved niece, Corrie. She is just a gorgeous girl,
and even though she looks like she eats like a bird, believe me, she comes to the
table hungry and expecting a hearty meal. And this salad has got it all—fresh
tomatoes and good summer corn, and it’s packed with shrimp in every bite.
SERVES 4
2 ½ teaspoons fresh lemon juice
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
¼ cup olive oil
1 pound small shrimp, cooked and peeled
1 head Boston lettuce, torn into bite-size pieces
1⅓ cups corn kernels, cooked fresh or thawed frozen
2 plum tomatoes, sliced
½ small red onion, very thinly sliced
⅓ cup chopped fresh basil
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the lemon juice, salt, black pepper, and
garlic. Whisk in the oil until completely combined.
2. In a large salad bowl, combine the shrimp, lettuce, corn, tomatoes, onion,
and basil. Pour the dressing over the salad and toss well to combine. This salad
is best served just as soon as you make it up.
A WHOLE LOTTA SHAKIN’
Keep your finished and cleaned jelly jars in the cupboard and use them to make
your dressings. Just add all the ingredients to the jar, cap tightly, and shake,
shake, shake. I like to make full jars of dressing and keep them in the fridge so I
can pull out homemade dressing all through the week.
Core a tomato by inserting a small knife just to the side of the core on the
stem end. Angling the knife away from the core, carve a 1-inch-deep circle
and pop out the core with the tip of the knife.
NUTTY SHRIMP SALAD
Typically, I’ll make this salad if I am hosting a luncheon or a brunch, and serve it
in small and dainty portions on a bed of lettuce as a starter course. It makes such
a pretty presentation that way. And don’t forget to save any leftovers to put in
between two slices of toast for a shrimp salad sandwich that will knock your
socks off.
SERVES 4
4 cups cooked large shrimp, peeled, deveined, and halved crosswise
½ cup corn kernels, cooked fresh or thawed frozen
⅓ cup chopped pecans
¼ cup chopped pimiento
¼ cup finely chopped celery
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
2 tablespoons chopped scallion
¼ cup mayonnaise
Salt and black pepper
Lettuce leaves, for serving
In a large bowl, combine the shrimp, corn, pecans, pimiento, celery, parsley,
scallion, mayonnaise, and salt and black pepper to taste. Scoop the salad onto
pretty little lunch plates lined with lettuce leaves.
BUTTER ME UP
I recommend butterhead lettuce (like Boston lettuce) here. It is so pretty and
bright on a plate, and the leaves are nice and big and sturdy. Romaine lettuce will
work too. And, in a pinch, iceberg will do just fine. Be careful not to rip your
lettuce leaves. You want them as whole and intact as possible on the plate. I like
to remove the core first with a small paring knife and then gently pull the leaves
apart from the base.
DOUBLE POTATO SALAD
Potato salad is everybody’s favorite. I don’t care how stubborn your man is
about eating salad, you can bet that potato salad will disappear practically before
the bowl hits the table. And when you double your potato salad pleasure by
topping it with crunchy crumbled potato chips, well, there is no potato lover I
know who can resist.
SERVES 8 TO 10
3 pounds small creamer potatoes (see box), unpeeled
1 ¼ cups sour cream
1 small green bell pepper, chopped
¼ cup chopped fresh chives
1 ¼ teaspoons salt
½ teaspoon paprika
½ teaspoon black pepper
Potato chips, crumbled
1. Place the potatoes in a large pot and cover with salted water. Bring to a boil
and cook until tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Drain the potatoes and allow them to
cool before you coarsely dice them.
2. In a large bowl pretty enough for serving, combine the potatoes with the
sour cream, bell pepper, chives, salt, paprika, and black pepper. Sprinkle the
salad with crumbled potato chips just before serving.
YOU SAY POTATO
Creamer potatoes are generally Yukon Gold or red potatoes that are harvested
early in the season. They have a low starch content that makes them just right for
boiling, and they turn out small and delicate. The thin, waxy skin is perfect if left
on and adds such pretty color to the salad.
PAULA’S CLASSIC POTATO SALAD
One of the most precious memories I have from my childhood in Albany,
Georgia, is Mama setting out a picnic blanket under a shade tree by the creek
and Daddy pulling all these wonderful dishes out of the picnic basket. I swear
my brother, Bubba, and I had eyes as big as saucers when we got a look at all the
good food Mama had made for us. One of our favorites (aside from the deviled
eggs and tomato sandwiches) was this simple, old-fashioned potato salad. When
I tell you that this recipe is just the way Mama made it, well, you know I can’t
give it a higher recommendation than that.
SERVES 6 TO 8
4 pounds red potatoes, unpeeled, cut into ¾-inch cubes
3 large eggs
About ¾ cup mayonnaise
2 ½ teaspoons apple cider vinegar
½ cup chopped dill pickle relish
2 celery stalks, finely chopped
3 scallions, finely chopped
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
Paula Deen Collection Silly Salt or Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page
435) and black pepper
1. In a large pot of boiling water, cook the potatoes and eggs for about 10
minutes. Drain the potatoes and eggs and allow them to cool. Peel the eggs and
squish them with your hands until they crumble.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together ¾ cup mayonnaise and the vinegar.
3. In a large serving bowl, combine the potatoes, eggs, pickle relish, celery,
scallions, and parsley and toss with the dressing. Season with salt and black
pepper to taste. Add more mayonnaise if not creamy enough. Serve immediately
or pack it up in some plastic containers for your picnic.
AS THE EGG CRUMBLES
I’d much rather crumble hard-boiled eggs in my hands instead of chasing ’em
around the cutting board as they roll all over the place. Obviously you want the
eggs to be cooled before you lay your bare hands on them.

HOT GERMAN POTATO SALAD WITH BACON
This hot potato salad is surely not what you think about when you think of
potato salad, but let me tell you that it is just about one of the best things you
could ever put in your mouth. That’s because it’s got lots of bacon mixed in, and
all those meaty juices really give this salad some heft, while the yellow mustard
makes it zippy. Just try it once and you will find yourself making it over and
over again.
SERVES 6 TO 8
3 pounds small red potatoes, unpeeled
6 slices bacon
1 to 2 tablespoons vegetable oil
⅔ cup chicken broth
2 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
4 teaspoons yellow mustard
1 teaspoon sugar
Salt and black pepper
3 or 4 scallions, chopped
1. Place the potatoes in a medium pot with water to cover. Bring to a boil and
cook until just tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Drain the potatoes and allow them to
cool before halving or quartering, depending on size.
2. Meanwhile, in a large skillet, cook the bacon until crispy, 5 to 7 minutes.
Set the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. Carefully pour the bacon fat from the skillet into a measuring cup. Add
enough vegetable oil to the bacon fat to make ¼ cup, then pour the fat back into
the skillet along with the broth, vinegar, mustard, sugar, and salt and black
pepper to taste. Whisk the mixture in the skillet to combine and simmer for 4
minutes.
4. Place the potatoes in a large salad bowl and add the warm vinaigrette,
tossing well to combine. Crumble the bacon on top of the salad and sprinkle with
the scallions just before serving.
HOT POTATO
When boiling potatoes for potato salad, it’s best to cook them until just tender,
because even after you drain potatoes from the pan, they’ll keep cooking while
they cool. You want the potatoes to keep their shape, not go all mushy on you
when you toss them with the other ingredients. To test for doneness, stick a fork
or skewer into a potato; if the fork or skewer slides in easily, those potatoes are
done!
WILTED SALAD WITH HOT BACON DRESSING
This is the kind of warm, comforting salad you might expect to find on the menu
of a good steakhouse. And if you could really call any salad “romantic,” well, it
would be this one. The hot bacon dressing covers the greens so that every leaf
just drips with flavor. Now, this is a salad you can really sink your teeth into.
SERVES 4
12 cups salad greens, such as spinach, butterhead lettuce, and red leaf
lettuce, or equivalent mixed greens
3 scallions, white and light green parts only, chopped
About 2 ½ teaspoons apple cider vinegar
¼ teaspoon sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
4 slices bacon
Black pepper
1. In a large salad bowl, combine the greens and scallions. In a small bowl,
mix together 2 ½ teaspoons vinegar, the sugar, and salt. Toss with the salad. Add
a few more drops of vinegar if you need it to coat all those greens.
2. In a large skillet, fry the bacon until crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Set the bacon on
a paper towel– lined plate to drain. Crumble the bacon over the salad and pour
the hot bacon grease over the greens. Toss well to combine. Season with black
pepper to taste.
KEEP IT CLEAN
There’s nothing worse than a salad filled with grit. Make sure you clean your
salad greens thoroughly. I like to fill the sink up with a whole load of cold water
(sometimes I even throw some ice cubes in there), give a generous shake of salt
to the water, and submerge my leaves. The salt will take care of any critters that
have stowed away in your leaves, and they will drop to the bottom of the sink.
Give the leaves a swirl around in the water, then dry them thoroughly. A salad
spinner is the best bet for drying, but if you don’t have one, just lay the leaves
out on a kitchen towel to dry.
BEET AND BLUE CHEESE SALAD
I absolutely love a beet salad, and I will always order one when I’m at a
restaurant. But I must confess, I very rarely make one at home. It’s because I
don’t like to see my hands get stained red from all the roasting and peeling you
have to do to get beets ready to eat. So I decided to just go ahead and make it
easy on myself by buying canned precooked beets. I’ve never had another day of
worry.
SERVES 4
3 tablespoons walnut pieces
2 teaspoons balsamic vinegar
¼ teaspoon saltBlack pepper
1 ½ tablespoons olive oil
3 cups canned sliced beets, drained
Salad greens, for serving
⅓ cup crumbled blue cheese
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Spread the walnuts on a rimmed baking sheet
and toast until golden and fragrant, about 7 minutes. Let the nuts cool, then give
them a rough chop.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the vinegar, salt, and black pepper to taste.
Whisk in the oil until completely combined.
3. In a bowl, toss the beets and walnuts with the vinaigrette. Serve on a bed of
greens, topped with the blue cheese.
WRAP IT UP
To roast your own beets, place trimmed beets on a large sheet of foil. Wrap them
up in a package, scrunching the edges together to seal. Place the beet package on
a baking sheet to catch any juices that might leak while roasting. Roast in a
375°F oven until a knife easily pierces the beets, 30 minutes to 1 hour,
depending on the size of the beets. Let cool until you can handle them without
scorching your fingers, then peel the warm beets with your fingers (it will stain
them red) or with a paring knife.
CREAMY RICE SALAD WITH COUNTRY HAM AND PEAS
This creamy salad is something you’ll find on many Southern tables and picnic
blankets on a Sunday afternoon after church. It’s a hearty dish that tastes great
served either hot or cold—so it’s especially convenient to make when you
suspect you might have company coming later. You know nobody will go
hungry when you’ve got this in the fridge!
SERVES 6 TO 8
2 cups long-grain white rice
½ teaspoon salt
1 cup diced country-style ham (¼ pound thick cut)
¾ cup frozen peas, thawed
⅓ cup mayonnaise
⅓ cup sour cream
⅓ cup chopped fresh parsley
¼ cup finely chopped red onion
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice
½ teaspoon hot sauce, plus extra for serving
1. In a medium saucepan, combine the rice, salt, and 3 cups water. Bring to a
boil over medium-high heat. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook until the
liquid has evaporated and the rice is tender, about 20 minutes. Remove the
saucepan from the heat and let stand, still covered, for 10 minutes. Fluff with a
fork and let it cool, uncovered.
2. In a large salad bowl, toss the rice with the ham, peas, mayonnaise, sour
cream, parsley, onion, garlic, lemon juice, and hot sauce. Serve with plenty of
extra hot sauce to pass at the table.
HOT, HOT, HOT
We sure like our hot sauce here in the South. And no table is complete without
plenty of hot sauce options laid out. From vinegary Louisiana-style sauces to
Georgia sweet and spicy sauces, nothing punches up a meal like hot sauce.
WARM MACARONI SALAD
There is one thing everybody should know about my dear son Bobby—he goes
crazy for macaroni! I created this salad just for him. It’s got plenty of macaroni,
grated carrot for color, and just a pucker of chopped pickle that brings it all
together. I like to serve it warm, but it will still be tasty if you refrigerate the
leftovers to eat the next day.
SERVES 6 TO 8
2 cups elbow macaroni (about 8 ounces)
½ cup grated carrot (about 1 large)
3 tablespoons finely chopped Vidalia onion
1 celery stalk, finely chopped
3 tablespoons finely chopped bread-and-butter pickle
⅔ cup mayonnaise
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the pasta according to the
package directions. Drain well and transfer to a large serving bowl.
2. Add the carrot, onion, celery, and pickle to the warm macaroni. Stir in the
mayonnaise, salt, and black pepper. Serve it while it’s still warm.
A GEORGIA SWEET
Vidalia onions are one of the greatest prides of Georgia! They have a sweet, mild
taste that reminds me of the temperament of most Georgians. Because they are
never sharp or overpowering, Vidalias are perfect chopped raw into a salad.
MAMA’S ICEBERG WEDGE WITH HOMEMADE
THOUSAND ISLAND DRESSING
I am just in love with these simple old-fashioned recipes! It seems like you so
rarely see something with so few ingredients on a plate these days; when I was
growing up it was the simplest things that were the best. This salad is nothing
but a quarter of a head of lettuce placed on a plate with a drizzle of good ol’
Thousand Island dressing. This is a dinner salad the way my mama used to serve
it, just as elegant and as tasty as can be.
SERVES 4
Dressing
1 ½ cups mayonnaise
1 cup ketchup
1 hard-boiled egg, peeled and very finely chopped
¼ cup dill pickle relish
Salt and black pepper
Lemon-pepper seasoning, such as Paula Deen Collection (optional)
Salad
1 small head iceberg lettuce, cut into 4 wedges
Crumbled bacon, for serving (optional)
1. To make the dressing: In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise,
ketchup, egg, relish, salt and black pepper to taste, and lemon-pepper seasoning,
if desired.
2. To assemble the salad: Place the lettuce wedges on individual plates and
drizzle generously with the dressing. Top with crumbled bacon, if you’d like.
CHOP, CHOP
For another take, try giving this salad a good chop and adding some cooked
bacon. Place it all on a hamburger on a fluffy sweet bun and you’ve got yourself
a hearty meal.
7-LAYER MOLDED SALAD
Now, who doesn’t love a molded salad? Especially one that’s got seven layers! I
make this classic salad all the time, and it’s always a hit at any Southern buffet or
picnic.
SERVES 8 TO 10
2 packages (3 ounces each) powdered lemon gelatin
Pinch of salt
2 cups boiling water
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
½ cup full-fat cottage cheese
½ cup chopped red bell pepper
½ cup chopped celery
2 hard-boiled eggs, peeled and sliced
½ cup frozen peas, thawed
4 slices bacon, cooked and crumbled
1. In a medium heatproof bowl, mix the powdered gelatin and salt with the
boiling water until completely dissolved. Stir in 1 ½ cups cold water and the
lemon juice. Refrigerate, covered, until the gelatin is just wiggly but not firmed
up (like loose jelly), about 1 hour.
2. Scoop 1 cup of the gelatin and place in a small bowl. Stir in the cottage
cheese and set aside.
3. Spoon ½ cup of the gelatin into a 6-cup mold. Scatter the bell pepper evenly
on top and cover with another ½ cup of the gelatin. Then scatter the celery on
top, followed by another ½ cup of the gelatin. Next, layer the eggs and top with
the remaining gelatin. Top this with the peas and bacon. Evenly spoon the
reserved gelatin–cottage cheese mixture on top of the peas and bacon.
Refrigerate until firm, about 4 hours or overnight. Unmold and serve.
BREAKING THE MOLD
Here are some tips for easily unmolding gelatin. Before filling your mold, rinse
it in a little cold water. This helps prepare the sides of the mold. Then, when you
are ready to unmold, dip the mold in some warm water (not too hot!) for about 5
seconds. This will help to loosen the gelatin. Lift the mold out of the water and
gently pull the gelatin away from the sides with the pads of your fingers. Then
place a pretty serving plate on top of the mold and invert right onto the plate,
giving the gelatin a little shake back and forth as you do so.
For easy unmolding, dip the bottom of the mold into a bowl of warm (not
hot) water for a few seconds. Using your fingertips, gently pull the gelatin
away from the sides of the mold and invert onto a serving plate.

I can’t think of one thing more comforting and fulfilling than a wonderful bowl
of hot soup or stew with a slab of corn bread beside it. As a child, I loved
Fridays at the old country school I attended, because that was the day they
served homemade vegetable soup, buttered toast, and peanut butter balls. I swear
I would almost run over the child in front of me to get to that lunch line. Nothing
says Mama and comfort like a soup.
Of course, down South in the summertime I’m so busy running from airconditioned car to air-conditioned house, I wouldn’t stop once to think of soup if
not for my husband. But I tell you what—that man could live off soup. Michael
couldn’t care less if it’s 100 degrees outside; he would happily eat soup three
meals a day. He adores a hearty Sour Cream, Bacon, and Split Pea Soup (page
77), which has such a deep, porky flavor and is truly soul-satisfying. Michael
also makes the best Ham Bone Soup (page 76) I’ve ever had. He’s got all these
ham hocks bobbing in a pot with one old sack of beans. It’s so rich and delicious.
I do think of soup whenever the house is full of friends. A big wintertime
celebration, or even just a handful of guests staying the weekend, will inspire me
to pull down my stockpot and make up a big old pot of hearty The Lady & Sons
Beef Vegetable Soup (page 70), one of my specialties. The beautiful thing about
soup is that you can leave a pot on the stove, stack some bowls and spoons
nearby, then step back. If you’re having an open house, or you’ve got overnight
guests and you know they’ll all want to eat something at different times, you can
just tell ’em, “Hey, y’all, soup’s on—help yourself.”
For the cold and sniffle season, you want to have a good chicken soup. My
Cure-All Chicken Rice Soup (page 69) has special properties that come from
making it with good ingredients and love. Chicken soup is a comfort that
everyone the world ’round swears by, but in this chapter I also include many
Southern specialties, like Burgoo (page 74). This thick stew-y soup is
traditionally eaten on the day of the Kentucky Derby. Old-time versions of the
recipe feature squirrel. My chicken, beef, and lamb version is much tamer, but,
honey, you could give those Derby horses a run for their money after a steaming,
meaty bowl of good burgoo.
The Real Deal Gumbo (page 79), She-Crab Soup (page 80), Charleston Okra
Soup (page 75), Easy Shrimp Bisque (page 81), and Creamy Peanut Soup (page
84)… Southern soups are like a history of the South simmered in a pot. There
are enough fine soup recipes here to last you the year. So ladle up a bowl of
comfort, Southern style.
CURE-ALL CHICKEN RICE SOUP
I have been a mama a pretty long time now, and I come from a long line of ladies
who knew the power of soup, so I feel qualified to tell y’all that this is the best
cure for whatever ails you that I know. Plenty of chicken flavor, plenty of
chicken meat, tender carrots, and rice, and a sweet little surprise tarragon flavor
make this just about the most comforting, healing food you can serve. I make it
whenever anyone’s sick—or even just thinking about it—and it has never failed
to improve things.
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 whole chicken (3½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8 pieces
3 celery stalks, chopped
2 large carrots, halved crosswise
1 large yellow onion, halved through the root end
3 cloves garlic, finely chopped
2 bay leaves 2
½ teaspoons salt
¾ teaspoon black pepper
¾ teaspoon dried tarragon
1 cup long-grain white rice
⅓ cup chopped fresh parsley
1. In a large stockpot, combine the chicken, 12 cups water, celery, carrots,
onion, garlic, bay leaves, salt, black pepper, and tarragon. Bring to a boil over
high heat. Reduce to a simmer and cook until the chicken is cooked through,
about 45 minutes.
2. Remove the chicken and carrots from the pot and set aside. Strain the
remaining liquid and discard the solids. Return the strained broth to the pot, stir
in the rice, bring to a gentle simmer, and cook until the rice is tender, 15 to 20
minutes.
3. Meanwhile, once the chicken is cool enough to handle, pick the meat off the
bones, discarding the bones and skin. Cut the meat into bite-size pieces and
thinly slice the carrots. Return the chicken and carrots to the pot. Simmer for 5
minutes. Adjust seasoning and stir in the parsley just before serving.
THE BONES HAVE IT
Flavor, that is. It’s always best to stick with bone-in meat when preparing soups
because that’s where your soup gets all its richness and flavor.
THE LADY & SONS BEEF VEGETABLE SOUP
Now, I don’t usually aim to write down recipes for y’all that have more
ingredients than you can count on your fingers, but this soup is an exception. For
one thing, many of these ingredients are just seasonings, and most can be kept on
hand in the freezer or pantry, so you don’t need to run out with a fresh shopping
list. Second, the soup comes together fast and makes enough to feed an army. If
you ever find yourself stuck in the house—say, a heavy rain caught you by
surprise—get situated in the kitchen with this recipe and you can have soup in
the freezer to last months.
MAKES 8 QUARTS
2 ½ to 3 pounds boneless chuck or beef short ribs (see box, opposite)
2 tablespoons vegetable oil (if using chuck roast)
3 tablespoons dried parsley flakes
1 tablespoon Italian seasoning
1 tablespoon beef bouillon granules
1 tablespoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1 tablespoon Paula Deen Collection Seasoned Salt, or other seasoned
salt
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1 teaspoon celery salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
2 bay leaves
1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce
1 ½ cups chopped yellow onions
1 can (28 ounces) diced tomatoes
1 cup thinly sliced carrots
1 cup chopped celery
1 cup sliced green beans, fresh or rinsed and drained canned
1 cup black-eyed peas, frozen or rinsed and drained canned
1 cup butter beans, frozen or rinsed and drained canned
1 cup sliced okra, fresh or frozen
1 cup corn kernels, fresh, frozen, or rinsed and drained canned
1 cup chopped red potatoes
½ cup elbow macaroni
2 teaspoons Acćent (optional)
1. If using chuck roast, in a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat
until shimmering. Place the roast in the skillet and cook until browned on both
sides, about 5 minutes per side. Remove the roast from the skillet and cut it into
1 ½- to 2-inch cubes; discard the fat.
2. Place the beef in a large stockpot. (If using short ribs, you can put them
right in the pot with no preparation.) Add 4 quarts water, the parsley, Italian
seasoning, bouillon granules, House Seasoning, seasoned salt, garlic powder,
celery salt, black pepper, bay leaves, Worcestershire sauce, onions, and diced
tomatoes. Bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook
until the meat is very tender, 1 ½ to 2 hours. If using short ribs, remove them
from the pot and cut the meat from the bones, discard the bones and fat, and
return the meat to the pot.
3. Add the remaining vegetables and the macaroni and bring the soup back to
a boil, stirring to combine the ingredients. Reduce the heat to a simmer and
cook, uncovered, for 45 minutes. Add the Acćent, if you’d like. Remove the bay
leaves before serving.
BONE UP ON FLAVOR
The chuck roast will yield more meat, but the bones from the short ribs give the
soup an incredible flavor.
CLEVER DEGREASING
To remove excess fat that floats to the top of the soup, swirl a lettuce leaf around
the surface of the soup—it will pick up a lot of the fat.
FRIED ONION SOUP
Y’all, a can of French’s fried onions in my pantry is like a challenge: How can I
work those delicious things into whatever I’m cooking? I’ve found they give my
onion soup a wonderful little crunch, along with their savory flavor.
SERVES 6
8 cups beef broth
4 cups chicken broth
2 teaspoons dried thyme
3 cans (2.8 ounces each) French’s fried onions
¼ cup dry sherry
6 slices day-old French bread
1 ½ cups shredded Swiss cheese (6 ounces)
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. Preheat the broiler. Arrange six 2-cup ovenproof bowls on a baking sheet.
2. In a large stockpot, combine both broths with the thyme. Bring to a boil
over high heat. Reduce to a gentle simmer and cook for 10 minutes. Stir in the
fried onions. Simmer for 5 minutes more. Stir in the sherry and simmer for 2
minutes. Ladle the soup into the bowls.
3. Place a slice of bread on the top of each bowl of soup and scatter the cheese
over the bread. Place the soup under the broiler until the cheese is melted and
bubbling and just starting to brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Garnish with parsley to
pretty it up, and serve.
SERVING SUGGESTION
If you have them, this soup looks great in onion soup crocks. It’s the authentic
way to serve onion soup, just like the French do!
SUMMER CORN AND POTATO CHOWDER
When corn is fresh and sweet, so many roadside stands pop up in the South that
you couldn’t be blamed for stopping to buy a sack of corn every few minutes.
After the first few ears, which I just love to steam, then eat with sweet butter and
salt, I get creative and I start adding corn kernels to just about everything. They
sweeten and thicken up this nice little chowder.
SERVES 4 TO 6
3 tablespoons butter
1 large yellow onion, chopped
2 ½ cups fresh corn kernels (from 3 ears of corn)
1 large (¾ pound) baking potato, peeled and cut into ½-inch cubes
3 cups chicken broth
½ cup heavy cream
⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper
Salt and black pepper
¼ cup chopped fresh chives, for garnish
1. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onion
and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, about 5 minutes.
2. Add the corn, potato, broth, cream, cayenne pepper, and salt and black
pepper to taste. Bring the soup to a boil. Reduce to a simmer and cook until the
potato is tender, about 10 minutes. Serve in pretty shallow bowls garnished with
the chives.
Quickly cut corn off the cob by cutting the cob in half crosswise and, using
a large sharp knife, scraping in a downward motion along the cob. For
added flavor, milk the corncob by coarsely grating it in a large shallow
bowl until you release all the wonderful flavor that the cob has to offer.
ONLY THE FRESHEST WILL DO
If you’re choosing your summer corn from a farm stand, avoid the ears that have
been sitting out in the sun. That sunshine will cause sweet corn to taste starchy,
even if it’s fresh-picked. Do choose the ears with the greenest husks and the
most silk poking out at the top.
BRUNSWICK STEW
Georgians and Virginians both lay claim to this rib-sticking stew. Wherever it
got its start, it’s a soul-satisfying combination of tangy, sweet, and smoky
flavors. My version comes together quickly, since I use rotisserie chicken along
with bacon and barbecue sauce, but it tastes like you’ve been simmering it for
hours.
SERVES 4 TO 6 AS A MAIN COURSE
4 slices bacon, chopped
1 large yellow onion, chopped
1 rotisserie chicken (2½ pounds), meat removed and chopped (about 5
cups)
1 can (28 ounces) diced tomatoes
1 can (16 ounces) creamed corn
1 package (10 ounces) frozen lima beans
1 cup chicken broth
½ cup barbecue sauce
1 tablespoon distilled white vinegar
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
½ teaspoon celery salt
Black pepper
1. In a large saucepan, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until almost
crisp, about 5 minutes. Add the onion and cook until softened, about 5 minutes.
2. Add the chicken, tomatoes, corn, lima beans, broth, barbecue sauce,
vinegar, Worcestershire sauce, celery salt, and black pepper to taste. Bring to a
boil. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook until the lima beans are tender, 5 to 7
minutes. And that’s it, folks!
VARIATIONS ON A STEW
This gorgeous stew is also delicious with butter beans instead of lima beans. And
I like to throw in some okra when I’ve got it in the house (which is just about
always).
BURGOO
Kentucky burgoo is an old-time tradition that some claim should be served from
mint julep cups after their contents are drunk at Kentucky Derby parties—a good
way to ensure you don’t drink yourself off to the races without any food to hold
you down! Burgoo is a mix of meats and vegetables that once relied on plentiful
squirrel meat but now usually contains more domestic fare: chicken, beef, and
sometimes game. I use lamb along with a garden full of vegetables for a souplike
version. Some prefer to keep it simmering until they have a real thick, stewlike
burgoo, which you can try if you like.
SERVES 12 TO 14
3 pounds bone-in chicken thighs
pounds beef round steak, cut into 3-inch chunks
2 pounds lamb shoulder, cut into 3-inch chunks
Salt and black pepper
¼ cup vegetable oil
2 medium yellow onions, finely chopped
2 medium carrots, chopped
2 celery stalks, chopped
1 large green bell pepper, chopped
1 jalapeño pepper, seeded and finely chopped (leave the seeds in if you
want more heat)
4 cloves garlic, finely chopped
6 cups beef broth, chicken broth, or water
1 can (28 ounces) crushed tomatoes
2 large baking potatoes, peeled and diced
1 package (10 ounces) frozen corn kernels
1 package (10 ounces) frozen lima beans
3 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce
1 ½ teaspoons Tabasco or other hot sauce
UPDATING A CLASSIC
Although a traditional burgoo uses a whole cut-up chicken, I like to use all
chicken thighs. For a slow-cooking stew, the texture and flavor of dark meat
really can’t be beat. But if you’re a white meat sort of person, bone-in chicken
breasts or a mix of breasts and legs will work just fine.
1. Lightly season the chicken, beef, and lamb all over with salt and black
pepper. In a large Dutch oven, heat the oil over medium-high heat until
shimmering. Working in batches, brown the meats on all sides, about 7 minutes
per batch. Drain the meats on a paper towel–lined baking sheet.
2. Add the onions, carrots, celery, and bell pepper to the pan. Cook, stirring,
until slightly softened, about 5 minutes. Add the jalapeño and garlic and cook for
2 minutes. Return the beef and lamb to the pan (cover the chicken with plastic
wrap and refrigerate until ready to use). Stir in the broth or water, the crushed
tomatoes, and 1 tablespoon salt. Bring the mixture to a boil. Reduce to a simmer,
cover, and cook for 1 ½ hours.
3. Return the chicken to the pan. Cover and simmer for 45 minutes. Add the
potatoes and simmer until all the meats are very tender and shred easily with a
fork, 45 minutes longer.
4. Remove the chicken from the pan. Once the chicken is cool enough to
handle, pick the meat off the bones, discarding the bones and skin; shred the
chicken and return to the pan. Stir in the corn, lima beans, Worcestershire sauce,
and hot sauce. Simmer until the vegetables are hot and the stew reaches the
thickness you like, 10 to 15 minutes.
CHARLESTON OKRA SOUP
Okra soup is traditional in Savannah as well as in Charleston. Meaty beef bones
give the broth a real deep background flavor, and okra provides that lovely silky
texture that Southerners crave.
SERVES 10 TO 12
3 pounds beef bones with meat (such as beef hindquarter shanks)
1 bay leaf
1 tablespoon salt
2 cans (28 ounces each) peeled whole tomatoes, coarsely broken with a
fork
3 pounds fresh or thawed frozen okra, sliced
1 large yellow onion, chopped
1 large green bell pepper, chopped Hot sauce
1. In a large pot, combine the beef bones, bay leaf, and 1 teaspoon of the salt.
Cover with 12 cups water. Bring to a simmer and cook over medium-low heat
for 1 hour.
2. Add the tomatoes, okra, onion, bell pepper, and the remaining 2 teaspoons
salt. Simmer until the soup is thick and the meat is falling apart, 1 to 1½ hours.
Remove the meat, bones, and bay leaf from the pot. When cool enough to
handle, pick the meat off the bones, cut into bite-size pieces, and return it to the
pot. Discard the bones and bay leaf. Stir in hot sauce to taste.
FREEZE OUT
This soup freezes just great. Since it’s a nice big batch, freeze it in separate
containers so you can pull out serving portions throughout the week. If you do
choose to freeze it, stick with fresh okra instead of the frozen.
HAM BONE SOUP
Honey, if you haven’t made friends with your local butcher yet, now’s the time.
He’ll cut you a nice ham bone for this hearty, simple soup, and chances are he’ll
set your heart aflutter while he’s at it—I don’t recall ever meeting a butcher who
didn’t have a certain appeal.
SERVES 6 TO 8
4 slices bacon, cut into ½-inch pieces
2 large carrots, chopped
2 celery stalks, chopped
1 large yellow onion, chopped
3 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 smoked ham bone (about 1 ¼ pounds), cut into thirds by your
butcher
1 bay leaf
Salt
4 cups shredded green cabbage (½ head)
2 cans (15 ounces each) kidney beans, rinsed and drained
Black pepper
1. Heat a large pot over medium-high heat. Add the bacon and cook until
almost crisp, about 5 minutes. Add the carrots, celery, and onion and cook,
stirring, until softened, about 5 minutes. Add the garlic and cook for 1 minute.
2. Drop in the ham bone and bay leaf. Add 8 cups water and 2 teaspoons salt.
Bring the mixture to a boil over high heat. Reduce to a simmer and cook for 20
minutes.
3. Stir in the cabbage and simmer for 30 minutes.
4. Add the kidney beans and simmer for 30 minutes more. Discard the bay
leaf and season with salt and black pepper to taste.
A HELPING HAM
If you’ve got a leftover ham bone from dinner, this is a great way to use it,
making this soup a real economical treat. An added bonus is that any meat still
stuck to the bone will just fall off into the soup to thicken it up.
SOUR CREAM, BACON, AND SPLIT PEA SOUP
Bacon fat gives this comforting split pea soup a nice smoky taste in no time, and
I reserve the crisped bacon to top the creamy green soup—along with a nice
dollop of sour cream. We grow a pot of thyme year-round so we always have the
ingredients on hand for this one. Consider planting your own herbs. They are
low-maintenance and high-flavor.
SERVES 6
6 slices bacon, cut into ½-inch pieces
1 large white onion, finely chopped
1 celery stalk, finely chopped
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 pound green split peas, rinsed
1 ½ teaspoons salt
2 sprigs fresh thyme
1 bay leaf
½ teaspoon black pepper
Sour cream, for serving
Chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. In a large pot, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, 5 to 7
minutes. Drain the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate, then crumble it up.
2. Add the onion, celery, and garlic to the pot. Cook, stirring, until tender,
about 5 minutes. Stir in the tomato paste until blended in. Stir in the split peas, 8
cups water, the salt, thyme, and bay leaf. Bring to a boil. Reduce to a gentle
simmer and cook until the peas have completely fallen apart and the soup
thickens, 1 ½ to 2 hours. Keep an eye on the soup and add more water if the
soup thickens too much while cooking.
3. Discard the bay leaf and season the soup with the black pepper. Serve the
soup topped with the crumbled bacon, a hearty dollop of sour cream, and a pretty
sprinkling of parsley.
PEAS, PLEASE
Split peas are so easy to prepare. They don’t need to be soaked—just give them a
good rinse and you’re off. They are such a great source of protein that they make
this (almost) vegetarian soup as hearty as a meaty concoction.
CONFEDERATE BEAN SOUP
Now, I adore baked beans and I never let myself get down to the last can or two
in my pantry before I pick up a few more. I love to eat them plain, but I
especially love to boil them up into this meaty, simple, and hearty soup. It’ll
warm your bones. Serve it with piping-hot corn bread.
SERVES 3 TO 4
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
½ pound smoked sausage, sliced into ¼ -inch-thick rounds
2 slices bacon, chopped
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
½ medium green bell pepper, chopped
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
2 cups leftover baked beans, or 1can 16 ounces) Bush’s Baked Beans
1 ½ cups half-and-half
Hot sauce, for serving
1. In a medium pot, heat the butter over medium-high heat. Add the sausage,
bacon, onion, bell pepper, and garlic. Cook, stirring, until the bacon is crisp, 5 to
7 minutes.
2. Add the beans and simmer for a few minutes over low to medium heat. Stir
in 1 cup half-and-half. Add more half-and-half depending on how thick you
want your soup. Pass hot sauce at the table.
A TASTE OF THE SOUTH
Don’t forget the hot sauce on this one. A smoky, bacony bean soup served with
corn bread and loads of hot sauce is a true taste of the South.
THE REAL DEAL GUMBO
Cooking the okra separately before adding it to this shrimp gumbo lets you enjoy
its silkiness without the sliminess. The soup—thickened with a roux (see step 2)
and flavored with sausage, onion, bell pepper, garlic, and Cajun seasoning—is a
real traditional Cajun recipe, full of shrimp and perfect for serving over rice.
SERVES 4 TO 6
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 cup chopped okra, fresh or thawed frozen
3 tablespoons butter
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
1 large yellow onion, chopped
1 large green bell pepper, chopped
1 tablespoon chopped garlic
4 cups chicken broth
¾ pound andouille or other smoked sausage, sliced
1 teaspoon Cajun seasoning
Salt and black pepper
1 pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined
4 cups cooked rice, for serving
Hot sauce, for serving
1. In a small skillet, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the okra and cook,
stirring frequently, until no longer slimy, about 3 minutes. Set aside.
2. In a large saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Whisk in the flour
and cook, stirring constantly, until it is a light chocolate color, about 5 minutes
(this is the “roux”).
3. Add the onion, bell pepper, and garlic and cook for 2 minutes. Add the
broth, sausage, and Cajun seasoning and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to a
simmer, cover, and cook for 20 minutes. Season to taste with salt and black
pepper.
4. Add the shrimp and simmer until they are pink and cooked through. Serve
over the rice. Pass hot sauce at the table.
TASTE AND ADJUST
Because soups have a tendency to cook down as the liquid evaporates, tasting
and adjusting seasoning is one of the most important steps in soup making. I like
to keep a spoon in a clean glass of water near my pot so I can have frequent
tastes to see how my flavors are developing.
SHE-CRAB SOUP
To find out if you’re looking at a she-or a he-crab, turn it over. The belly flap
part of the shell, called the apron, is wide on a she-crab, and narrow and pointed
on a he. Blue she-crab was the crab of choice for this soup because the
traditional garnish was crab roe, but any type of picked crabmeat will work. My
version is simply garnished with chives and Parmesan (no crab roe). The base of
the soup is a homemade fish broth that is enriched with cream and flavored with
sherry. The crabmeat gets mixed right in along with pieces of fish, and no matter
the sex of your crab, you’ll have yourself a real flavorful, traditional soup.
SERVES 8
One 2-pound fish head (preferably grouper), eyes, gills, and scales
removed (see top box, opposite)
1 medium yellow onion, peeled
2 celery stalks, including leaves
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon white pepper
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
¾ cup chopped scallions, white and light green parts only
2 teaspoons finely chopped garlic
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
1 cup heavy cream
1 cup whole milk
1 pound crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see below)
¼ cup dry sherry
½ teaspoon lemon-pepper seasoning, such as Paula Deen Collection
1 cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 4 ounces)
½ cup chopped fresh chives
1. In a large pot, combine the fish head, onion, celery, salt, white pepper, and 4
½ cups water. Bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and
cook for 30 minutes. Remove the fish from the pot. When cool enough to
handle, pick the fish meat off the bones in pieces that resemble picked crabmeat.
Discard the bones and skin. Remove the celery and onion from the broth and
discard.
To easily find shells in crabmeat, spread out the crabmeat on a baking sheet
in an even layer and place in a low oven (about 200°F) for a few minutes.
The shells will turn red in the heat.
2. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the
scallions and garlic and cook until tender, 2 to 3 minutes. Add the flour, stirring
until well blended. Slowly add 2 cups of the fish broth, continuing to cook until
smooth and bubbling. Slowly add the cream and milk. Stir in the reserved fish
and the crabmeat. Add the sherry and lemon-pepper seasoning. Simmer until
piping hot. Taste and add more sherry, garlic, salt, or white pepper to taste. Serve
in pretty bowls and top with the Parmesan and chives.
BROTH OPTIONS
You can freeze leftover fish broth for future use. It should keep in your freezer in
a good airtight container for about a month, but after that it will start to lose its
flavor. If you’d like, you can skip the homemade fish broth and substitute 2 cups
chicken broth instead.
EASY SHRIMP BISQUE
This soup is so elegant, no one will believe you if you tell them it took you about
5 minutes to make. So you just keep that to yourself and break out the fine china
for this one. It makes a wonderfully smooth first-course soup.
SERVES 4
½ pound cooked shrimp, peeled and chopped
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of celery soup
2 cups half-and-half
½ cup whole milk
2 tablespoons dry sherry
2 teaspoons tomato paste
1 teaspoon paprika
Salt and black pepper
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
In a blender (in batches if necessary), puree the shrimp, soup, half-and-half,
milk, sherry, tomato paste, and paprika. Pour into a medium saucepan and warm
gently over medium-low heat, stirring often, until the bisque is heated through.
Season to taste with salt and black pepper. Serve garnished with the parsley. It’s
easy and delicious!
BY DEFINITION
A bisque is a velvety, creamy soup traditionally flavored by shrimp, crab, lobster,
or crayfish. Feel free to substitute any of these other seafood options in this easy
bisque.
OYSTER STEW
Oysters are generally considered the food of love, and I have always liked to
serve them for a romantic dinner. You can serve them raw, holding the half-shell
for your honey to slurp down, or cook them—ever so gently—in this mild,
sweet-tasting stew. Either way, you should be prepared to reap the benefits of
one of the world’s greatest aphrodisiacs.
SERVES 4 TO 5
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
2 scallions, thinly sliced
1 pound shucked raw oysters, with their liquor (juices)
4 cups half-and-half or whole milk
¼ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper
Dash of Worcestershire sauce
Oyster crackers, for serving
In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the
scallions and cook until tender, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the oysters, half-and-half,
salt, cayenne pepper, and Worcestershire sauce. Simmer until the edges of the
oysters begin to curl and the mixture is hot but not boiling. Serve the stew with,
what else? Oyster crackers!
OYSTER PICKING
Choose your freshly shucked oysters wisely. They should be plump and their
color should be a milky cream to various shades of gray. Make sure the liquid
they are in is not cloudy. And here’s something a lot of folks don’t know. Freshly
shucked oysters can keep in the refrigerator for 7 to 10 days. Just make sure they
are kept in a real cold part of the refrigerator.
CREAMY CREOLE TOMATO SOUP
Louisiana Creole cooking can get pretty fancy—and pretty spicy. I keep it simple
with this creamy tomato soup. But look out! Thanks to a hit of Cajun seasoning
and a pinch of cayenne pepper, it does bite back!
SERVES 8 TO 10
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 medium yellow onions, chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 tablespoon Cajun seasoning
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
2 cans (28 ounces each) diced tomatoes
4 cups chicken broth
1 ½ cups heavy cream
1 teaspoon salt
1. In a large pot, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the onions and
cook, stirring, until very tender, 7 to 10 minutes.
2. Stir in the garlic, Cajun seasoning, and cayenne pepper and cook, stirring,
for 1 minute. Stir in the diced tomatoes and broth. Simmer, uncovered, for 15
minutes.
3. Working in batches, transfer the soup to a blender or food processor and
puree until smooth. Return the soup to the pot. Stir in the cream and salt and
simmer until heated through, about 3 minutes. Serve piping hot.
BLENDING IN
When blending hot soups, there’s always the chance of the soup getting all filled
up with air and blowing the top off your blender. So it’s best to fill the blender
up only halfway and blend your soup in batches. Hold the lid down firmly when
blending, and drape a dish towel over it for extra protection.
CREAMY PEANUT SOUP
When Southern cotton was ravaged by the boll weevil in the 1890s, George
Washington Carver championed the peanut, teaching farmers to grow it and
cooks to use it in as many ways as possible. Peanut soup was a keeper, and once
you taste the smooth, rich, nutty flavor, you’ll see why.
SERVES 4 TO 6
3 tablespoons butter
1 small yellow onion, chopped
2 celery stalks, chopped
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
6 cups chicken broth
2 cups creamy peanut butter
1¾ cups sour cream
Salt and black pepper
1 tablespoon sliced scallions, for garnish
1 tablespoon finely chopped peanuts, for garnish
1. In a large pot, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the onion and
celery and cook, stirring, until tender, about 5 minutes. Stir in the flour and cook
for 2 minutes. Slowly whisk in the broth. Bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce
to a simmer and cook until thickened, 10 to 15 minutes. Strain the soup and
discard the solids.
2. Return the strained soup to the pot. Whisk in the peanut butter over low
heat until fully incorporated and heated through. Gently stir in the sour cream.
Season with salt and black pepper to taste. Ladle the soup into pretty bowls and
serve hot, garnished with the scallions and peanuts.
STICKY SITUATION
To keep your peanut butter from sticking to your measuring cup, coat the cup
with a little cooking spray first—the peanut butter will slide out easily.

Brunch is really big now in the South, but, of course, for generations, in many
families, the mother cooked a great big meal every Sunday after church, whether
or not you called it brunch. I adore hosting this meal. It’s early in the day, the sun
is shining, and you still have plenty of energy, so it can be even more fun than a
dinner party. Besides, it’s very family-friendly and much more economical than
an evening get-together. And most brunch menus are all about one of my
passions: good old farm-fresh eggs.
Now, y’all, if you’ve got room for a chicken coop anywhere in your yard, I
highly recommend one. There is nothing like going out there every day
collecting those fresh eggs. I adore my chickens. Mine are rescued from a place
where they test mosquito control here in Savannah. And, oh my, they are the
sweetest girls. I go out there and I pick them up, rock them, and scratch their
ears, and they lie in my arms and go to sleep. I come in from being on the road
for a week, and I’ll say, “I bet there’s nothing here to eat.” And then I think, “Oh,
yes, there is! My girls will have me something.”
All my hens lay brown eggs. I gather them and clean them off and they can sit
out on the counter for about 30 days. Most recipes call for eggs at room
temperature because they beat up higher. So that basket of eggs on the counter is
just a great big delicious brunch waiting to happen.
My favorite brunch dishes are the ones you can make ahead, like Sunday
Morning Casserole (page 93), which I put together the night before, then pop in
the oven when I wake up. That is such a great-smelling way to start the day.
Artichoke and Smoked Cheddar Bake (page 92), Southern Shrimp and Pimiento
Strata (page 94), and Praline French Toast Casserole (page 100) are three more
of my all-time favorite do-ahead brunch dishes.
If y’all are egg lovers like me, you want to start with the basics, though:
follow my instructions for Paula’s Perfect Omelet (page 90) a few times and,
honey, you will be turning out the lightest, fluffiest, most beautiful yellow
omelets you ever saw. Once you have a gorgeous omelet in your repertoire, you
can take on anything: Southern Eggs Benedict with Tasso Hollandaise (page 96),
Eggs Baked with Grits and Ham (page 97), Cheesy Southern Quiche with
Country Ham (page 98)…
So you get yourself some chickens—or a dozen farm-fresh eggs—some ham
or bacon, a loaf of bread, cheese, potatoes or grits, and whatever else you’ve got
lying around, and you’re ready to whip up a meal so good, so homey, and so
hearty that it counts for breakfast and lunch. Oh, and did I mention you should
go ahead and pop a bottle of bubbly if you like mimosas?
BAKED EGG CRISPS
Here is an individual baked egg dish that is a surefire hit. Crispy toast, runny
yolks, melted cheese, and crunchy bacon—this one’s got it all.
SERVES 6
6 slices bacon
6 slices white bread, crusts removed
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, at room temperature
6 large eggs Salt and black pepper
1 tablespoon grated Parmesan cheese
1. Preheat the oven to 425°F.
2. In a large skillet, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, 5 to 7
minutes. Drain the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate, then crumble it up.
3. Spread one side of each slice of bread with the butter. Press the slices,
buttered side up, into each of six 4-ounce ramekins. Bake until pale golden,
about 8 minutes. Remove from the oven and reduce the oven temperature to
350°F.
4. Crack an egg into each ramekin. Season the eggs with salt and black pepper
to taste. Sprinkle each one with ½ teaspoon of the Parmesan. Bake until the
whites are set but the yolks are still nice and runny, 15 to 20 minutes. Serve
topped with the crumbled bacon.
Break eggs into a shallow bowl or teacup and then pour into ramekins to
ensure that the yolks remain intact.
POUR IT ON
It can be tricky cracking your eggs straight into your ramekins without breaking
those fragile yolks. To be extra sure those yolks stay whole, try cracking your
eggs into a shallow bowl or teacup before sliding them into the ramekins. Just a
little extra insurance!
PAULA’S PERFECT OMELET
I got my first cooking lessons in my Grandmama Paul’s kitchen, and the earliest,
most important lessons were fixing basics like this one. Once you’ve mastered a
light, fluffy folded omelet, you can walk into any kitchen with confidence. So,
y’all, this is one to practice at home. Try this recipe once or twice and you’ll be
able to do it in your sleep, I promise! Then, feel free to get creative. This recipe
is a perfect canvas for any filling that strikes your fancy (see top box, opposite).
MAKES 1 SERVING
1 tablespoon butter 2 large eggs
1 tablespoon whole milk
Salt and white pepper
1. In an 8-inch omelet pan or nonstick skillet with sloped sides, melt the butter
over medium heat. In a bowl, give the eggs a good beat with the milk and salt
and white pepper to taste. Pour into the pan. Leave it be and after about 1 minute
the bottom will start to set.
2. Using a rubber spatula, move the edges of the egg mixture toward the
middle and, swirling the pan, let the uncooked egg run out onto the surface of
the pan along the edges. Give the pan a shake (if you are adding fillings, now is
the time to do it). Let cook until just set.
3. Using the spatula, fold one-third of the omelet over the middle, and, tilting
the pan over a plate, fold the omelet over one more time as it rolls out onto the
plate.
Alternatively, fold the omelet by tilting the pan away from you and, using a
spatula, lifting the edge closest to the handle over the center of the omelet.
Tilt the pan back toward the handle to flip the unfolded portion over the
folded portion, then slide the omelet onto a plate.
FILL ’ER UP
I like to think of omelet fillings as my fridge cleaners. Got a plum tomato in
there and a few spinach leaves? Well, just cook them up with some onion, throw
in a little cheese (blue cheese, Swiss, you name it), and you’ve got yourself a
tasty omelet filling. Cheddar cheese and some baked ham left over from last
night’s dinner? Chop it up and throw that into your omelet in the morning.
BAKED HAM ’N’ EGG CUPS
Brunch is the time of day when I just love to serve up dishes that have a playful
presentation like this one. Baking slices of ham in muffin tins turns them into the
prettiest “bowls” for baked eggs. They look like tulips and are some of the besttasting ham ’n’ eggs you ever put in your mouth.
SERVES 4
¼ pound ham, cut into 4 thick (⅛-inch) slices
4 teaspoons ketchup
4 large eggs
Salt and black pepper
1 or 2 teaspoons sliced scallions
Hot sauce, for serving
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Lightly grease four cups of a standard-size
muffin tin or coat with cooking spray. Line the cups with the ham slices. Spread
a small dollop of ketchup on each slice of ham.
2. Carefully crack an egg into each ham-lined cup. Season the eggs with salt
and black pepper to taste. Bake until the whites are set but the yolks are still nice
and runny, 15 to 20 minutes. Sprinkle with the scallions and serve. Pass hot
sauce at the table.
A GOOD EGG
Now, you do want to be a little careful that the baked eggs don’t dry out in the
oven. To keep baked eggs as moist as possible, I like to spoon a little milk or
cream on top of my eggs just as I’m putting them in the oven. Keeps everything
nice and tender.
ARTICHOKE AND SMOKED CHEDDAR BAKE
There’s only one thing I like better than a full-on Sunday brunch, and that is a
lazy morning. With this easy dish I can have both. I can put this together the
night before, then pop it in the oven when I get up. When that oven timer rings,
I’ve got a deluxe brunch on the table, and if you look close, I may still have a
pillow crease on my cheek.
SERVES 6
1 tablespoon butter
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 yellow onion, chopped
6 cups 1-inch bread cubes (about 7 slices of bread)
3 cups shredded smoked Cheddar cheese, (¾ pound)
2 jars (6 ounces each) marinated artichoke hearts, drained and
chopped
7 large eggs 2
½ cups whole milk
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium skillet, melt the butter with the oil over medium heat. Add the
onion and cook until it just starts to brown, about 7 minutes. Remove from the
heat and let cool.
3. Evenly scatter the bread cubes in the prepared baking dish. Top with 1½
cups of the cheese, all of the cooled onion, and the artichoke hearts.
4. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, salt, and black pepper. Pour
over the bread mixture. Cover the dish with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at
least 1 hour or up to overnight.
5. Let the casserole come to room temperature as you preheat the oven to
350°F.
6. Top with the remaining 1½ cups cheese and bake until puffed and golden,
about 45 minutes.
FREEZE IT
Every home cook has tricks for keeping the monthly food bills down. Here’s one
that I think you’re gonna like. Make your own croutons or bread crumbs using
leftover ends of bread or whenever there’s a real good sale on bread at your
market. Cut the bread into cubes and toast in a 325°F oven until golden. Store as
croutons or grind them in a food processor and store as bread crumbs. Then
freeze them in airtight containers for several months. Pull them out as you need
them.
SUNDAY MORNING CASSEROLE
You need only look down at the ingredient list to know how I feel about this
recipe. I put just about everything I love into this one, and when it comes out of
the oven I get so excited, I’m likely to burn my mouth. What a wonderful way to
wake up your taste buds.
SERVES 6
2 slices white bread
1 pound bulk mild breakfast sausage meat (see box)
1 ½ cups thinly sliced cooked unpeeled red potatoes
1 ½ cups mixed shredded Cheddar and Monterey Jack cheese (6 ounces
total)
6 large eggs, lightly beaten
2 cups whole milk
1 teaspoon mustard powder
½ teaspoon salt
Black pepper
1. Grease a 2½- to 3-quart baking dish (attractive enough to bring to the table)
with butter, oil, or cooking spray. Cube the bread and place in the dish in a single
even layer.
2. In a large skillet, cook the sausage, breaking it up with a spoon, until it’s
almost cooked through, about 5 minutes. Drain off the fat. Layer the sausage
over the bread, and top with the potatoes. Sprinkle the cheese on top.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, mustard powder, salt, and
black pepper to taste. Pour the egg mixture over the sausage and potatoes in the
casserole. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate overnight.
4. When ready to cook the casserole, preheat the oven to 350°F. Bake the
casserole until set and golden, about 30 minutes. Serve hot.
GIVE IT A SQUEEZE
If you can’t find bulk sausage meat in your market, just buy sausage links and
squeeze the meat out of the casings. Just slice off the end of the sausage and give
it a squeeze as you would do with a toothpaste tube.
SOUTHERN SHRIMP AND PIMIENTO STRATA
Any way you serve shrimp, I’m gonna love ’em. Here I toss big pink shrimp
with plenty of grated cheese, cubed bread, pimiento, and scallions to make a
savory baked strata that will keep you going ’til suppertime. Oh, and if you ever
did have any left over, which happens when I make this for just a few of us, it is
a divine light lunch served alongside a little green salad. Almost worth holding
back at brunch. Almost.
SERVES 6 TO 8
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1 pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined About
8 cups 2-inch bread cubes (from¾ pound Italian bread)
2 cups shredded Gruyère or Swiss cheese (8 ounces)
⅓ cup chopped scallions
1 jar (4 ounces) diced pimientos, drained
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
8 large eggs
2 cups whole milk
1 teaspoon dried thyme Pinch of grated nutmeg
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large skillet, melt the butter over high heat. Add the shrimp and cook
until just pink, about 30 seconds per side. Transfer the shrimp to a large bowl.
3. Add the bread, cheese, scallions, pimientos, ½ teaspoon of the salt, and ¼
teaspoon of the black pepper to the bowl with the shrimp. Toss well to combine
and empty the contents into the prepared baking dish.
4. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, thyme, nutmeg, the
remaining ½ teaspoon salt, the remaining ¼ teaspoon pepper, and the parsley to
make the custard. Pour the custard over the bread mixture. Use the back of a
spoon, or just your fingertips if you like, to press the bread so that it will absorb
the custard. Cover the strata with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 1 hour
or up to overnight.
Using your fingertips or the back of a spoon, push the bread down into the
custard to ensure that the bread soaks up the liquid.
5. Let the strata come to room temperature as you preheat the oven to 350°F.
Remove the plastic wrap and bake until the top is golden and the custard is set,
45 to 50 minutes. Serve sprinkled with the parsley.
SOAK IT UP
It’s important that you let your strata or any other bread and egg dish (such as
bread pudding) sit for at least 1 hour. That way, the bread is sure to soak up lots
of the liquid from the egg and milk, so your dish doesn’t end up dry and tough.
You want that custard light and fluffy and wrapped around the cubes of bread.
PICKLED EGGS AND BEETS
Pickled eggs are one of those items you’ll notice sitting in a jar on the counters
of Southern country stores, and if you’ve never had the opportunity to try one,
now’s your chance. The eggs take on the color of the beet juice and look so
festive on the table when you’re having company. They make a beautiful snack
on their own, but pickled along with beets they are a brunch showstopper worthy
of your best china (though perhaps not your fine white linen napkins, since these
beauties are fuchsia!).
SERVES 6
1 can (15 ounces) whole beets, drained, liquid reserved
¾ cup sugar
½ cup distilled white vinegar
½ teaspoon whole cloves
1 teaspoon salt
6 hard-boiled eggs, peeled and rinsed
1. In a medium saucepan, heat the reserved beet liquid, sugar, vinegar, cloves,
and salt over medium-low heat until the sugar has dissolved.
2. Place the eggs in a large bowl with the beets. Pour in the vinegar mixture so
that eggs are fully submerged. Cover and refrigerate overnight.
3. When you’re ready to serve, remove the eggs and beets from the vinegar
mixture with a slotted spoon and place them whole on a pretty serving platter.
DO AHEAD
Get these eggs done ahead of time and keep them in mason jars in the
refrigerator. They will keep for 3 to 5 days, if not longer.
SOUTHERN EGGS BENEDICT WITH TASSO HOLLANDAISE
Tasso is a real traditional ham down here, and we throw some in the pot
whenever we crave that special Cajun flavor. It adds just the right bit of spice to
a rich, creamy hollandaise sauce here. The recipe calls for you to play shortorder cook, since it should be made right before serving, so sit your loved ones
down, serve a little fruit to keep them occupied, then whip up a breakfast worth
waiting for.
SERVES 2 TO 4
2 ounces tasso (see top box, opposite), diced (about ½ cup)
4 slices Canadian bacon (about ¼ pound)
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, at room temperature
3 large egg yolks
tablespoons fresh lemon juice
¼ teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon distilled white vinegar
4 large eggs
2 English muffins, split and toasted
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. Place the tasso on one side of an 8-inch square baking dish and the
Canadian bacon on the other side. Cover with foil and bake until the meats are
cooked, about 10 minutes. If you’re not finished with the rest of the recipe after
the meats have been in the oven for 10 minutes, just turn the oven off and leave
the meats inside to keep nice and warm.
3. In a small saucepan, combine the butter, egg yolks, lemon juice, and salt.
Cook over low heat, stirring constantly with a whisk, until the sauce coats the
back of a spoon, 4 to 5 minutes. Remove from the heat and keep whisking until
thick (the heat from the pan will continue cooking the sauce, so make sure you
keep on stirring until it cools down).
4. Fill a small, shallow saucepan with 2 inches of water and the vinegar and
bring to a simmer. Break one of the eggs into a small cup and slide the egg into
the water, stirring the water very gently with a spoon. Repeat immediately with
the other eggs and cook until the whites are firm, about 3 minutes. Remove the
eggs with a slotted spoon and drain them on paper towels.
5. Top each English muffin half with a slice of Canadian bacon, followed by
one poached egg. Stir the tasso into the hollandaise and spoon over the tops of
the eggs. Serve just as soon as you can.
ANOTHER CAJUN CLASSIC
Tasso ham can be found in Cajun stews, gravies, and even our old favorite,
jambalaya. But the true starring role for this peppery smoked pork, in my eyes,
comes when it’s paired with poached eggs. Add some hollandaise and you’ve
got yourself a perfect Southern breakfast. If you can’t find tasso near you, go on
ahead and substitute andouille.
EGGS BAKED WITH GRITS AND HAM
Y’all, I can’t believe how well I ate growing up. Even if we didn’t have much,
and so many families from southwest Georgia had very little, we did have grits.
Breakfast, lunch, and dinner, I never tire of grits, and this is my go-to method of
serving them up with ham and eggs in the morning. It’s an easy, one-pan bake
that lets you feed folks like kings on even a beggar’s budget.
SERVES 4
½ cup quick-cooking grits
1 ¼ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (5 ounces)
¾ cup coarsely chopped country-style ham (3 ounces, thickly sliced)
Salt and black pepper
⅛ teaspoon garlic powder
4 large eggs
1 to 2 tablespoons sliced scallions
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Lightly grease an 8-inch square baking pan with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium saucepan, cook the grits according to the package directions.
Once the grits are cooked, stir in ¾ cup of the Cheddar, the ham, ½ teaspoon salt,
¼ teaspoon black pepper, and the garlic powder and continue stirring until the
cheese melts.
3. Scrape the grits mixture into the prepared pan. Using a spoon, make four
egg-size indents in the grits mixture (these will be the nests for the eggs). Crack
1 egg into each nest. Season the eggs lightly with salt and black pepper. Top with
the remaining ½ cup Cheddar. Bake until the whites are set but the yolks are still
runny and the cheese is melted, 15 to 20 minutes. Serve sprinkled with the
scallions.
QUICK STUDY
When picking up your grits at the supermarket, make sure you choose the quickcooking grits. If you see the instant kind, just walk on by. Any Southerner worth
his salt will tell you they are just not real grits.
CHEESY SOUTHERN QUICHE WITH COUNTRY HAM
I baked my share of quiches back before I opened the restaurant, when I was
catering. Everyone adores a rich, eggy pie like this, and I think it’s the prettiest
thing for a brunch buffet.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or store-bought piecrust
1 large egg white
3 tablespoons shredded Cheddar cheese
3 large eggs
a ½ cups half-and-half
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
6 ounces thinly sliced fully cooked country ham, cut into ½-inch-wide
strips
1 tablespoon butter, cut into small bits
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Roll the dough out to a ⅜-inch thickness and line
a 9-inch pie plate. Line the dough with foil and fill with dried beans or pie
weights. Bake for 20 to 25 minutes, then remove the foil and beans or weights
and bake for 5 to 7 minutes longer.
2. Take the crust out of the oven, but leave the oven on and increase the oven
temperature to 375°F. Brush the bottom of the crust with the egg white and
sprinkle evenly with the cheese. Return the crust to the oven and bake until
lightly browned, 10 to 13 minutes.
3. In a medium bowl, prepare the custard by whisking together the whole
eggs, half-and-half, nutmeg, salt, and black pepper.
4. Lay the ham over the bottom of the partially baked crust and carefully pour
in the custard. Dot the top with the butter pieces and return to the oven. Bake
until the top of the quiche is puffed up and golden and the middle is almost set,
25 to 35 minutes. Let the quiche cool for at least 15 minutes on the counter. That
middle will keep on cooking gently. By the time you cut into it, the quiche
should be good and set so that your slices come out nice and clean.
BLIND BAKING
This means partially baking a piecrust before you add your filling. Blind baking
ensures that your crust doesn’t get all soggy from a liquid filling. The pie
weights prevent the crust from puffing up when you bake it. If you don’t have
pie weights around your house, just use dried beans or uncooked rice on top of
the foil to hold that crust in place.
KENTUCKY HOT BROWN
Now, a Hot Brown is a historical food. It was invented at The Brown Hotel in
Louisville, Kentucky, in 1926. What is it? A hot open-face turkey sandwich
gilded with tomato, bacon, and plenty of melted cheese sauce. Oh my, that’s just
the thing to revive you after a late night.
SERVES 4
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
¼ cup all-purpose flour
2 cups whole milk
1 ½ cups shredded Monterey Jack cheese (6 ounces)
½ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper
4 slices white bread, toasted
¾ pound sliced roast turkey
4 slices tomato
¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 1 ounce)
8 slices bacon, cooked until crisp
1. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Whisk in the
flour and cook, stirring with the whisk, for 1 minute. Add the milk, bring to a
boil, and cook, stirring with the whisk, until thickened, about 3 minutes. Stir in
the Jack cheese until melted. Stir in the salt and cayenne pepper.
2. Preheat the broiler. Place the toast in a baking dish large enough to fit the 4
slices in one layer. Divide the turkey and tomato among the bread slices. Pour
the cheese sauce over the toasts and top with the Parmesan. Broil until brown
and bubbling, about 5 minutes. Place 2 slices of the bacon (like an “X”) on top
of each cheesy toast and serve.
IT STARTS WITH THE ROUX
It may seem like nothing, but the most important step in this recipe is the one
where you cook the flour and the butter. This is called a roux, and it’s a
foundation of good Southern cooking. If you don’t take the time to cook it for
the full minute called for, you will taste the raw flour in your finished dish.
PRALINE FRENCH TOAST CASSEROLE
I make this rich, sweet recipe for my sweet family whenever they ask. It’s an old
favorite that is just out of this world and it brings out everyone’s sweet tooth—
especially mine.
SERVES 6 TO 8
French Toast
Butter, for the baking dish
1 loaf French bread (13 to 16 ounces)
8 large eggs
2 cups half-and-half
1 cup whole milk
2 tablespoons granulated sugar
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon grated nutmeg
Pinch of salt
Praline Topping
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1 cup packed light brown sugar
1 cup chopped pecans
2 tablespoons light corn syrup
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon grated nutmeg
Raspberry Syrup
1 cup raspberry preserves
2 tablespoons raspberry liqueur, such as Chambord
1. To prepare the French toast: Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish generously
with butter. Cut the bread crosswise into twenty 1-inch-thick slices. Arrange the
slices in two overlapping rows.
2. In a large bowl, combine the eggs, half-and-half, milk, granulated sugar,
vanilla, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt. Beat with a rotary beater or whisk until the
custard mixture is blended but not too foamy. Pour the custard over the bread
slices, making sure they all are covered evenly. Spoon some of the custard in
between the slices. Cover with foil and refrigerate overnight.
3. The next day, preheat the oven to 350°F.
4. Meanwhile, prepare the praline topping: In a medium bowl, combine the
butter, brown sugar, pecans, corn syrup, cinnamon, and nutmeg and blend well
with a fork. Spread the topping evenly over the bread slices. Bake until puffed
and lightly golden, about 45 minutes.
5. Meanwhile, make the raspberry syrup: In a small saucepan, heat the
preserves, liqueur, and 3 tablespoons water over medium heat. Stir until warm
and thinned out to a syruplike consistency.
6. Serve the French toast casserole drizzled with the pretty raspberry syrup.
SYRUP SWAP-OUT
If you’d rather not use raspberry liqueur or if you can’t find it, substitute orange
juice.

Y’all, I love my carbs! No Southern table is complete without a bowl of
carbohydrate goodness on there. I don’t care where you are in the South, you’ll
always find pasta, noodles, or rice on the table. In the North I have enjoyed
wonderful authentic Italian food. Down here we tend to cook our pasta a bit
more, then smother it with cheese, cream, and butter, and call it macaroni and
cheese.
I make mac ’n’ cheese crispy (The Lady’s Cheesy Mac, page 105), creamy
(Creamiest Mac and Cheese, page 106), or healthy (Healthier Mac and Cheese,
page 107), depending upon my mood. But no matter what, it is a dish that kids
and adults always come together on. My grandbaby Jack has never turned down
a plate of macaroni, and I’m sure I never met a child who has.
Now, I do a lasagna, too, but I do it Southern style. A little cream cheese is my
secret, and I’m sharing the recipe for My Favorite Lasagna (page 108) with y’all
because it makes the best lasagna you could dream of. Cream cheese goes in my
pretty Pasta with Creamy Primavera Sauce (page 112), too.
Another one of my takes on classic Italian cooking is my Smoky Southern
Spaghetti Carbonara (page 111), and this is another marriage made in heaven.
Italian cooks came up with this divine sauce of egg, cheese, and pork—I just
make mine with good smoky bacon and a nice dash of hot sauce to sweeten the
deal.
Using a bit of meat to enrich your starch is an old Southern trick. Take our rice
dishes. Where I am originally from, in the southwest corner of Georgia, it was
rice and brown gravy. When I made it to Savannah, I was introduced to
Savannah red rice. I’ll never turn my back on rice and gravy, but my Savannah
red rice (page 113), packed with tomato and sausage, is truly delicious.
Around here you also see Dirty Rice (page 118), which has to have chicken
livers in it if you want the real deal. The comforting flavors of that dish, full of
butter, ground beef, and the Cajun combination of green pepper, scallions, and
garlic, will even win over someone who swears they can’t love a liver dish.
No matter how you eat it, rice is just so fast and simple, and you can make it a
bed for anything, and flavor it in just about any way. Plus, leftovers are a gift that
will allow you to make the best Rice Croquettes (page 120).
Historically, even the poorest Southern families ate really well because they
usually had their own gardens, raised some animals, and knew how to make the
most amazing dishes from simple foods like noodles and rice. Recipes like the
ones in this chapter have filled so many bellies and brought such comfort and
enjoyment to people over the years. And here they are for your eating pleasure.
THE LADY’S CHEESY MAC
Do y’all have a recipe that you’re just so proud to serve because you know it is
absolutely the best it can be? Well, for me that recipe is The Lady’s Cheesy Mac.
I have made this rich and creamy macaroni and cheese so many times, I don’t
even need to use measuring cups anymore. I can just do it by sight. Our buffet
table at The Lady & Sons is never without it, and, of course, Jamie and Bobby
expect to see it on our family table!
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 cups elbow macaroni (8 ounces)
2 cups shredded Cheddar cheese, plus extra for topping
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, cut into pieces
3 large eggs, lightly beaten
1 cup whole milk or evaporated milk
½ cup sour cream
½ teaspoon salt
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Lightly grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the macaroni according to the
package directions. Drain well and transfer to a large bowl. Add the 2 cups
Cheddar and the butter, stirring until the pasta is coated.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk, sour cream, and salt. Add
the egg mixture to the pasta and stir well to combine. Scrape the mixture into the
prepared baking dish. Bake until golden, 35 to 40 minutes. Take the dish out of
the oven and top with extra cheese, then return it to the oven until the cheese is
melted and beginning to brown, about 5 minutes. Serve hot.
THE SECRET’S OUT
It’s the sour cream that makes this mac and cheese truly special! It creates the
oh-sovelvety smooth texture inside—a perfect complement to the crispy
browned top. And the tangy sour notes are just the right balance for the cheesy
richness.
CREAMIEST MAC AND CHEESE
I swear there must be something in the human gene—all children everywhere
love mac and cheese. And kids all seem to agree: the creamier, the better. Well,
this stovetop macaroni and cheese not only comes together in the twinkle of an
eye, it is the richest, the silkiest, the most yummy creamy mac and cheese you
have ever tasted. Your children will beg for it, and I’ll bet you’ll be only too
happy to oblige.
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 cups elbow macaroni (8 ounces)
3 tablespoons butter
2 large eggs
¾ cup heavy cream or evaporated milk
1 teaspoon salt
¾ teaspoon black pepper
¾ teaspoon mustard powder
Pinch of cayenne pepper (optional)
1 ½ cups shredded Cheddar cheese (6 ounces)
8 slices American cheese
1. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the macaroni according to the
package directions. Drain well and return the pasta to the pot. Add the butter and
stir over medium heat until the butter has melted and the pasta is coated.
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, cream, salt, black pepper,
mustard powder, and cayenne pepper, if using. Pour the egg and cream mixture
into the pot and stir. Add the cheeses and continue stirring over medium heat
until the sauce has thickened and is very creamy, about 3 minutes. Serve hot.
CREAM OF THE CROP
Dairy products are delicate creatures when they come across heat. There’s
always the risk of curdling, which makes a clumpy mess. The best protection
against curdling, folks, is fat. So, regular milk, with its lower fat content, will
just not cut it in this recipe. Stick with the heavy cream or evaporated milk, and
this mac will be at its creamy best!
HEALTHIER MAC AND CHEESE
Now, do you know that my son Bobby is something of a health nut? He loves his
salads, and his grilled chicken breast, and his tuna steaks. But no matter what
kind of health regime he’s on, he’s just got to have macaroni and cheese—so I
make this up for him to satisfy his craving and honor his health kick.
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 cups whole wheat or regular elbow macaroni (8 ounces)
2 cups shredded reduced-fat Cheddar cheese (8 ounces)
½ cup low-fat evaporated milk
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
¼ cup reduced-fat sour cream
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
⅓ cup grated Parmesan cheese
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Coat a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with cooking
spray.
2. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the macaroni according to the
package directions. Drain well and transfer the pasta to a large bowl. Add the
Cheddar and stir until the pasta is coated and the cheese has melted.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the evaporated milk, eggs, sour cream,
mustard, salt, and cayenne pepper. Add the milk-egg mixture to the macaroni
and cheese and stir well to combine. Scrape the mixture into the prepared baking
dish and sprinkle the Parmesan evenly over the top. Bake until golden brown and
crispy around the edges, 35 to 40 minutes.
A HEALTHY OPTION
Whole grains aren’t just for breakfast cereal. When it comes to types of pasta,
there are so many options on the supermarket shelves these days—from whole
wheat and gluten-free pastas all the way to pastas enriched with vegetables like
spinach and carrot. Well, who knew it was so easy to be healthy?
MY FAVORITE LASAGNA
America is just one great big melting pot of cultures and cuisines, and the South
is no different. Down here, we serve the classics of Italian cooking, like lasagna,
and set them on our potluck buffet table right next to the fried chicken and gravy.
Of course, we do put a Southern spin on it. I make it extra-special with cream
cheese. I just love to bring it hot and bubbling to the table.
SERVES 8
12 ounces lasagna noodles
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 small yellow onion, finely chopped
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
1 pound ground beef
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1 jar (24 ounces) spaghetti sauce
5 ounces cream cheese, cut into bits
1 pound fresh mozzarella cheese, thinly sliced
1 ½ cups grated Parmesan cheese (about 6 ounces)
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Lightly grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large pot of boiling salted water, parboil the lasagna noodles according
to the package directions.
3. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add the onion and
cook until translucent, about 5 minutes. Add the garlic and cook until fragrant,
about 1 minute. Add the beef and cook, breaking it up with a fork, until
browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Sprinkle with the salt and black pepper. Add the
spaghetti sauce and cream cheese. Stir until the cheese has melted into the sauce.
4. Spoon ½ cup of the meat sauce into the bottom of the prepared baking dish.
Top with a single layer of noodles, 1 cup of the sauce, one-third of the
mozzarella, and ½ cup of the Parmesan. Repeat the layering two more times,
until all of the ingredients have been used, ending with a layer of mozzarella and
Parmesan.
5. Cover the baking dish with foil and bake for 30 minutes. Remove the foil
and continue baking until golden on top and bubbling, 20 to 25 minutes.
DO AHEAD
Don’t you just love a dish that tastes even better the day after you make it? Well,
this is just that kind of dish—which, of course, makes it perfect for hassle-free
entertaining. I even like to make up two dishes sometimes and stick one in the
freezer for future midweek meals.
BUTTERNUT SQUASH RAVIOLI WITH PECAN BROWN
BUTTER
When I first started seeing this butternut squash ravioli for sale in the
supermarket, I thought, “Really? Squash in ravioli?” I wasn’t quite convinced I’d
like it because I’m used to having meat or cheese in my ravioli, but I’m game to
try anything once. And I am so glad I did, because I love it to pieces. The squash
adds just a bit of sweetness to a savory dish, and, as y’all know, that salty-sweet
taste is my absolute downfall. To get the full force of the flavor, you need to
serve it with a butter sauce rather than a red sauce as you would other ravioli.
And this brown-butter sauce is just the thing.
SERVES 4
1 pound fresh or frozen butternut squash or pumpkin ravioli
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
½ cup finely chopped pecans
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the ravioli according to the
package directions. Drain well.
2. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Stir in the pecans
and cook, stirring occasionally, until the pecans are golden and the butter is
brown and fragrant, about 2 minutes. Add the ravioli, stirring to coat in the
butter, and cook until warmed through, about 30 seconds. Stir in the salt and
black pepper and serve hot.
PASTA PERFECT
In a perfect world, your pasta comes out done just as you are ready to throw the
sauce on it. Well, things don’t always work out that way. If your pasta is done
before your sauce is ready, just give it a quick rinse under some cold or cool
water, never hot. Don’t bother with oil to stop it from sticking—water is your
best bet.
LINGUINE WITH SPICY CAJUN SHRIMP
You just can’t get a better taste of the South than serving that hot and spicy
Cajun seasoning with some nice, buttery shrimp. All you got to do is add some
noodles and you have a meal that will please anybody who has working taste
buds. My husband, Michael, who knows a thing or two about Cajun cooking,
will often come home with a whole mess of shrimp and a box of pasta and ask
me to fix him up some of this. Now that I’ve got the recipe written down, I guess
he’ll be making it for me!
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined
2 teaspoons Cajun seasoning
12 ounces linguine
1 tablespoon chopped garlic
½ cup chicken broth
2 dashes of hot sauce
½ cup chopped scallions, plus 1 or 2 tablespoons for garnish
Grated Parmesan cheese, for serving
1. In a large, deep skillet, heat the oil and 2 tablespoons of the butter over
medium-high heat. Dust the shrimp evenly with the Cajun seasoning and add
them to the pan. Cook the shrimp, turning once, until they are just opaque and
cooked through, about 3 minutes. Transfer the shrimp to a plate.
2. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the pasta according to the
package directions. Drain well.
3. Meanwhile, as the pasta cooks, melt the remaining 2 tablespoons butter in
the pan. Add the garlic and cook for 30 seconds. Add the broth and hot sauce.
Bring to a simmer and stir up any browned bits from the pan. Turn off the heat
and return the shrimp to the pan.
4. Toss the pasta with the shrimp sauce and the ½ cup scallions. Serve
garnished with scallions. Pass the Parmesan cheese at the table.
RAGIN’ CAJUN
You’ll notice that I don’t call for salt and pepper in this recipe. That’s because
it’s all taken care of in the Cajun seasoning. Truly an amazing spice blend, this
mix of salt, peppers, paprika, ground garlic, and onion (with a million variations
in between) is a staple of Cajun cooking.
SMOKY SOUTHERN SPAGHETTI CARBONARA
This dish has got everything I love right there in one bowl: that smoky flavor of
good, crispy bacon combined with a wonderful cheesy, creamy sauce and just
the right amount of hot sauce to slap some sense into your taste buds. It’s the
kind of dish that will make you stand up and holler a big “Thank you!” to the
cook.
SERVES 4
½ pound bacon, chopped 1
¼ cups grated Parmesan cheese (about 5 ounces)
¼ cup heavy cream 2 large eggs
Salt
Tabasco or other hot sauce
Black pepper
1 pound spaghetti
1 medium yellow onion, finely chopped
1. In a large, deep skillet, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp,
about 5 minutes. Drain the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate. Take the skillet
off the heat, but don’t drain off the bacon fat.
2. In a bowl, whisk together the Parmesan, cream, eggs, ¾ teaspoon salt, ½
teaspoon hot sauce, and black pepper to taste.
3. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the pasta according to the
package directions. Drain well.
4. While the pasta cooks, return the skillet to medium-high heat. Add the
onion and cook until softened, about 5 minutes. Remove the skillet from the
heat.
5. Immediately add the hot pasta, the bacon, and the egg mixture to the skillet;
toss everything together to combine. The heat from the pasta and skillet will
thicken the eggs into a creamy sauce. Taste and add more salt, hot sauce, or
black pepper, if desired. Serve hot.
THE HEAT IS ON
Now, you may look at this recipe and say, “Paula, how in heaven’s name are my
eggs going to cook without any heat on them?” Don’t you worry; there will be
enough heat coming from that pasta and the skillet itself to make sure those eggs
are good and cooked but not scrambled. If you left them on the direct heat, you’d
have a scrambled egg pasta dish. I’m telling you, make sure your pasta is hot,
make sure you give it a really good stir, and what you will end up with is a
creamy, beautiful sauce. And we’ll just leave the scrambled eggs for breakfast.
PASTA WITH CREAMY PRIMAVERA SAUCE
This dish is a real beauty, plain and simple. All of those gorgeous fresh
vegetables are so colorful and inviting, I swear it just makes you want to dive
right into the bowl! And because it is so easy to prepare (the vegetables and the
pasta cook in no time), it’s a wonderful dish to serve for a luncheon or a party
where you may have other things to put your mind to. I like to serve this in a
clear glass bowl and place it right in the center of the table.
SERVES 6
1 small head broccoli (½ pound), cut into bite-size florets
1 medium carrot, thinly sliced
1 medium zucchini, quartered lengthwise and thinly sliced crosswise
⅓ cup frozen green peas
1 pound penne pasta 1 tablespoon olive oil
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
¾ cup halved cherry tomatoes
¾ cup heavy cream
2 ounces cream cheese, cut into bits
¾ cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 3 ounces)
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
¼ cup chopped fresh basil
1. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. Have a bowl of ice water at the
ready. Add the broccoli and carrot to the boiling water and cook until crisptender, about 2 minutes. Transfer the vegetables with a slotted spoon to the ice
water. Add the zucchini and peas to the boiling water and cook for 1 minute.
Transfer with a slotted spoon to the ice water. Drain the vegetables and transfer
to a large bowl that’s pretty enough to serve in.
2. Bring the vegetable cooking water back to a boil. Add the penne and cook
according to the package directions; drain well.
3. Meanwhile, in a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add the
garlic and cook until fragrant, about 15 seconds. Add the tomatoes and cook
until just soft, 1 to 2 minutes. Scrape the garlic and tomatoes into the bowl of
vegetables.
’TIS THE SEASON
Primavera means “spring” in Italian. Traditionally, this pasta was made with the
fresh bounty of vegetables harvested in the springtime. But my pasta primavera
is too good to have just in the springtime! Since you can get these vegetables any
time of the year, you can serve primavera any time you crave it.
4. Return the skillet to the heat. Add the cream and bring to a simmer. Whisk
in the cream cheese until smooth. Whisk in ½ cup of the Parmesan, the salt, and
the black pepper.
5. Add the pasta to the bowl of vegetables. Pour the hot cream sauce over the
mixture. Stir in the basil and the remaining ¼ cup Parmesan and toss well. Taste
and adjust seasoning, if necessary.
SAVANNAH RED RICE
Now, in the inland areas of Georgia, people do up their rice with brown gravy,
but out on the coast, they are all about their red rice. This is how I make rice for
my husband, Michael, and his two children, Michelle and Anthony. Though I
admit it’s taken me a few years of living in Savannah to come around to their
way of eating, now this is how I love it, too. Serve with crusty bread to sop up
that good sauce.
SERVES 4 TO 6
3 tablespoons butter
1 cup chopped yellow onion
1 cup chopped green bell pepper
1 cup chopped andouille or other smoked sausage
1 cup long-grain white rice
1 can (15 ounces) crushed tomatoes
1 cup chicken broth
1 teaspoon hot sauce Pinch of salt Pinch of black pepper
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Lightly grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onion,
bell pepper, and sausage and cook until the vegetables soften, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir
in the remaining ingredients and bring to a simmer. Cook until the sauce begins
to thicken, about 10 minutes.
3. Scrape the mixture into the prepared baking dish and cover with foil. Bake
until the rice is tender and the sauce is bubbling, 40 to 45 minutes. Serve hot.
RELAXED ENTERTAINING
This is another great dish for entertaining. Baked rice is so easy and foolproof,
and when you’ve got guests stopping by, it’s a surefire hit. There are two ways
you can prep this up ahead of time. One way is to just get the dish ready to the
point that everything is in the baking dish waiting to be baked. Then, bake it off
when guests start arriving and it’ll be ready when you sit down to supper. Or, in
a pinch, go ahead and bake it off earlier and just reheat it, covered, when your
guests show up.

JAMBALAYA
To me, jambalaya is another testament to what a Southern cook can do, even on
a tight budget. This classic dish seems to have just a little bit of everything in it,
and all those odds and ends sure do make one delicious meal. Now, if shellfish
are not so readily available in your area, this tastes just as fantastic with
shredded rotisserie chicken tossed through, in place of the shrimp.
SERVES 4 TO 6
1 cup long-grain white rice
3 tablespoons dried minced onion
1 tablespoon dried parsley flakes
1 tablespoon beef bouillon granules
½ teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon garlic powder
½ teaspoon black pepper
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
¼ teaspoon salt
1 bay leaf 1 can (14 ½ ounces) diced tomatoes
1 can (8 ounces) tomato sauce
½ pound fully cooked smoked sausage, such as andouille, cut into ¼ -
inch slices
¾ pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined
1. In a medium bowl, combine the rice, onion, parsley flakes, bouillon, thyme,
garlic powder, black pepper, cayenne pepper, salt, and bay leaf. (This seasoned
rice may be used immediately or stored in an airtight container at room
temperature for up to 6 months.) 2. In a Dutch oven, combine the rice mixture, 2
½ cups water, the diced tomatoes, tomato sauce, and sausage. Bring to a boil
over medium-high heat. Reduce to a simmer and cook, stirring occasionally,
until the rice is tender, about 20 minutes.
3. Add the shrimp and cook until just opaque, 5 to 7 minutes; discard the bay
leaf. Dish it up while it’s hot.
DUTCH TREAT
I love to make my jambalaya in a Dutch oven. It’s just the right cooking vessel
for a dish like this because of its thick walls and ability to conduct and hold heat
evenly throughout, especially during long simmers. If, however, you don’t have
a Dutch oven, you can use a wide, deep saucepan. Just make sure the base has a
heavy bottom, to prevent sticking and burning and to make sure the rice is
cooked evenly and gently.
RED BEANS AND RICE WITH ANDOUILLE SAUSAGE
Oh, Lord, do I love my red beans and rice! That is something my son Jamie and
I can absolutely agree upon—we could have red beans and rice for just about
every meal and you’d never, ever hear us complain. I love to make mine with
spices and herbs that deepen the flavor without overpowering it. And of course
I’ve got to add a dash or two of hot sauce because I love some heat in most
dishes. This one always takes me back to my Southern kitchen, no matter what
part of the world I’m eating it in.
SERVES 8
3 tablespoons bacon fat, lard, or olive oil
1¾ cups chopped andouille sausage (about ½ pound)
1 yellow onion, chopped
1 green bell pepper, chopped
2 celery stalks with leaves, chopped
3 cloves garlic, finely chopped
2 teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon dried thyme
1 pound dried red beans
1 ½ teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon hot sauce
3 bay leaves
6 cups cooked rice
¼ cup sliced scallions
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. In a large pot or a Dutch oven, heat the fat, lard, or oil over medium-high
heat. Add the sausage and cook until golden, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the onion, bell
pepper, celery, and garlic. Cook, stirring, until softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in
the cumin and thyme and cook for 1 minute.
2. Add the beans, salt, hot sauce, bay leaves, and enough water to cover the
beans by 2 inches. Bring the mixture to a boil. Immediately reduce to a simmer,
cover, and cook for 1 ½ hours. Uncover and simmer until the beans are tender
and the sauce has thickened, 30 to 45 minutes, adding more water if necessary.
Remove and discard the bay leaves. Serve over the rice, topped with the
scallions. Garnish with the parsley.
SMOKIN’ SAUSAGE
Andouille sausage came to the American South from France, via Louisiana, of
course. It’s a smoked-pork sausage flavored with pepper, onion, and all sorts of
yummy seasonings. If you can’t find it near you, though, you can substitute a
nice smoked kielbasa.
PERLOW
Did y’all know that Charleston, South Carolina, was built on rice? That lovely
little grain was grown on Low-Country plantations and even used as currency
there during the eighteenth century. (Can y’all imagine getting paid in rice?)
Perlow, a variation on the word pilau or pilaf (as in rice pilaf), is the way they
cook rice in that region to this day. The dish almost always includes some ham
or bacon, and scallions, and usually tomato as well. But the key ingredient is
good old rice, baked up to a tender, fluffy, glorious dish. I make mine with bacon
and a smoked turkey wing for flavor, and then plenty of tender turkey pieces to
become a main course.
SERVES 4 AS A MAIN DISH
1 tablespoon butter
2 slices bacon, chopped
1 cup chopped yellow onion
1 clove garlic, chopped
½ pound turkey cutlets, cut into ¾-inch pieces
1 ½ cups long-grain white rice
1 cup chopped tomato
One ½-pound smoked turkey wing
1 teaspoon saltBlack pepper
⅓ cup chopped scallions, dark green tops only
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. In a Dutch oven, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the bacon and cook
until crisp, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the onion and cook until soft, about 5 minutes.
Add the garlic and cook for 1 minute.
3. Add the turkey pieces and cook until the turkey loses its raw color, about 2
minutes. Add the rice, tomato, smoked turkey wing, salt, black pepper to taste,
and 3 cups water. Bring to a boil, cover, and bake until the rice is tender and the
liquid has been absorbed, about 30 minutes.
To chop a peeled onion, halve the onion lengthwise and lay cut side down.
Hold one half steady while slicing the onion lengthwise in parallel strokes
up to but not through the root. Make horizontal cuts across these cuts to
create pieces of desired size. Repeat with the other half.
4. Remove the smoked turkey wing from the pot. When cool enough to
handle, pull the meat from the bones and finely chop. Stir the meat into the
perlow along with the scallion greens and dig in.
SMOKY FLAVOR
The smoked turkey wing here gives this perlow a really deep, rich flavor. And
the meat on the turkey wing is sure to be juicy because the smoking process
locks in all the moisture. If you can’t find smoked turkey wings in your market,
you can substitute a smoked ham hock or, if you’re feeling ambitious, you can
smoke your very own turkey!
SOUTHERN BROWN RICE WITH MUSHROOMS
This is the way we made our rice when I was growing up in Albany, Georgia, in
the southwest corner of the state. I guess Bubba and I would get this for dinner at
least twice a week, which, believe me, was just fine with us. It’s the kind of dish
that’ll fill you up right without emptying out your pocketbook.
SERVES 4
3 tablespoons butter
¾ cup chopped yellow onion
1 cup long-grain white rice
1 can (4 ounces) sliced mushrooms, drained
1¾ cups beef broth
¼ teaspoon salt
Chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
THE FLUFFIEST RICE
Long-grain rice is my favorite rice. Its grains are slender and lower in the type of
starch that shorter-grain rice types have. So for rice dishes like this, stick with
long-grain and they won’t end up all gluey and sticky. Instead, your rice will
cook fluffy, with separate grains.
1. In a medium saucepan, heat the butter over medium heat. Add the onion
and cook until soft and golden, 10 to 12 minutes.
2. Add the rice and mushrooms and cook, stirring to coat with the butter, for
about 2 minutes. Pour in the broth and add the salt. Bring to a boil over high
heat. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook until most of the liquid has been
absorbed and the rice is tender, 17 to 20 minutes. Remove from the heat and let
stand, covered, for 5 minutes. Fluff with a fork. Serve garnished with parsley.
DIRTY RICE
What did I tell you about how good Southern cooks can get every bit of flavor
out of any ingredient? Well, you don’t think we’d let the chicken livers go to
waste, do you? Truth be told, I love to eat chicken livers. They are so tender and
rich and economical, I just feel like a richer and smarter person with every bite.
This is a traditional Southern dish that blends great taste with great home
economics.
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 cup long-grain white rice
1 ¼ teaspoons salt
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
¾ pound ground beef
¾ pound chicken livers, finely chopped
½ teaspoon black pepper
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
½ cup chopped green bell pepper
4 scallions, chopped
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
¾ teaspoon hot sauce Chopped fresh parsley
1. In a medium saucepan, combine the rice, 1¾ cups water, and ¼ teaspoon of
the salt. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and
cook until most of the liquid has been absorbed and the rice is tender, 17 to 20
minutes. Remove from the heat and let stand, covered, for 5 minutes.
2. Meanwhile, in a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add the
beef and cook, breaking it up with a fork, until well browned, 5 to 7 minutes.
Add the chicken livers and cook, turning once, until no longer pink, 2 to 3
minutes. Season with ½ teaspoon of the salt and ¼ teaspoon of the black pepper.
With a slotted spoon, transfer the mixture to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
To remove the bitter-tasting connective tissue between the lobes of chicken
liver, place the liver on a cutting board and gently spread the lobes apart.
Hold one lobe steady while pressing the side of a small sharp knife against
the other lobe. The stringy tissue should release from the lobe being held
down. Gently scrape the tissue from the lobe to which it is still attached.
Rinse the lobes and pat dry.
3. Return the skillet to the heat. Add the butter and let it melt. Add the bell
pepper, scallions, and garlic. Cook until the vegetables have softened, 5 to 7
minutes. Stir in the cooked rice and the meat mixture. Cook until warmed
through. Season with the hot sauce, and the remaining ½ teaspoon salt and ¼
teaspoon black pepper. Stir in the parsley just before serving.
ANOTHER SOUTHERN CLASSIC
My other favorite thing to do with chicken livers is to fry them up! We
Southerners may have started out cooking up those chicken livers because they
were inexpensive, but as soon as we started frying them, we realized how much
possibility they had. Check out my Cajun Chicken-Fried Livers with Cream
Gravy (page 181).
RICE CROQUETTES
Do I need to argue with anyone about this one? Frying leftover rice into crisp
little breaded cakes full of Parmesan cheese is just a no-brainer. Make extra rice
so you won’t have to go without this delicious dish.
MAKES 16 CROQUETTES (8 SERVINGS)
2 cups cooked rice
Salt and black pepper
1 large egg, lightly beaten
1 cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 4 ounces)
1 teaspoon onion powder
½ cup dry bread crumbs
Vegetable oil, for frying
1. In a medium bowl, toss the rice with salt and black pepper to taste. Stir in
the egg, Parmesan, and onion powder and mix well.
2. Working with moistened hands, scoop 2 tablespoons of the rice mixture into
your palm and give it a squeeze, then shape it into a fat little patty. Coat with the
bread crumbs and repeat with the rest of the rice.
3. In a large skillet, heat ¼ inch of oil over medium-high heat until hot but not
smoking. Working in batches (don’t crowd the pan), cook the croquettes until
browned on both sides, about 1 ½ to 2 minutes total. Drain on a paper towel–
lined plate for a minute, then serve warm.
STICKY FINGERS
Keep a small dish of water nearby while you’re shaping the croquettes. You’ll
need to lightly dampen your hands now and again to make sure the rice doesn’t
stick to your hands as you handle it.

There’s no denying I love meat. Nothing will fill you up and satisfy you like a
good steak or a nice roast. I crave it. If we go a long time without eating steak,
I’ll call home to say, “Tonight is the night. I have just got to put me a steak on
the grill.” I can’t think of a meat that I don’t like. I like liver and onions. I love
gizzards. And I would not want to live in a world without fried pork chops.
Now, putting meat on your table does not have to be a big splurge. You just
got to make the most of your cheaper cuts. One of the tastiest is one of the
cheapest: bone-in chuck roast. We use it for The Lady & Sons Pot Roast (page
125) that we serve on Friday nights, and everyone just loves that dish. I have
found that when you take your time cooking them until they’re truly tender,
those more economical cuts of meat become especially moist and full of flavor.
Another one of my favorites is also a bargain: Chicken-Fried Steak with Cream
Gravy (page 127). You take a round steak so tough you couldn’t bite it with
wooden teeth, your butcher runs it through the cuber, and, oh, my goodness,
what a lot of flavor!
When you’re buying beef, you’ve got Select, Choice, and Prime. I generally
go middle of the road with Choice because I can count on that to be a good
tender cut. Unless I’m going to cook it a good long while, I stay away from
Select, and I don’t buy Prime often—it has to be a special occasion.
I insist on having steak medium-rare. It just kills me to hear somebody order a
steak well-done. They’re missing out on the richest flavor! On the other hand, I
was taught as a young bride to cook pork to death. You don’t need to cook it so
much for safety’s sake anymore—as long as it’s 140°F, you know it’s all right—
but in many of my recipes, like my Pulled Pork BBQ (page 140) or my Fried
Pork Chops with Tomato Gravy (page 142), that pork is good and cooked.
Then there’s ham. Hallelujah! Some of my earliest memories were of
watching my grandmother pulling great big hams out of the oven. I swear by
those Southern hams, which are raised and cured to precise, time-honored
standards, and give off a wonderful salty-sweet flavor. Try my Batter-Fried
Country Ham Bites (page 19) and tell me if that right there isn’t pork candy!
Now, you don’t have to be Southern to make meat taste good. Some of the
recipes I adore are just good ol’ American favorites like my Cheeseburger Meat
Loaf and Sauce (page 138), and others get their inspiration from different
cuisines. On chilly nights I make a Red Wine Beef Stew (page 128) that I just
had to share with y’all, and every St. Paddy’s Day we love to have our St.
Paddy’s Day Corned Beef and Cabbage (page 133). For entertaining, I love me a
real big cut of meat. Whether it’s Rack of Lamb with Rosemary (page 148), a
Baked Sugared Ham (page 146), or my Famous Foolproof Standing Rib Roast
(page 129), one of the great glories of cooking meat is how simply you can
produce a showstopper of a meal.
THE LADY & SONS POT ROAST
This has to be one of my favorite roasts in the whole entire world (and it happens
to be one of the most economical, too). We order chuck roasts to do our Friday
Pot Roast each week at The Lady & Sons and folks line up out the door for that
dinner. It truly is an occasion, so why not make it at home? It could hardly be
simpler, since this is a set-it-and-forget-it type of meal made in a slow cooker.
You just ask your butcher to tie the roast so it cooks evenly, then plan on cooking
it low and slow—you can’t rush a good thing—and by the time you’re ready for
dinner, well, that meat has just about melted and it is so full of flavor. This dish
packs more taste than your fancier cuts, and is divine with a plate of noodles or
in a sandwich the next day.
SERVES 6
One 3-pound boneless chuck roast
1 ½ teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
Salt and black pepper
¼ cup vegetable oil
1 yellow onion, thinly sliced
3 bay leaves
3 or 4 beef bouillon cubes, crushed
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
½ cup Chardonnay or other full-bodied white wine
1. Sprinkle the roast on all sides with House Seasoning. Season all over with
salt and black pepper. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat until
it shimmers. Add the roast and brown on all sides, about 5 minutes per side.
2. Place the roast in a slow cooker. Place the onion, bay leaves, crushed
bouillon cubes, garlic, and soup on top of roast. Pour in the wine. Add just
enough water to cover the roast. Cook on low for 8 hours; remove and discard
the bay leaves before serving. I tell you, it doesn’t get much easier than that,
folks.
MAKE IT SLOW
Now I know most of you know how truly wonderful the slow cooker is, but I
just have to sing its praises, y’all! It has got to be one of the most convenient
kitchen appliances there is. Just place your ingredients in the pot, turn it on, and
there’s not much more to be done. You can leave that slow cooker going even
when you’re out all day.
SMOTHERED STEAK AND ONIONS
How many times did I yell “Put a lid on it, y’all” as my boys ran wild through
the house shouting at the top of their lungs back when they were in school? Well,
now they’re perfect gentlemen, to my pride. And I chuckle about those days
whenever I make my smothered steak. Putting a lid on your pot—a way of
cooking we Southerners call “smothering”—makes for tender, juicy meat and
plenty of flavorful sauce. I smother my top round steak strips with a big old
tangle of onions, and those onions keep the meat moist at the same time that they
turn the cream gravy sweeter than syrup.
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 pounds thin boneless top round steaks, sliced into ¼ -inch-thick strips
Salt and black pepper
1 teaspoon dried oregano
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
4 large Vidalia or other sweet onions, sliced
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
2 ½ cups beef or chicken broth
½ cup heavy cream
6 cups cooked noodles or white rice, for serving
1 to 2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. Place the meat in a bowl. Season lightly with salt and black pepper. Add the
oregano and flour and toss to coat well.
2. In a very large skillet, melt 3 tablespoons of the butter over medium-high
heat. Working in batches, brown the meat until dark golden on all sides, 5 to 7
minutes per batch. Transfer the meat to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. Add the remaining 1 tablespoon butter to the skillet. Add the onions and
cook, stirring, until wilted and softened, about 10 minutes. Stir in 1 teaspoon
salt, ½ teaspoon black pepper, and the cayenne pepper.
4. Return the meat to the skillet and pour in the broth. Scrape up any browned
bits from the bottom of the pan. Bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and
cook until the meat and onions are very tender and the gravy is thick, about 1
hour.
5. Pour in the cream and simmer until hot, about 5 minutes. Serve over
buttered noodles or white rice. Garnish with the parsley to pretty it up.
FULL FLAVOR
Now, why do I keep telling you to scrape up those brown bits from the bottom of
your pans? Because that’s where the flavor is! When you get at those brown bits
and distribute them into your stews and gravies, you’re getting all the flavor
released when you browned the meat.
CHICKEN-FRIED STEAK WITH CREAM GRAVY
Chicken-frying is nothing fancy. You just tenderize a tougher cut of steak (or
have your butcher cube it, which means partly cutting through the meat in a
checkerboard pattern to tenderize it by breaking tough fibers), then you treat it
like chicken: a buttermilk dip, a coating of seasoned flour, and a nice hot fry. But
whoa, Mama, is that a tasty way to cook meat! What you end up with in your
skillet are the makings for one of the finest sauces in the whole wide world:
cream gravy. It’s nothing more than pan drippings, broth, and cream, but it
comes together like magic.
SERVES 4
4 boneless top round steaks (½ pound each,½ inch thick)
2 ½ teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435), plus extra as
needed
1 ½ cups plus
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
1 cup buttermilk
1 large egg
½ cup vegetable oil
1 cup beef broth
1 cup heavy cream
1. With the flat side of a meat pounder or a small, heavy skillet, pound the
steaks until ⅓ inch thick. Season all over with 1 teaspoon of the House
Seasoning.
2. In a shallow bowl, mix together the 1½ cups of the flour and the remaining
1½ teaspoons House Seasoning. In a separate shallow bowl, beat together the
buttermilk and egg.
3. Dredge the steaks in the seasoned flour, shaking off any excess, then dip
into the buttermilk mixture, letting any excess drip off, and then dip again into
the flour to coat.
4. In a large skillet (I like to use cast iron), heat the oil over medium-high heat
until it shimmers. You want it real hot. Cook the steaks until browned, about 3
minutes per side. Transfer to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
5. Drain all but 3 tablespoons of the oil from the skillet. Add the 3 tablespoons
flour and stir until browned, about 2 minutes. Add the broth and cream and bring
to a boil. Stir until thickened, about 2 minutes. Taste and add some House
Seasoning to the gravy, if desired. Serve up the steaks smothered in the cream
gravy. It doesn’t get much more Southern than this, folks.
THE SKILLFUL SKILLET
The cast-iron pan is a kitchen tool I could not do without, y’all. It conducts heat
evenly across your food, and if the pan is seasoned just right, you’ll never have
to worry about the meat sticking. Plus, they don’t cost much and chances are
you’ve got one your mama passed on down to you.
RED WINE BEEF STEW
When you live in a warm place like I do, you really savor those nippy nights
when you can get cozy, and nothing is cozier than simmering a beef stew. I made
so many beef stews for the boys when they were growing—it was a surefire way
to make sure they didn’t end up back in the kitchen an hour later claiming to be
hungry again. These days, I make this classic red wine and herb-flavored stew
when I want to serve something special for a crowd, whether it’s friends or
family. Serve the stew with Buttery Buttermilk Mashed Potatoes (page 248).
SERVES 8 TO 10
3 pounds beef stew meat, cut into 2-inch chunks 2
¼ teaspoons salt 2
¼ teaspoons black pepper
⅓ cup all-purpose flour
3 tablespoons butter Olive oil
½ pound cremini mushrooms, quartered
2 large carrots, cut into ¼ -inch rounds
1 large yellow onion, finely chopped
1 large clove garlic, finely chopped
2 tablespoons tomato paste
1 bottle (750ml) cabernet sauvignon or other full-bodied red wine
2 sprigs fresh thyme
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
1. Season the meat all over with 2 teaspoons each of the salt and black pepper.
Dip the meat in the flour, then shake off any excess.
2. In a large Dutch oven, melt 2 tablespoons of the butter in 2 tablespoons oil
over medium-high heat until very hot. Working in batches, brown the beef until
golden all over, about 10 minutes. Transfer the meat to a paper towel–lined
platter to drain. Add more oil, a tablespoon at a time, as needed, if the pan starts
to dry up.
3. Add the remaining 1 tablespoon butter and 1 tablespoon oil to the pan. Stir
in the mushrooms, carrots, onion, and garlic. Cook until the vegetables have
softened, about 7 minutes. Stir in the remaining ¼ teaspoon each salt and black
pepper. Stir in the tomato paste and cook for 1 minute. Transfer the vegetables to
the platter with the meat.
OVEN BRAISE
If you’d like, you can also make this stew in the oven. Just preheat the oven to
300°F, and after you’ve returned the meat and vegetables to the Dutch oven and
brought it back up to the boil, go on ahead and cover the pan, pop it into the
oven, and bake for 2 to 3 hours. But do take care, if you’re not using a Dutch
oven, that your pan is ovenproof.
4. Pour the wine into the pan. Simmer, scraping up any browned bits from the
bottom of the pan, until the wine has reduced by half, 15 to 20 minutes.
5. Return the meat and vegetables to the pan. Tie the thyme and rosemary
together with kitchen string (so you can fish them back out easily before serving
the stew) and drop the bundle into the pan. Bring the mixture to a boil.
Immediately reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook until the meat is very tender, 2
to 2 ½ hours.
PAULA’S FAMOUS FOOLPROOF STANDING RIB ROAST
If there is a simpler way to wow a big party than with a beautiful rib roast, I
would like to hear about it. This recipe is nothing more than good meat done
right. Perfectly medium-rare, nice and pink at the center, the roast slices up so
pretty. And since all you’ve got to do is season it and leave it in the oven, you’re
freed up to make a few nice sides—maybe spoon bread or mashed potatoes, plus
asparagus or green beans.
SERVES 6 TO 8
One 5-pound bone-in standing rib roast
1 tablespoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1. Allow the roast to stand at room temperature for at least 1 hour. Meanwhile,
preheat the oven to 375°F. Place a roasting rack in a large roasting pan.
2. Rub the roast all over with the House Seasoning. Place on the prepared
roasting rack with the rib side down and the fatty side up. Roast for 1 hour. Turn
the oven off. Leave the roast in the oven but do not open the oven door for at
least another 3 hours (it can sit in the oven for up to 6 hours after roasting).
About 30 to 45 minutes before serving time, preheat the oven to 375°F. Reheat
the roast until a meat thermometer inserted in the center of the meat reads 120°F.
The result? The most perfectly cooked rib roast you have ever tasted!
STAND AND DELIVER
It’s important to let your roast stand at room temperature for a bit before you
cook it so that it cooks nice and evenly. So be sure you don’t skip that step! And
I mean it about keeping that oven door closed. You don’t want to release any of
the radiant heat that cooks the roast so perfectly.
STUFFED CABBAGE
I have such fond memories of my grandmama’s stuffed cabbage that I decided to
start making it myself. And wouldn’t you know, it is surprisingly easy:
something about the shape of cabbage leaves just makes them roll right up
around your filling. I stuff mine with rice and meat mixed with sweet raisins and
tender cooked onion. After it all simmers together in a nice tomato-based sauce,
you wind up with such a wonderful old-timey flavor.
SERVES 4 OR 5
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 cup chopped yellow onion
1 medium head (about 2 pounds) green cabbage
1 pound ground beef
½ cup cooked rice
¼ cup raisins
¾ teaspoon salt
1 can (16 ounces) tomato sauce
½ cup beef broth
½ teaspoon paprikaAbout
½ cup sour cream, for serving
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add the onion and
cook until softened, about 5 minutes. Set aside to cool.
3. Meanwhile, bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. Using a small, sharp
knife, cut in a circle all around the stem of the cabbage and remove the core.
Place the cabbage in the boiling water. After about 2 minutes an outside leaf will
come loose—pull it off and out of the water using tongs. After another minute
the next leaf will come loose. Remove and repeat until you have 8 to 10 nice
leaves. Pat the leaves dry with paper towels. Cut out the thick part of the rib
from the bottom of each leaf, but don’t cut more than a third of the way into the
leaf. (Unused cabbage can be made into my Easy Coleslaw (page 48) and
Coleslaw with Raisins, Dill, and Honey-Roasted Peanuts (page 49).
4. In a bowl, mix together the beef, cooled onion, rice, raisins, and salt. With
the stem side of the cabbage leaf facing you, place a scant ⅓ cup of the beef
mixture in the center of each cabbage leaf. Fold the bottom edge over the
mixture and then fold the sides over and roll into a tidy packet. Place the
cabbage rolls, seam side down, in the prepared baking dish.
KEEP IT COVERED
Make sure that the cabbage rolls are fully covered by the sauce. This will keep
them from drying out and will ensure that they cook nice and evenly.
5. In a bowl, mix together the tomato sauce, broth, and paprika and pour over
the cabbage. Cover the baking dish with foil and bake for 1 hour. Serve the
cabbage rolls with a big dollop of sour cream.
Place a small amount of filling in the center of a cabbage leaf and fold the
leaf over from each side, then roll up to form a packet. Place in the pan
seam side down.
FRIED BEEF TENDERLOIN WITH GRITS AND GRAVY
Grits are such a comfort to a Southerner; you can’t go too long without a bowl. I
whip up this recipe for hearty, full-on flavorful gravy and good, satisfying beef
to serve over my grits whenever we want real food fast. Don’t forget to put out a
bottle of hot sauce on the table for folks who like a little more warmth. This is
stick-to-your-ribs comfort food.
SERVES 4 TO 6
1 ½ pounds beef tenderloin tips, cut into 1-inch chunks Salt and black
pepper
1 ½ tablespoons Wondra flour, plus extra for dusting the meat
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 large yellow onion, finely chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 ½ cups whole milk Hot sauce
6 cups cooked grits
Cut the beef into 1-inch-thick slices, then place the slices between two
sheets of plastic wrap. Strike them firmly with a rolling pin until the desired
thickness is reached.
INSTANT SUCCESS
Well, I just think that Wondra is a wonderful product! It’s the best way to keep
your gravy from getting all lumpy on you. Basically, it’s flour that’s been treated
to dissolve in liquid quickly and fully without any lumps!
1. With the flat side of a meat pounder or a small, heavy skillet, pound each
chunk of meat between two sheets of plastic wrap until ¼ inch thick. Season the
meat generously all over with salt and black pepper. Dust the pieces with the
flour, shaking off any excess.
2. In a very large skillet, melt 3 tablespoons of the butter over medium-high
heat until foamy. Place half the beef in the skillet and cook, without stirring, until
golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Transfer the beef to a plate. Add another
3 tablespoons of the butter to the skillet and cook the remaining beef. Keep the
beef warm by tenting some foil over it. Don’t cover it tightly or it will keep on
cooking and stewing under that foil.
3. Add the onion to the skillet. Cook, stirring, until softened, about 5 minutes.
Add the garlic and cook for 1 minute. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons butter
and stir until melted. Stir in the 1 ½ tablespoons flour and cook for 1 minute.
Slowly whisk in the milk. Simmer over medium heat until the gravy has
thickened, about 2 minutes. Season the gravy to taste with salt and hot sauce.
Serve the beef tips over the grits with plenty of gravy poured over, and hot sauce
to pass at the table.
ST. PADDY’S DAY CORNED BEEF AND CABBAGE
Quite a few Irish Catholics live here in Savannah, and the town puts on one of
the largest St. Patrick’s Day celebrations in the country, second only to New
York City. The whole town takes pride in its Irish heritage that day, and at The
Lady & Sons we serve this corned beef and cabbage to all of our guests. It’s a
savory, hearty meal that comes together fast and tastes like you spent all day on
it. Serve this with Turnip Mashed Potatoes (page 249) and Corn Sticks (page
274).
SERVES 8
One 3-pound corned beef brisket
1 large head (about 2 ½ pounds) green cabbage
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
1 to 2 teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1. Place the corned beef in a large stockpot and cover it with cold water to
nearly fill the pot. Bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook until the
beef is firm but tender to the fork, 2 ½ to 3 hours. Remove the beef from the pot.
(Save the broth, if desired; see step 3.)
2. When the corned beef is almost done, core the cabbage. Then pull off any
dark green outer leaves from the head of cabbage, chop, and set aside. Chop the
rest of the cabbage and keep separate from the dark green leaves. Place the
lighter-colored cabbage in a colander and rinse with cool water. In a separate
large pot, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Immediately add the rinsed
cabbage to the pot, leaving as much water as possible on the leaves. Cook,
stirring, until the cabbage is well coated with butter. Sprinkle with the House
Seasoning. Cover the pot and simmer until the cabbage is tender but still
somewhat crisp, 7 to 10 minutes.
3. Slice the corned beef thinly across the grain. Place the cabbage in a serving
dish and place the sliced corned beef on top. Drizzle a spoonful or two of broth
from the stockpot over the corned beef and cabbage, if you like.
THE SKILL OF THE IRISH
You want to make sure you choose your corned beef brisket well so you get the
best end result. There are basically three different brisket cuts you’ll find: point,
flat, and round. I recommend flat cut because it has enough fat to give good
flavor to your corned beef but not so much that your braise comes out greasy and
with precious little meat to go around.
SOUTHERN CHILI IN A BISCUIT BOWL
What could be more festive than these adorable little biscuit bowls full of chili? I
love to set them out in a basket on the buffet next to a big old Crock-Pot of chili.
This is my classic chili, and it’s got your ground beef, your good chili spices, and
your beans, peppers, and tomatoes. But what really does it up special is the
fixin’s: it’s amazing what some scallions, sour cream, and shredded cheese can
do for a nice bowl of chili—just like a nice new purse will pull together your
outfit, or a pretty vase of flowers will dress up your decor. Throw in a green
salad, and something sweet after, and you’re good to go.
SERVES 6
Biscuit Bowls
2 cups Bisquick baking mix
⅔ cup whole milk
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
All-purpose flour, for dusting the work surface
Chili
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 pound ground chuck
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
1 green bell pepper, chopped
2 cans (14 ounces each) Mexican-style stewed tomatoes
1 can (15 ounces) kidney beans, rinsed and drained
2 tablespoons chili powder
1 teaspoon salt
Fixin’s
Shredded sharp Cheddar cheese
Sour cream
Sliced scallions, white and light green parts only
Tortilla chips
Hot sauce
DO AHEAD
Make this meal as easy as can be by making up your biscuit bowls ahead of
time. They will keep in an airtight container at room temperature for up to a
week. The chili can be made a day or two before, as well.
1. Make the biscuit bowls: Preheat the oven to 450°F. Invert a standard-size
muffin tin and coat the underside with cooking spray. In a bowl, stir together the
baking mix, milk, and cayenne pepper to make a stiff dough. Shape into a ball.
Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour and knead the dough 3 or 4
times. Divide the dough into 6 pieces and flatten each piece into a 6-inch round.
Place 1 dough round over the back of each muffin cup and press around the cup
to form a bowl shape. Bake until lightly browned, 10 to 12 minutes. Let cool
slightly on the pan, then remove the biscuit bowls and set aside while you make
the chili to fill them with.
2. Make the chili: In a Dutch oven, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the
beef and cook, breaking it up with a spoon, until most of the pink is gone, about
3 minutes. Add the onion and bell pepper and cook until the beef is completely
browned and the vegetables are tender. Drain off any fat. Stir in the tomatoes,
beans, chili powder, and salt. Bring the mixture to a boil. Reduce to a simmer,
cover, and cook for 35 minutes.
3. To serve, spoon the hot chili into the biscuit bowls. Top with shredded
Cheddar, sour cream, sliced scallions, and tortilla chips. And be sure to pass
around extra toppings and hot sauce at the table.
TEXAS-STYLE CHILI
Y’all, I love all kinds of chili. But traveling in Texas, especially around San
Antonio, I got good and schooled in the matter. Texans take their chili seriously
and don’t go in for extra ingredients: just peppers, spices, and pieces of meat.
Ground chuck will not cut it, and beans are not invited to the party. I came home
with some new chili recipes and a ten-gallon hat. Well, y’all, I’m not from Texas,
but I do love to tinker, so this is the Paula Deen salute to Texas chili.
SERVES 6 TO 8
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
3 pounds beef stew meat, cut into 1 ½-inch chunks
Salt and black pepper
1 large yellow onion, chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 fresh jalapeño pepper, finely chopped (leave the seeds in if you want
more heat)
3 tablespoons chili powder
2 teaspoons dried oregano
1 ½ teaspoons ground cumin
1 can (28 ounces) diced tomatoes
About ½ cup sour cream, for serving
1. In a large Dutch oven, heat the oil over medium-high heat until it shimmers.
You want that oil good and hot. Lightly sprinkle the meat with salt and black
pepper. Working in batches, cook the meat until well browned on all sides, 7 to
10 minutes per batch. Transfer the meat to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
2. Add the onion, garlic, and jalapeño to the pan. Cook, stirring until softened,
about 5 minutes. Stir in the chili powder, oregano, and cumin and cook for 1
minute. Stir in the tomatoes, 4 cups water, and 1 teaspoon salt and bring to a boil
over high heat. Reduce immediately to a simmer and cook, uncovered, until the
meat shreds easily with a fork, 2 ½ to 3 hours. While it simmers, add extra water,
as needed, to keep the meat covered with liquid.
3. Ladle into bowls and serve topped with a hearty dollop of sour cream.
CHOOSING CUTS
When shopping for stew meat, look for economical cuts like chuck or rump.
Because they tend to be tougher, with lots of connective tissue that needs to be
broken down, they take well to long, slow cooking. And that’s exactly what you
need for your stews and chilis. All that slow breaking down adds loads of flavor
to the broth. You can go buy precut stew meat, but I prefer to cut my own from a
whole piece of chuck.
CRUNCHY WIENER SCHNITZEL
I like to think of Wiener schnitzel as Austria’s answer to chicken-fried steak. The
recipe is simple—the secret is to use real thin cutlets and fry them nice and hot.
You’ll wind up with the crispiest breaded coating that way. Veal is so tender and
delicate, all these need to embellish them is a squeeze of lemon. I love to serve
my Wiener schnitzel over potato salad with a green salad on the side for a fast
meal that feels special.
SERVES 4
¾ cup all-purpose flour
1 ½ teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
2 large eggs
1 cup dry bread crumbs
1 ½ pounds veal cutlets, ⅛ to ¼ inch thick
Vegetable oil, for frying
1 lemon, cut into wedges
1. In a shallow bowl, mix together the flour and ¾ teaspoon of the House
Seasoning. In a separate shallow bowl, lightly beat the eggs. Put the bread
crumbs in a third shallow bowl and season with the remaining ¾ teaspoon House
Seasoning.
FLOUR POWER
You may wonder, why do I need to dip my meat in flour right before dipping it
in egg? If you want your bread coating to stick to the meat, you have to do the
flour first, then the egg, and then the bread. The flour acts as a sticky base to
keep the egg and bread on the meat.
2. Dredge the veal in the seasoned flour, shaking off any excess, then dip into
the egg, letting any excess drip off, and then coat well with the bread crumbs.
3. In a large skillet, heat ¼ inch of oil over medium-high heat. To make things
a little easier on yourself, use two skillets at the same time if you have them.
Working in batches, cook the veal until browned on both sides, 1½ to 2 minutes
per side. Transfer to a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Serve as soon as
possible, with the lemon wedges.
BASIC MEAT LOAF
My dear sweet Aunt Peggy has done so much to help bring me and the boys
along, supporting us financially when The Lady & Sons was just a dream I never
thought I’d live to see, and showing us what family and love truly mean. She’s
also taught me just about as much about good cooking as anyone. This meat loaf
is absolutely one of her classics. She wrote down the recipe for me when I first
started my bag lunch business, The Bag Lady, way back when. Every time I
make it now, it brings me back to all the wonderful meals we’ve enjoyed around
our family table.
SERVES 4
Meat Loaf
1 pound ground beef
½ cup chopped yellow onion
½ cup chopped green bell pepper
1 large egg, lightly beaten
1 cup canned diced tomatoes, with juice
½ cup quick-cooking oats
1 ¼ teaspoons salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
Topping
⅓ cup ketchup
2 tablespoons light brown sugar
1 tablespoon yellow mustard
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. In a large bowl, combine the beef, onion, bell
pepper, egg, tomatoes, oats, salt, and black pepper. Mix well with your hands.
Place the mixture in a baking dish big enough to hold the meat loaf. Shape the
meat mixture into a loaf about 8 by 3 inches.
2. In a small bowl, combine the ketchup, brown sugar, and mustard. Spread
over the loaf. Bake for 1 hour, until well browned. Serve hot.
LEFTOVERS THAT DON’T LET YOU DOWN
I tell you, a meat loaf sandwich could give the hamburger a run for its money.
My favorite way to enjoy leftover meat loaf is to place it between halves of a
bun and top it with spicy ketchup or barbecue sauce, cheese slices, and lots of
chopped iceberg lettuce.
CHEESEBURGER MEAT LOAF AND SAUCE
Cheeseburger Meat Loaf is one of those Paula Deen specialties that has taken on
a life of its own. Adding cheese to your meat loaf is a no-brainer, and I just keep
making it because it is so darn delicious that if I took it off the menu at the
restaurant, there’d be a revolt. Oh, and get in there with your hands when you’re
mixing up a meat loaf. It’s easier that way, so don’t be shy.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Meat Loaf 2 pounds ground beef
2 teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1 teaspoon Lawry’s Seasoned Salt
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
1 bell pepper, chopped
1 cup shredded Cheddar cheese (4 ounces)
1 cup crushed Ritz crackers
1 cup sour cream
¼ cup Worcestershire sauce
8 slices white bread
Sauce
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of mushroom soup
1 soup-can measure of milk
1 ½ cups shredded Cheddar cheese (6 ounces)
1. Make the meat loaf: Preheat the oven to 325°F. In a large bowl, combine
the beef, House Seasoning, Lawry’s salt, onion, bell pepper, Cheddar, cracker
crumbs, sour cream, and Worcestershire sauce. Use your hands and make sure
you mix the ingredients really well so they are thoroughly combined. Shape into
a loaf about 8 by 3 inches.
2. Line a rimmed baking sheet with the bread slices and place the loaf on top.
Bake the loaf until well browned, 45 minutes to 1 hour. Remove from the oven
and discard the bread slices.
3. Meanwhile, make the sauce: In a medium saucepan, heat the soup and milk
over medium heat. Add the Cheddar and stir until the cheese is melted.
4. Slice the meat loaf and serve topped with the sauce or pass the sauce at the
table.
SOAK UP THE GREASE
If there’s one thing I don’t like, it’s when my meat loaf comes out of the oven
swimming in grease. The white bread slices in this recipe are an ingenious way
of soaking up that grease as the meat loaf cooks.
THE LADY & SONS SMOKED BOSTON BUTT ROAST
I love cooking a big hunk of pork like this—it feeds so many people and comes
out so moist and flavorful. All you need to do is season it a bit and then give it
time in the oven so the fat inside starts to render out. Serve it sliced for a sitdown dinner, or chop some to pile on rolls with barbecue sauce for a picnic
lunch. Heck, this recipe feeds so many, you could do both!
SERVES 12 TO 15
One 8-pound bone-in pork butt roast (also sold as shoulder)
4 tablespoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
2 tablespoons Paula Deen Collection Seasoned Salt or other seasoned
salt
¼ cup liquid smoke
1 medium yellow onion, sliced
3 bay leaves
1. Sprinkle one side of the roast with 2 tablespoons of the House Seasoning,
rubbing it in well. Flip the roast over and sprinkle with the remaining 2
tablespoons House Seasoning, rubbing it in well. Repeat this process with the
seasoned salt and the liquid smoke and let the meat rest, covered, in the
refrigerator for at least 2 hours or overnight.
2. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Place the roast in a large roasting pan. Add the
onion, bay leaves, and 1 cup water. Cover with foil and bake until an instant-read
meat thermometer inserted in the center of the roast registers 170°F, 2 ½ to 3
hours. Let the roast rest for 15 to 20 minutes before slicing.
SIT AND SOAK
To get the full flavor of this roasted pork butt, make sure you give it ample time
to sit in the seasonings: a minimum of 2 hours, though overnight is always best.
This pork butt is such a large hunk o’ meat, it needs the time to soak up all that
flavorful goodness.
PULLED PORK BBQ
Good old white bread buns piled with pulled pork and barbecue sauce, some
mayo or coleslaw, all topped off with dill pickles: my idea of heaven in a
sandwich. Michael does this recipe in the smoker we have in our backyard, and
if you’ve got one, try it. The extra smoke flavor is wonderful. But, y’all, I do
mine in the oven so I can enjoy this heavenly sandwich year-round. You got to
cook your pork till it just about melts. And invite friends to join in pulling the
pork! Hand everyone a couple forks and show them how to shred the meat up
instead of cutting it, so you get nice strands that hold on to the tangy sauce.
SERVES 8
Pulled Pork
2 tablespoons dark brown sugar
2 tablespoons paprika
1 ½ tablespoons salt
1 ½ tablespoons black pepper
1 tablespoon ground cumin
1 ½ teaspoons cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1 teaspoon mustard powder
One 4-pound boneless pork butt or shoulder roast
2 cups apple juice
1 cup apple cider vinegar
1 ½ tablespoons Worcestershire sauce
BBQ Sauce
1 ½ cups ketchup ⅓ cup molasses
¼ cup fresh lemon juice
1 ½ tablespoons Worcestershire sauce
1 ½ teaspoons mustard powder
1 teaspoon onion powder
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
8 hamburger buns (optional)
1. To make the pulled pork: In a small bowl, combine the brown sugar,
paprika, salt, black pepper, cumin, cayenne pepper, garlic powder, and mustard
powder. Place the meat in a large bowl and rub the mixture all over. Cover with
plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 2 hours or overnight.
2. When you are ready to cook the pork, preheat the oven to 325°F. Pour the
apple juice, vinegar, and Worcestershire sauce into a large Dutch oven. Place the
pork in the pot and tightly cover it with foil, then the lid. Bake until the meat is
fork tender and shreds easily, about 4 hours, basting the roast with the cooking
juices about every hour.
3. Meanwhile, make the barbecue sauce: In a small saucepan, combine the
ketchup, molasses, lemon juice, Worcestershire sauce, mustard powder, onion
powder, and cayenne pepper. Bring to a simmer over medium-low heat and cook
for 15 minutes, then remove from the heat.
4. Remove the meat from the oven and let stand until cool enough to handle.
Shred the pork into strands with a fork or tongs. Toss with the barbecue sauce
and serve, sandwiched in buns if you’d like.
HANDS ON
While a fork or tongs will do just fine, I prefer to pull my pork by hand. That
way, I can fish out any remaining fat or gristle that I sure don’t want to serve up
to my guests. But no matter which way you choose to do it, make sure you pull
the pork. Slicing or dicing with a knife will only make it dry out.
Use your fingers to pull apart and shred the pork.
HAM STEAKS WITH REDEYE GRAVY
I love stories about cowboys pouring black coffee into a skillet to make redeye
gravy, but I take my coffee with cream and sugar, so this is redeye gravy Paula
style, smoothed out with a little cream and just a kiss of brown sugar. It is such a
fine, tasty sauce, I just have to serve my ham over grits for soaking up every bit.
SERVES 2 TO 3
1 tablespoon butter
One 1-pound ham steak (½ inch thick)
1 cup brewed coffee
¼ cup heavy cream
1 teaspoon light brown sugar
1. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the ham steak
and cook until browned on both sides, about 2 minutes per side. Transfer to a
warm platter.
2. Add the coffee, cream, and brown sugar to the skillet and bring to a boil,
scraping up any browned bits from the bottom of the pan. Serve the ham topped
with the gravy. I tell you, this is a real pick-me-up!
THE HAM BISCUIT
You know another way I love to serve this dish? Take a biscuit, cut it in half, and
soak each side with plenty of that redeye gravy. Then put slices of that ham steak
between those biscuit sides and, well, you have yourself a meal.
FRIED PORK CHOPS WITH TOMATO GRAVY
Is there one dinner that you can just make with your eyes closed? Well, for me it
would have to be fried pork chops along with red beans and rice. I sit down to
that meal and I know all is right.
SERVES 4
4 bone-in center-cut pork chops (1 inch thick, ½ pound each)
Salt and black pepper
¼ teaspoon garlic powder
3 tablespoons olive oil
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 tablespoons finely chopped onion
¼ cup all-purpose flour
1 ½ cups whole milk
½ cup chicken broth or water
1 can (14 ½ ounces) diced tomatoes, drained
1. Lightly sprinkle the chops on both sides with salt and black pepper, then
sprinkle with the garlic powder. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high
heat. Add the chops and cook, without moving, until a dark golden crust forms
on the bottom of each, 5 to 6 minutes. Flip the chops and cook for 5 minutes
more. Transfer to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
2. Add the butter to the skillet and melt. Add the onion and cook, stirring,
until softened, about 5 minutes. Go ahead and reduce the heat if the onion starts
to brown too quickly. Sprinkle the flour over the onion and cook, stirring, for 1
minute. Slowly whisk in the milk, then the broth or water. Simmer the mixture
until thickened, about 5 minutes. Whisk in the tomatoes, ½ teaspoon salt, and ¼
teaspoon black pepper. Spoon the sauce over the pork chops and serve up to a
hungry family.
SEAL IN THE FLAVOR
Searing meat is a really important step in producing the juiciest meat possible.
When the meat first hits the pan, make sure you leave it be as it develops a nice
crust in that oil or butter. This will lock in all the flavor and moistness and leave
you with just the nicest texture—a little crunch on the outside and tenderness on
the inside. Doesn’t that just make your mouth water thinking about it?
BBQ PORK RIBS
Y’all, there are few things simpler to make than oven-barbecued ribs, and they
come out so succulent you won’t believe it. You can use other cuts of pork ribs
here, but I love to sink my teeth into big, meaty country-style ribs. Just count on
seasoning them the night before (or at least a few hours ahead) so the meat is
seasoned all the way through before you pop them in the oven. I love to serve
my ribs with warm Angel Biscuits (page 275) and a little bowl of extra barbecue
sauce.
SERVES 6
5 pounds bone-in country-style pork ribs
Salt and black pepper
1 teaspoon garlic powder
Daddy’s Tangy Grilling Sauce (page 212), for basting
1. Remove the white membrane from the bony side of the rack of ribs. Season
the ribs generously all over with salt and black pepper. Sprinkle all over with the
garlic powder. Cover the ribs and refrigerate for at least 4 hours or overnight.
2. When you are ready to cook the ribs, preheat the oven to 300°F. Pour half
the sauce into the bottom of a roasting pan. Add the ribs to the pan, turning them
to coat evenly with the sauce. Cover the pan tightly with foil and bake for 1 ½
hours. Uncover the ribs and pour the remaining sauce over them. Replace the
foil and continue baking until the meat is nearly falling off the bone, 1 to 1 ½
hours longer. Let rest for 5 minutes before slicing into individual ribs. Serve up
to a hungry crowd and be sure to pass around plenty of extra napkins!
DO IT ON THE GRILL
If you feel like gettin’ outside, you can do this barbecued pork on the grill. Same
idea as the oven. Cook it in the pan over indirect heat with the grill cover on. To
create indirect heat, start the charcoal as usual and then push the coals to either
side of the grill, creating an area in the middle that does not have coals burning
directly underneath. If using a gas grill, leave the center burner unlit, but light
burners to each side of this burner on medium. Place the pan with the ribs over
the center and grill until done.
ROASTED PORK RIBS WITH SAUERKRAUT AND APPLES
The flavors of apple and cabbage are so delicious with pork ribs, and this recipe
falls into one of my favorite categories: set-it-and-forget-it. After a few hours,
your whole house will smell like heaven and you’ll have a comforting meal that
will satisfy even the heartiest meat-and-potato types. In fact, I love to serve
potatoes—mashed, baked, or in a salad—alongside these ribs. Call it
Oktoberfest, Paula style.
SERVES 4
5 pounds bone-in, country-style pork ribs
Salt and black pepper
2½ teaspoons paprika
3 tablespoons olive oil
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 Granny Smith apples (¾ pound), unpeeled and cut into ¼ -inch-thick
slices
1 yellow onion, thinly sliced
½ cup white wine
One bag (32 ounces) sauerkraut, drained
1 bay leaf
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F.
2. Remove the white membrane from the bony side of the rack of ribs. Season
the ribs generously all over with salt and black pepper. Sprinkle the paprika over
the ribs. Coat the ribs evenly with the oil.
3. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the apples and
onion and cook, stirring, until both are golden, about 10 minutes. Season with ½
teaspoon salt and ½ teaspoon black pepper. Pour in the wine and simmer for 2
minutes, scraping up any browned bits from the bottom of the pan.
4. Transfer the apple-onion mixture to a large roasting pan. Add the sauerkraut
and bay leaf; toss the mixture well to combine. Nestle the ribs on top of the
sauerkraut. Cover the pan with foil. Bake until the ribs are very tender and
falling off the bone, 2 ½ to 3 hours. Remove and discard the bay leaf. Serve
immediately, alongside the sauerkraut.
STICK TOYOUR RIBS
Country-style pork ribs are cut from the shoulder blade end of the pork rib. They
are packed with meat and have plenty of fat that will break down during this
long cook to give the sauerkraut loads of flavor.
CROWN ROAST OF PORK
Now, I don’t think of myself as a drama queen, but I sure do love to put on a
show, and few dishes that I make get quite as many “Ooh’s” and “Ahh’s” as this
one. A crown roast is made up of two rib sections tied (your butcher will take
care of this; just ask) into a standing ring just like a crown. Stuffed in the middle
with a true Southern corn bread dressing, it is a meal fit for royalty, and I look
for occasions to serve it.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Pork
3 tablespoons olive oil
4 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 tablespoon dried thyme
1 ½ teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon black pepper
One 5-pound crown roast of pork, rib ends frenched (see box, page 148)
Stuffing
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 large green bell pepper, chopped
¾ cup sliced scallions
1 celery stalk, chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 fresh jalapeño pepper, finely chopped (include some seeds if you want
more heat)
6 cups crumbled corn bread
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
½ cup chopped fresh cilantro
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
2 cups chicken broth, plus more if needed
1. To prepare the pork: In a bowl, combine the oil, garlic, thyme, salt, and
black pepper. Rub the mixture all over the roast, making sure to cover the areas
between the chops. Transfer to a roasting pan. Cover well with plastic wrap and
refrigerate for at least 4 hours or overnight.
2. When you are ready to cook the roast, preheat the oven to 450°F. Turn the
roast upside down (rib bones down) in the roasting pan. Roast for 15 minutes.
Reduce the oven temperature to 350°F and roast until an instant-read meat
thermometer registers 155°F when inserted 2 inches into the center of the meat,
about 1 ½ hours longer.
3. Meanwhile, prepare the stuffing. In a large skillet, melt the butter over
medium-high heat. Add the bell pepper, scallions, celery, garlic, and jalapeño.
Cook until the vegetables are softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl.
4. Add the crumbled corn bread to the sautéed vegetables. Add the eggs,
cilantro, cayenne pepper, salt, and black pepper; stir to combine. Stir in the 2
cups broth. Stir in more broth, if needed, so the stuffing is moistened. Grease a
shallow 2-quart baking dish with butter, oil, or cooking spray. Press the stuffing
into the baking dish. Thirty minutes before removing the roast, place the stuffing
in the oven and bake until golden, about 45 minutes.
5. When the roast is done, remove it from the oven, tent with foil, and let
stand for at least 15 minutes. Cut the string. When the stuffing is done, mound
half of it on a serving platter. Flip the roast upright on top of the stuffing. Fill the
center of the roast with the remaining stuffing. Slice at the table to a chorus of
“Ooh’s” and “Ahh’s.”
GIVE IT A REST
Resting meat is one of the most important steps in serving it perfectly cooked.
By resting the meat, you ensure that all the meat juices stay locked in and don’t
come spilling out all over your cutting board when you slice into it. I like to tent
foil over my roast when it’s resting so that it stays nice and warm. Never cover it
tightly, or it will stew under there and lose the nice crust it’s formed.
BAKED SUGARED HAM
Baked ham may be the food that gives Southerners their taste for salty-sweet
foods. I adore the combination and consider a beautiful baked ham to be the
perfect centerpiece for Christmas, a New Year’s buffet, an open house, or any
other festive occasion.
SERVES 10
One 10-pound whole cured ham
¾ cup packed light brown sugar
3 tablespoons brown or Dijon mustard
1 ½ tablespoons apple cider vinegar
1 teaspoon black pepper
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Place a roasting rack in a large roasting pan.
Score the fat of the ham in a diamond pattern (see box opposite). Place the ham
on the roasting rack. Bake for 2 hours.
2. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, whisk together the brown sugar, mustard,
vinegar, and black pepper.
3. Remove the ham from the oven and spread the glaze all over the ham.
Return the ham to the oven and bake until the glaze is thick and slightly
caramelized, 30 to 40 minutes longer.
4. Transfer the ham to a cutting board and let it rest for 15 minutes before
slicing and serving.
KNOW THE SCORE
Scoring ham makes it look pretty, lets the fat render so that it crisps up, and
helps the glaze seep into the ham better, giving you maximum flavor. To score
your ham, remove the thick rind but leave about a ¼ -inch-thick layer of fat on
top of the meat. Use a very sharp knife to lightly slice into the fat and create a
diamond pattern over the whole surface.
To carve a whole ham, create a flat surface by cutting a few slices from one
of the long sides of the ham, then place that side flat on the cutting board.
Starting at the shank end, make even cuts perpendicular to the bone using a
long, sharp knife, working your way around the bone in a spiral fashion.
Cut parallel to the bone to free the slices.
RACK OF LAMB WITH ROSEMARY
Down in parts of Georgia, some folks never did quite take to serving ham on
Easter. If sheep grazed in the area, you could just as easily see lamb on the
menu. These days, most butchers can sell you a beautiful rack of lamb. I love
rosemary’s herby fresh flavor, which goes so beautifully with the taste of lamb.
SERVES 4
Two 14-to 16-rib racks of lamb (1 ½ pounds each), rib ends frenched
(see box)
1 ½ teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons olive oil
¼ cup chopped fresh rosemary
4 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1. Preheat the broiler. Line a baking sheet with foil.
2. Sprinkle the lamb all over with the salt and black pepper. Rub it with the
oil, then the rosemary and garlic. Transfer the lamb, fatty side up, to the baking
sheet. Broil, turning over once halfway through the cooking time, until it reaches
the doneness you like, 7 to 8 minutes total for medium-rare (125°F on a meat
thermometer). Let the meat rest for 5 minutes before carving into individual
chops and serving.
FRENCH CUT
Ask your butcher to french your racks of lamb. He will cut into the meat at the
end of the bone and scrape it off so that the bone is exposed. Your lamb will look
so much prettier at the table. It’s all in the presentation, folks!
GRILLADES AND GRITS
You know you’re cooking Louisiana style when you’ve got celery and peppers in
your pan and a thick dark roux made with flour and fat. All together, this is one
heck of a flavorful mess of sliced pork and deep, rich sauce. It was just made to
serve over steaming-hot grits, with a bottle of hot sauce on the side. If you want
to, serve Cheese Straws (page 22) as a garnish.
SERVES 8
Grillades
One 3-pound boneless pork butt or pork shoulder, cut into ½-inch
pieces
Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
⅓ cup plus ¼ cup all-purpose flour
4 tablespoons bacon fat
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 large bell pepper, chopped
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
1 cup chopped celery
3 large cloves garlic, finely chopped
4 cups beef broth or water
3 bay leaves
1 teaspoon dried thyme
2 tablespoons hot sauce
1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce
1 teaspoon dried basil
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon black pepper
1 can (10 ounces) extra-spicy tomatoes (such as Ro*Tel)
4 large fresh tomatoes, peeled and quartered
½ cup chopped fresh parsley
Grits 1
¼ cups whole milk
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup quick-cooking grits (not instant)
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1. To prepare the grillades: Sprinkle the meat with the House Seasoning. Dust
with the ⅓ cup of the flour and toss together lightly.
2. Heat the bacon fat and 4 tablespoons of the butter over medium-high heat in
a Dutch oven until very hot. Working in batches, add the meat and brown all
over, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl using a slotted spoon.
3. Add the bell pepper, onion, celery, and garlic to the Dutch oven and cook,
stirring, until softened and just beginning to brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer the
vegetables to the bowl with the meat using a slotted spoon, leaving a total of 3
tablespoons of fat in your Dutch oven.
4. Add the ¼ cup flour to the Dutch oven and cook over medium heat, stirring
constantly and slowly, until the flour is a nice deep brown, about 5 minutes; take
care not to burn the flour. Slowly add the broth or water and stir. Bring to a
simmer. Return the meat and vegetables to the pan. Add the bay leaves, thyme,
hot sauce, Worcestershire sauce, basil, salt, and black pepper and stir. Add the
canned tomatoes and simmer, stirring occasionally, until the pork is tender, about
1 ½ hours.
5. Meanwhile, make the grits: In a small saucepan, combine the milk, salt, and
2 cups water. Bring to a boil and add the grits in a slow stream, stirring
constantly until well mixed. Let the mixture return to a boil, cover, reduce to a
simmer, and cook for about 30 minutes, stirring from time to time. Add more
water, if it needs it. Grits are done when they have the consistency of smooth
cream of wheat. Stir in the butter.
6. Just before serving, discard the bay leaves from the grillades. Stir in the
fresh tomatoes and parsley.
7. Ladle the grits into bowls and top each serving with 1 ½ teaspoons of the
butter and the grillades.
YOU SAY TOMATO
If you can’t get your hands on the extra-spicy Ro*Tel tomatoes, have no fear.
Just substitute the same amount of other spicy diced tomatoes, or use regular
diced tomatoes and add some minced jalapeños or hot sauce for some heat.
MICHAEL’S FAVORITE OXTAIL STEW
I believe I’ve already shared with y’all the secret to my steamy marriage and it is
this soup. Chocolate-covered strawberries and Champagne may be sweet, but
this simple, slow-cooked oxtail soup will melt any man. It is a proven
aphrodisiac, in my experience—not to mention a darn good bowl of tender,
beefy soup to serve with rice. And what you do with yourselves while it’s
cooking in the slow cooker is up to you.
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 ½ pounds beef oxtails, cut into 1 ½-inch-thick slices
1 tablespoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
4 teaspoons soy sauce
2 large Spanish onions, thinly sliced
2 bay leaves
4 cups cooked rice, for serving
Sprinkle the oxtails with the House Seasoning and toss with the soy sauce.
Place the oxtails in a slow cooker and add the onions and bay leaves. Cover and
cook on high for 5 to 6 hours, until tender. Discard the bay leaves. Serve over a
fluffy bed of rice.
MORE ABOUT OXTAILS
This beef cut has a large bone and is very gelatinous, making it just the right cut
for long, slow stews.

There have been chickens scratching around front yards and backyards for most
of Southern history. You’ll spot fewer yard birds these days, but Southern tables
still regularly feature a beautiful platter of fried or baked chicken. Sunday
suppers, revival dinners, church suppers, covered-dish dinners… there is no end
of occasions that call for chicken in the South, and I do believe that Southern
cooks have created some of the best chicken recipes in the world. Make a batch
of my Best Ever Southern Fried Chicken (page 159) if you’re looking to decide
the matter.
Folks used to argue over who was going to have the preacher over after
Sunday service. And you knew that wherever you ate, whatever else was served,
at the center of that table was fried chicken. It was common for the woman of
the house to run out, catch the chicken, bring it back, and prepare the meal right
then. Thank goodness we don’t have to do that today, but you do want a good
fresh bird. Nowadays they grow some big, fat hens, but the sweetest chicken in
the world is a 2 ½-pound bird. They’re called fryers for a reason. Smaller birds
get nicely and evenly browned, and they have such good flavor.
Big old stewing hens that weigh 4 pounds and up have a purpose, too. I like a
nice big chicken for my Chicken and Dumplin’s (page 164). That is one of the
most important chicken dishes to me, because it was my daddy’s favorite. I was
nineteen when he died, and I remember calling my grandmama and saying, “I
want to come get you and go to the grocery store and have you teach me how to
make those chicken and dumplings.” Tasting it brings his memory back.
I also like those great big chickens for any slower-cooking recipe, such as The
Lady & Sons Chicken Potpie (page 168) or Chicken Bog (page 169), which is a
soupy South Carolina rice dish and one of earth’s greatest comfort foods. You
know, with so many wonderful ways to enjoy chicken, I have never once grown
tired of it. I don’t expect I will. But I do mix things up from time to time by
cooking up a turkey instead. Michael and I adore turkey too much to wait until
Thanksgiving, so I’ll do Pot-Roasted Turkey Breast with Vegetables (page 175).
And then for Thanksgiving I’ll make my Classic Roast Turkey and Dressing
(page 177).
Beyond raising chickens and turkeys, folks down South always hunted birds
in the fall. I remember as a child that it was not unusual at all for President
Eisenhower to fly into Darden County, Georgia, for quail and dove. We love our
game birds. And for holidays and other special meals, I occasionally cook
Molasses Game Hens (page 179) for something out of the ordinary. And you
know, the number one dish at my sweet niece Corrie’s wedding was Quails in
Gravy (page 180).
Whether you cook up a dainty little quail or just a big mess of Skillet Chicken
and Sausage Jambalaya (page 171), I never met a person who’s tired of poultry.
BAKED CHICKEN AND PINEAPPLE CASSEROLE
If you’re like me, the combination of sweet and salty, along with a dash of spice,
is just so good you can hardly stand it. That’s what I was aiming for when I
whipped up this casserole, along with a nice crunch from a cheesy Ritz cracker
topping, and oh, boy, let me tell you, it is all that. I find that children love to hold
on to a drumstick, so I make these with a mix of thighs for the knife-and-fork set
and legs for the ankle biters.
SERVES 4
1 ½ tablespoons vegetable oil
2 to 2 ½ pounds whole chicken legs (drumsticks and thighs)
Salt and black pepper
2 cans (8 ounces each) crushed pineapple, drained
1 ½ teaspoons hot sauce
1 cup crushed Ritz or saltine crackers
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
1 cup shredded Cheddar cheese (4 ounces)
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish (attractive
enough to come to the table) or coat with cooking spray.
2. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Lightly season the
chicken all over with salt and black pepper. In batches if necessary, place the
chicken in the hot oil and cook, turning once, until golden brown, about 8
minutes. Transfer the chicken to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. In a small bowl, toss together the pineapple and hot sauce. Spread evenly
on the bottom of the prepared baking dish. Place the chicken on top of the
pineapple. In a small bowl, combine the crackers, butter, and Cheddar. Scatter
the mixture over the top of the chicken and pineapple.
4. Bake until the topping is melted and golden and the chicken is just cooked
through, about 45 minutes. Bring straight to the table in the baking dish.
SOME FRESH IDEAS
Try adding a little freshly squeezed lemon juice to this casserole, about a
tablespoon or so, to give it a sweet-and-sour flavor. And give it some extra
crunch and color by scattering sliced scallions over the top just before setting it
on the table.
GLAZED BACON-WRAPPED CHICKEN
I had been serving bacon-wrapped chicken bites as an appetizer for years, and
one day, well, I just wanted more. So I said to myself, “Paula, why not make
these the main course?” Then I jumped into my kitchen and adjusted my recipe
to turn it into these beauties. That slightly spicy orange-soy glaze, along with
your salty bacon and a kiss of garlic, hits just about every flavor note you could
need, and the bacon keeps the chicken nice and moist. I figured this one would
be a winner right off the bat, but I recall the boys were over at the house when I
made it, so I let them try it. When I turned around and the plate was empty, I had
my proof.
SERVES 4
⅓ cup soy sauce
¼ cup orange juice
1 tablespoon hot sauce
1 ½ tablespoons finely chopped garlic
8 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about 2 pounds), halved
8 slices bacon, halved crosswise
1 cup packed light brown sugar
1. In a medium bowl, combine the soy sauce, orange juice, hot sauce, and
garlic. Add the chicken to the bowl and toss to coat well with the marinade.
Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 2 hours.
2. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil and grease
a wire cooling rack or coat with cooking spray. Place the rack on the baking
sheet.
3. Remove the chicken from the marinade, letting any excess drip off. Wrap a
bacon slice around each piece of thigh. Secure the bacon with a toothpick.
4. Crumble the brown sugar into a bowl. Dip each bacon-wrapped thigh into
the sugar, taking care to coat evenly. Place the chicken on the prepared rack.
Bake, turning once, until the bacon is crisp, the chicken is cooked through, and
the house smells of sweetness, about 30 minutes.
TRY ANOTHER WRAP1
If you’re serving this to someone who doesn’t eat pork, you can substitute turkey
bacon.
BEST EVER SOUTHERN FRIED CHICKEN
In my book, a well-fried chicken is among life’s greatest accomplishments, and I
can truthfully claim that I wouldn’t be where I am without the fried chicken
recipe I’m sharing with y’all here. You could say I am practically made of
Southern fried chicken—certainly I grew up eating and cooking it. I use some
hot sauce to season the crust, and I love to fry in shortening, which gives the
crust a particularly crunchy texture. But I don’t see the need for any other tricks
and frills with a skillet of fried chicken: some things in life cannot be improved
upon.
SERVES 4
3 large eggs
2 cups self-rising flour
Black pepper and salt
1 whole chicken (1 to 2½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8
pieces
Solid vegetable shortening, for deep-frying
1. In a shallow bowl, lightly beat the eggs with ⅓ cup water. In a separate
shallow bowl, combine the flour and 1 teaspoon black pepper. Lightly season the
chicken all over with salt and black pepper. Dip the chicken pieces in the egg
mixture, letting any excess drip off, and then coat well in the flour mixture.
2. In a large skillet, heat the shortening over medium-high heat until it melts
and reaches 350°F on a deep fry thermometer; you’ll want a depth of 2 inches.
Add the chicken and cook until browned and crisp, 13 to 14 minutes for the dark
meat and 8 to 10 minutes for the white meat. And just like that, you’ve got
yourself the best ever Southern fried chicken.
TAKING THE TEMPERATURE
Be extra careful when using a deep fry thermometer. And make sure it doesn’t
have any moisture on it that can make the oil spatter. Insert it into the melted
shortening, angling it away from the bottom of the pan so you get an accurate
read on the temperature of the oil—not the bottom of the pan!
EASY OVEN “FRIED” CHICKEN
Take it from Auntie Paula, no matter how much you adore fried chicken, you
just can’t eat it every day. This oven “fried” version is another matter, though.
It’s not only perfectly healthy and simple enough for a weeknight (you can start
it marinating in the morning), it is also darn crispy outside and moist inside. No
need to deny yourself here! And if you want to make this even healthier, just
peel off the skin right before eating.
SERVES 4
1 whole chicken (3 to 3 ½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8
pieces
Salt and black pepper
¾ cup buttermilk
1 ½ tablespoons Dijon mustard
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 ½ teaspoons hot sauce
1 cup self-rising flour
Cooking spray, for coating the chicken
1. Lightly season the chicken all over with salt. Season the chicken generously
with black pepper (at least ½ teaspoon). In a large bowl, combine the buttermilk,
mustard, garlic, and hot sauce. Add the chicken to the marinade, turning to coat
evenly with the mixture. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 30
minutes or up to 8 hours.
2. When you are ready to cook the chicken, preheat the oven to 425°F. Place a
wire rack on top of a large rimmed baking sheet.
3. In a large resealable plastic bag, combine the flour and ½ teaspoon black
pepper. Remove the chicken from the marinade, letting the excess drip off, and
transfer to the bag. Close it up tightly and give it a good shake until the chicken
is coated all over with the flour mixture.
4. Transfer the chicken to the wire rack. Coat the chicken generously all over
with cooking spray. Bake, turning every 15 minutes or so, until the chicken is
crispy, browned, and cooked through, 40 to 50 minutes.
BUTTER ME UP
For fixing my oven “fried” chicken, a buttermilk marinade is the way to go. It’s
the buttermilk that prevents the chicken from going dry on you when you cook it
and gives it a tangy flavor.
PECAN-CRUSTED CHICKEN BREASTS
With their crunchy, nutty coating, these breasts are my version of chicken fingers
and nuggets. My grandbaby Jack will tell you he’s a big boy now, but he has
adored this recipe since the day he was old enough to eat it. Then again, grownups love it, too, thanks to the sweet pecan and panko bread crumb crust. I keep
this recipe fairly lean by baking the chicken, so go ahead and add this to your
weekly rotation if your family loves it as much as mine does.
SERVES 4
4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts (½ pound each)
1½ teaspoons salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
4 teaspoons mayonnaise
¾ cup pecans, crushed
¾ cup panko bread crumbs
1. Place an oven rack in the upper third of the oven and preheat to 350°F.
Lightly grease a baking dish or coat with cooking spray.
2. Sprinkle the chicken with 1 teaspoon of the salt and the black pepper. Coat
each breast with 1 teaspoon mayonnaise. In a shallow dish, toss the pecans and
bread crumbs together. Dredge the chicken in the bread crumb mixture, pressing
firmly to make sure it sticks well to the chicken. Season with the remaining ½
teaspoon salt and place in the prepared baking dish. Bake until the crust is nicely
browned and the chicken is cooked through, 30 to 40 minutes.
GO NUTS
This recipe works well with all kinds of nuts. Change it up by using cashews,
almonds, or even macadamias if you’re feeling really rich.
Place the pecans between two paper towels and crush by rolling a rolling
pin back and forth over the paper towels.
SUNDAY BAKED CHICKEN
Sunday supper is a chicken meal in most Southern homes. This recipe for a
simple, bronze-skinned bird offers the added bonus of veggies—carrots and
potatoes—cooked right alongside it. The pan juices make those sweet carrots
and tender potatoes out of this world. All you need to fix while the chicken is
roasting is something green, maybe a salad or a plate of simmered green beans.
And sop up those pan juices with my Skillet Corn Bread (see page 273) for the
ultimate Sunday supper!
SERVES 4
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, at room temperature
1 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon dried thyme
½ teaspoon paprika
1 whole chicken (3 ½ pounds), rinsed and patted dry
2 teaspoons salt
1 pound Yukon Gold potatoes, halved
½ pound carrots, halved crosswise
4 cloves garlic, unpeeled
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F.
2. In a bowl, mash together the butter, ½ teaspoon of the black pepper, the
thyme, and the paprika. Sprinkle the chicken inside and out with the salt and the
remaining ½ teaspoon black pepper. Rub the chicken all over with the butter
mixture, spreading it as evenly as possible so the chicken will brown evenly.
PREPPING YOUR BIRD
To get a nice crisp on the chicken skin, make sure you pat that bird good and dry
before you season and cook it. Then, tuck the wings under the bird and tie the
legs together with kitchen string. This little trick turns the bird into a tight little
package so that it cooks evenly all over.
Pierce the chicken in the thickest part of the thigh. If the juices run clear (no
pink or red), then the chicken is done.
3. Scatter the potatoes, carrots, and garlic in the bottom of a large roasting
pan. Top the vegetables with a roasting rack. Place the chicken on the rack,
breast side up. Roast, stirring the vegetables occasionally, until the chicken is
golden, the thigh juices run clear when pierced with a knife, or the temperature
registers 180°F in the thigh, about 1 ½ hours.
4. Transfer the chicken to a cutting board to rest for 5 minutes before carving.
Serve with the vegetables and pan juices.
OLD-FASHIONED CREAMED CHICKEN
When someone says “creamed,” my ears perk right up. Oh, how I adore oldtimey dishes like this one. I jump up to make this whenever we’ve got leftover
chicken breasts. The lovely white sauce keeps the meat tender and moist. Serve
this classic over egg noodles, toast, or waffles (or see the box for other
suggestions).
SERVES 4
1 tablespoon butter
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour
½ cup chicken broth
½ cup half-and-half
1 tablespoon dry sherry
2 cups chopped cooked chicken breast
½ teaspoon dried thyme
Salt and black pepper
1 to 2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley or scallions, for garnish
1. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Whisk in the
flour and cook, stirring constantly, until bubbling, about 1 minute. Whisk in the
broth, half-and-half, and sherry. Bring to a boil, whisking frequently. Reduce to a
simmer and cook, stirring, until nice and thick, 3 to 5 minutes.
2. Stir in the chicken, the thyme, and salt and black pepper to taste, and warm
through. Serve garnished with parsley or scallions.
A SOUTHERN COMFORT
You can serve this comfort food on just about anything. Try it in baked frozen
pastry shells or over homemade biscuits, corn bread, or rice.
PAULA’S CHICKEN AND DUMPLIN’S
I never saw a dumplin’ I didn’t like. And I especially love chicken and dumplin’s
because it was my daddy’s favorite dish. When he passed and I asked my
grandmama for the recipe, she taught me how to do rolled dumplin’s like these.
To make them correctly, you mix your dough with ice water, then roll it out real
thin on the kitchen table. It takes some elbow grease: What you want is a dough
that puts up a little bit of a fight, so you end up with a real thin, tough dumplin’
you have to cut with a fork. That gives you a nice chew, and it’s the secret to this
recipe.
SERVES 4 TO 6
Chicken 1 whole chicken (2 ½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into
8 pieces
3 celery stalks, chopped
1 large yellow onion, chopped
2 bay leaves
2 chicken bouillon cubes
1 teaspoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of celery or cream of chicken soup
Dumplings
2 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup ice water
1. To prepare the chicken: In a large pot, combine the chicken, celery, onion,
bay leaves, bouillon cubes, House Seasoning, and 16 cups water. Bring to a
simmer over medium heat and cook until the chicken is tender and the thigh
juices run clear when pierced with a knife, about 40 minutes. Remove the
chicken from the pot and discard the bay leaves. When the chicken is cool
enough to handle, pick the meat off the bones, discarding the bones and skin.
Return the chicken meat to the pot. Add the canned soup to the pot and simmer
gently over medium-low heat.
2. To make the dumplings: In a medium bowl, mix the flour with the salt and
mound together. Beginning at the center of the mound, drizzle about 2
tablespoons of ice water over the flour. Using your fingers, and moving from the
center to the sides of the bowl, gradually drizzle the flour with about ¾ cup ice
water and incorporate. Knead the dough and form it into a ball.
3. Dust a small handful of flour onto a work surface. Roll out the dough (it
will be firm), working from the center, until it is ⅛ inch thick. Let the dough
relax for several minutes.
4. Once the dough is nice and relaxed, cut it into 1-inch squares. Pull each
piece in half and drop the halves into the simmering soup. Do not stir the pot
once the dumplings have been added or they may break apart. Instead, gently
move the pot in a circular motion so the dumplings become submerged and cook
evenly. Cook until the dumplings float and are no longer doughy, 3 to 4 minutes.
5. To serve, ladle the chicken, gravy, and dumplings into warm bowls.
THICK AND THIN
If the chicken stew is too thin, it can be thickened up before the dumplings are
added. Simply mix together 2 tablespoons cornstarch and ¼ cup water, then
whisk this mixture into the stew and cook until it reaches the desired
consistency.
CHICKEN WITH DROP DUMPLIN’S
Oftentimes I prefer the simplicity of a dropped dumpling to one you roll out on
your kitchen table. This version of chicken and dumplin’s comes together pretty
easily, but it tastes like it took all afternoon. I pour a good old glug of fresh
cream into the sauce at the last minute to give it a sweet, rich flavor. Sometimes I
like to leave the chicken pieces whole on the bone like my grandmama and
mama used to, but Michael likes it this way, pulled into bite-size pieces. I wake
things up with the tiniest bit of cayenne pepper in the dumplin’s. The end result
is pure old-fashioned comfort food.
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 whole chicken (3 to 4 pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8
pieces
cups chicken broth
2 celery stalks, finely chopped
1 bay leaf
2 cups plus
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour
4 teaspoons baking powder
1 ¼ teaspoons salt
¾ cup whole milk
¼ cup finely chopped scallions
Pinch of cayenne pepper
1 tablespoon butter
½ cup heavy cream
2 to 3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. In a stockpot, combine the chicken, broth, celery, and bay leaf. Bring to a
boil over medium-high heat. Reduce to a simmer and cook until the meat is
falling off the bone, 45 minutes to 1 hour. Remove the chicken from the pot and
reserve the broth; discard the bay leaf. When the chicken is cool enough to
handle, pick the meat off the bones, discarding the bones and skin.
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the 2 cups flour, the baking powder, and
1 teaspoon of the salt. Stir in the milk and mix well. Add the scallions and
cayenne pepper, and mix again. Bring the broth that you cooked the chicken in
back to a slow boil and drop the batter by tablespoonfuls into the broth until all
the batter is used up. Gently shake the pot. (Don’t ever stir the dumplings with a
spoon! This will only make them break apart and become a big mess.) Reduce to
a simmer, cover, and cook gently until the dumplings are just cooked through,
about 15 minutes.
3. While the dumplings are cooking, in a small saucepan, melt the butter over
medium heat until frothy and bubbling. Whisk in the 1 tablespoon flour and cook
for 1 minute. Slowly whisk in the cream and the remaining ¼ teaspoon salt. Let
the mixture bubble until it thickens up slightly, about 2 minutes.
4. When the dumplings are done, carefully pour the cream mixture into the
dumpling pot. Shake the pot gently. Return the chicken to the pot and shake the
pot one more time, this time in a rotating motion until the cream and chicken are
incorporated into the dumpling mixture. Serve up nice and hot, garnished with
the parsley.
Scoop up spoonfuls of the dumpling dough, then put them into the pot by
pushing the dough off the spoon with a second spoon.
DUMPLIN’ DOS AND DON’TS
Dumplings are delicate creatures, so take care cooking them. Never stir them or
let your simmer get going too fast, or they may break apart. If you’re not sure
your dumplings are done, try sticking a toothpick in them. If the toothpick comes
out clean, it’s time to serve.
EASY CHICKEN AND DUMPLIN’S
Some good Southern dishes are a labor of love. Then there are ones like this
little number that come easier. Any good cook will tell you there is no shame in
putting a beautiful pot of chicken and dumplin’s on the table in 45 minutes.
Canned soup and Bisquick make this not only possible, but so flavorful. I have
always believed that good cooking is all about taking some smart shortcuts from
time to time, and I know many busy Southerners who eat well every night thanks
to family favorites like this one.
SERVES 4 TO 6
Chicken and Gravy
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of chicken soup
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of celery soup
1 ½ cups whole milk
2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts, cut into 1-inch chunks
1 cup frozen peas and carrots
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
Salt and black pepper
Dumplings
1 cup Bisquick baking mix
⅓ cup whole milk
Pinch of paprika
1 to 2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. To make the chicken and gravy: In a medium saucepan, combine the soups
and milk. Bring to a simmer over medium-high heat and whisk to a smooth
consistency. Stir in the chicken, reduce the heat to medium, and simmer until just
cooked through, about 15 minutes. Stir in the peas and carrots and cook for 2
minutes to heat through. Season with the nutmeg and salt and pepper to taste.
2. To make the dumplings: In a medium bowl, stir together the baking mix,
milk, and paprika. Drop the dough by tablespoonfuls into the simmering chicken
mixture; do not stir the dumplings into the mixture or you’ll wind up with a big
mess. Cook the dumplings, uncovered, over medium-low heat for 10 minutes.
Cover and cook until the dumplings are firm to the touch and cooked through,
about 10 minutes longer. Make sure to stay at a gentle simmer, or the dumplings
may start to break up. Serve hot, sprinkled with the parsley.
CHICKEN CHOICES
This dish can also be prepared with boneless thigh meat if you prefer. Just cook
the meat a few minutes longer to ensure it’s done. Or, for an even easier option,
toss in some shredded cooked rotisserie chicken after the dumplings have
cooked through. Then all you need to do is warm the chicken through.
THE LADY & SONS CHICKEN POTPIE
For this beautiful potpie, I fill the crust with tender chicken in a creamy sauce
with carrots and peas, and top it with a pastry lattice. That sauce bubbling up
through the lattice is so pretty, and the finished pie is just absolutely full of
chicken flavor and so satisfying, you could put it on the table with nothing else
and you’d be serving up one of the tastiest, most complete meals I know. I think
of this recipe whenever I’m asked to bring along a main-course dish for a
potluck supper.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Filling
1 cooked chicken (store-bought rotisserie chicken is fine)
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed Cheddar cheese soup
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of celery soup
½ cup whole milk
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
1 package (10 ounces) frozen green peas or 1 can (8 ounces) peas,
drained
3 carrots, sliced, cooked, and drained
Salt and black pepper
Pastry
3 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
1 teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon baking powder
¾ cup solid vegetable shortening About
¼ cup ice water Butter
1. To make the filling: Pull the skin off the chicken and separate the meat from
the bones. Coarsely chop the chicken meat. Discard the bones and skin.
2. In a large saucepan, heat the soups and milk. Stir in the chicken, onion,
peas, carrots, and salt and black pepper and bring to a boil. Remove from the
heat and set aside to cool slightly.
A CUTUP
“Cutting in” is the term for combining shortening (or butter) with dry
ingredients. If you don’t have a pastry blender, a pair of (not too warm) hands or
two knives do the job just as well (see illustration, page 277).
3. To make the pastry: Preheat the oven to 350°F. In a large bowl, sift together
the flour, salt, and baking powder. Cut in the shortening with a pastry blender,
your hands, or two knives until the pieces of shortening are the size of small
peas. Sprinkle 1 to 2 tablespoons of ice water over half of the mixture. Gently
toss with a fork, then push to the side of the bowl. Repeat with another 1 to 2
tablespoons ice water until all of the mixture is moistened. Form the dough into
2 balls.
4. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Flatten a ball of dough by
pressing with the palm of your hand three times across in both directions. With a
floured rolling pin, roll the dough out, rolling from the center to the edges, to a
rectangle ⅛ inch thick and big enough to line a 13 by 9-inch baking pan. Fit the
dough into the pan.
5. Pour the chicken filling into the pastry-lined pan. Roll out the second ball of
dough to a 13 by 9-inch rectangle and cut into ½-inch strips. Lay over the pie
filling in a lattice style (see illustration, page 314). Dot the top with butter. Bake
until golden brown on top and all bubbling on the inside, about 45 minutes.
CHICKEN BOG
It’s hard to beat a good pot of chicken and rice. In South Carolina, folks add
smoked sausage and call it chicken bog. This is simple, hearty, full-flavored food
that you can fix for a crowd. You’ll see Carolina cooks simmering up a bog big
enough to feed an army—or a large family reunion. I don’t think anyone knows
why it’s called chicken bog, but you don’t dwell on the details when you’ve got
a soupy plate of chicken, sausage, and rice steaming in front of you.
SERVES 10 TO 12
1 whole chicken (3 pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and quartered
1 pound smoked link sausage, like andouille or kielbasa, cut into ½-
inch-thick slices
1 cup chopped yellow onion
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
2 teaspoons Paula Deen Collection Seasoned Salt or other seasoned salt
1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon black pepper
3 bay leaves
3 cups long-grain white rice
1. In a stockpot, combine the chicken quarters, sausage, onion, butter,
seasoned salt, cayenne pepper, black pepper, bay leaves, and 8 cups water. Bring
to a boil. Reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook for 40 minutes. Remove the
chicken from the pot, reserving the cooking broth. When the chicken is cool
enough to handle, pick the meat off the bones, discarding the bones and skin.
2. Meanwhile, add the rice to the pot of broth and bring to a boil, stirring well.
Boil for 10 minutes, then reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook until the rice is
done, about 10 minutes longer. Discard the bay leaves. Return the chicken to the
pot, give it all a good stir, and serve.
BETTER WITH BACON
That could be my motto! For nice texture and added flavor, here’s a dish that’s
even better topped with crispy crumbled bacon.
CHICKEN AND RICE CASSEROLE
One of my favorite ways to eat chicken is with rice, and here in Georgia every
cook seems to have her own opinion about how to combine them. For my
casserole, I add water chestnuts for crunch, which I just love, and green beans
and pimientos for color. The recipe couldn’t be simpler. You just stir your
chicken and vegetables all together with a box of mixed wild and white rice, a
can of cream of celery soup, and plenty of Cheddar cheese, then bake until the
whole thing is bubbling and smells like you just went to casserole heaven.
SERVES 6 TO 8
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
1 box (6 ounces) Uncle Ben’s long-grain and wild rice or another quickcooking long-grain and wild rice mix
3 cups chopped cooked chicken
1 can (8 ounces) water chestnuts, drained and chopped
2 cans (14 ½ ounces each) French-style green beans, drained
1 jar (4 ounces) pimientos, rinsed and drained
1 can (10¾ ounces) condensed cream of celery soup
1 cup mayonnaise 1 cup shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (4 ounces)
1. In a medium saucepan, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the onion and
cook until softened and translucent, 7 to 10 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl to
cool.
2. Cook the wild rice blend according to the package directions. Let cool and
stir into the onion.
3. Preheat the oven to 300°F. Add the chicken and all the remaining
ingredients to the rice mixture and stir to combine. Scrape into a 3-quart baking
dish. Bake for 25 minutes and you have yourself a great midweek meal.
DO AHEAD
This is a dish I like to do ahead on the weekend so I have it ready for the busy
workweek. It will keep in the fridge for up to 3 days.
SKILLET CHICKEN AND SAUSAGE JAMBALAYA
Y’all, jambalaya comes from the Creole-Cajun tradition of Louisiana cooking
and it is a party in a pot. You can make yourself a big old pot of rice and other
goodies, and as long as it’s got sausage, bell pepper, and a hint of celery (I use
celery seeds), I call it jambalaya. I keep mine simple and straightforward, with
plenty of chicken to make it a square meal.
SERVES 4 TO 6
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 tablespoon butter
¾ pound andouille or other smoked sausage, cut into ¼ -inch-thick
slices
1 large yellow onion, chopped
1 large green bell pepper, chopped
1 pound boneless, skinless chicken thighs, cut into 1 ½-inch pieces
Salt and black pepper
1 clove garlic, chopped
1 teaspoon dried thyme
1 teaspoon paprika
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
½ teaspoon celery seeds
2 bay leaves
3 cups chicken broth
1 can (14 ½ ounces) diced tomatoes
1 ½ cups long-grain white rice
1. In a large skillet with a lid, heat the vegetable oil and butter over mediumhigh heat. Add the sausage and cook until browned on both sides, about 5
minutes. Transfer the sausage to a bowl. Add the onion and bell pepper to the
skillet and cook until just beginning to soften, 2 to 3 minutes.
2. Lightly sprinkle the chicken all over with salt and black pepper. Add the
chicken and garlic to the skillet. Cook, stirring, until the chicken loses its raw
color, about 3 minutes. Add the thyme, paprika, cayenne pepper, celery seeds,
and bay leaves and cook for 30 seconds, or until fragrant. Add the broth and
tomatoes, bring to a boil, and taste for seasoning. Return the sausage to the pan
with any accumulated juices and sprinkle in the rice (make sure you sprinkle the
rice evenly all over the skillet).
3. Cover the pan, reduce the heat to low, and cook until all the liquid has been
absorbed and the rice is tender, about 15 minutes. Remove from the heat and let
stand, covered, for 10 minutes. Remove and discard the bay leaves. Serve it up
right from the skillet.
EVEN STEVEN
By sprinkling the rice all over your skillet when you add it, you ensure that all
the grains cook evenly. You want to make sure you don’t crowd the pan in any
one area.
SMOTHERED CHICKEN
We started turning fried chicken into smothered chicken at the restaurant and I
brought the habit home with me. To make a traditional Southern smothered dish,
you take your meat—I use chicken pieces, but you can do the same thing with
pork chops—and you bread it, fry it in a skillet, then make a thick milk gravy
and cook your meat down in that gravy, covered, until it’s completely tender and
the sauce is just too delicious and the whole house smells so good you can’t
stand it. To keep yourself busy while the chicken is cooking, make a big pot of
rice and a salad, then sit down at the table and watch everyone in sniffing
distance turn up.
SERVES 4
1 cup all-purpose flour
½ teaspoon garlic powder
Salt and black pepper
1 whole chicken (3 ½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8 pieces
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 small yellow onion, chopped
1 small green bell pepper, chopped
1 ½ cups whole milk
1. In a wide, shallow bowl, whisk together the flour, garlic powder, and ½
teaspoon each salt and black pepper. Lightly sprinkle the chicken all over with
salt and black pepper. Dip each piece of chicken in the flour mixture, shaking off
any excess flour. (Set any leftover flour aside to use in step 3.) 2. In a large
skillet with a lid, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the chicken and
cook, turning occasionally, until golden brown all over, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer
the chicken to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. Add the onion and bell pepper to the skillet and cook, stirring, until
softened, about 5 minutes. Stir in 3 tablespoons of the reserved flour mixture and
cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Slowly whisk in the milk and ½ cup water. Simmer
until the sauce has thickened and is nice and creamy, about 5 minutes.
4. Return the chicken to the pan. Cover the pan and simmer on low heat until
the chicken is tender, about 30 minutes. Bring to the table right there in that
skillet.
A BIRD IN HAND
Instead of using a whole bird cut up, you can go ahead and use 3 pounds of
whatever chicken pieces your family likes best. That way, if everyone likes
drumsticks, there’ll be enough to go around.
HOT BUFFALO WINGS
Now, everyone and their football bud loves chicken wings. Frying them and
dunking those babies in buttery hot sauce makes them perfect for one thing: the
dip. Blue cheese, sour cream, cream cheese, mayonnaise—all the good stuff!
And there’s nothin’ better than cooling that Buffalo-wing burn with blue cheese
dip on a stick of celery. While my boys are rooting for the Bulldogs, you’ll find
me swiping every last bit of goodness from the dip bowl.
SERVES 4 TO 6
Creamy Roquefort Dip
½ cup crumbled Roquefort cheese (2 ounces)
1 package (3 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
½ cup mayonnaise
½ cup sour cream
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
1 tablespoon white wine vinegar
Wings
About 4 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
12 chicken wings, disjointed (see box)
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 cup Paula Deen Collection Hot Sauce or any hot sauce you like
1. To make the dip: In a medium bowl, cream the Roquefort and cream cheese
with a wooden spoon until well combined. Mix in the mayonnaise, sour cream,
lemon juice, and vinegar and blend well. Cover with plastic wrap and chill for 2
hours.
2. To make the wings: Using a deep-fat fryer or a large, heavy pot, heat 3
inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry thermometer. Deep-fry the
wings in batches until golden and crispy, about 10 minutes, and transfer them to
a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. In a small saucepan, melt the butter, stir in the hot sauce, and heat
thoroughly. Then quickly pour the butter sauce into a large bowl and toss the hot
wings in the sauce. Serve the wings on a pretty platter along with the creamy
Roquefort dip.
WING IT
If you buy your wings whole (which is the most economical way to buy them),
you’ll need to cut them into three pieces at the joints. It’s fast and easy to do.
Save the wing tips for broths or just discard. The other meaty portions of the
wing are what you want for these Hot Buffalo Wings.
COUNTRY CAPTAIN CHICKEN
This Southern curry has been a favorite for entertaining for the better part of a
century and I see no reason to retire it now. It’s an easy and beautiful stew of
chicken with curry powder, tomatoes, bell pepper, and sweet little currants that
you serve over rice and sprinkle with almonds. A little old-fashioned, perhaps,
but then again, so am I.
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 tablespoon butter
1 whole chicken (3 ½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8 pieces
Salt and black pepper
1 large yellow onion, chopped
1 large green bell pepper, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
1 tablespoon curry powder
1 can (28 ounces) diced tomatoes
⅓ cup dried currants
3 cups cooked rice
½ cup slivered almonds, toasted
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. In a large ovenproof skillet, heat the oil and butter over medium-high heat.
Lightly sprinkle the chicken all over with salt and black pepper. Add to the
skillet, skin side down. Cook, turning once, until browned on both sides, about 8
minutes. Transfer the chicken to a plate.
3. Add the onion and bell pepper to the skillet and cook until softened, about 5
minutes. Add the garlic and curry powder and cook for 30 seconds, until
fragrant. Add the tomatoes and currants and bring to a boil. Taste and add some
salt and/or black pepper if you think it needs it.
4. Return the chicken and any accumulated juices to the pan, skin side up, and
transfer to the oven. Bake, uncovered, until the chicken is cooked through, about
40 minutes. Serve over the rice and sprinkle with the slivered almonds.
SWEET SUBSTITUTIONS
The currants in this dish add a nice sweet flavor that pairs up perfectly with the
curry. Currants are a type of dried sweet berry, a little smaller than raisins. If you
can’t get your hands on currants, you can substitute dark raisins, golden raisins,
or even dried cranberries.
POT-ROASTED TURKEY BREAST WITH VEGETABLES
This is my everyday version of Thanksgiving dinner, which is fitting because I
do give thanks every day. I like roasting the breast with plenty of veggies, then
using the pan juices for a rich-tasting gravy.
SERVES 6
1 bone-in turkey breast (6 pounds), rinsed and patted dry
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, at room temperature
Salt and black pepper
2 teaspoons dried sage
1 large Vidalia or other sweet onion, cut into chunks
2 large sprigs fresh rosemary
3 cups turkey or chicken broth
2 carrots, chopped
2 baking potatoes, peeled and chopped
1 celery stalk, chopped
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Rub the turkey breast inside and out with the
butter. Generously sprinkle salt and black pepper all over. Sprinkle the sage all
over.
2. Heat a large Dutch oven over high heat. Add the turkey, breast side down,
and cook until the skin is dark golden on all sides, 7 to 10 minutes. Using tongs,
lift out the turkey breast and scatter the onion and rosemary on the bottom of the
pan. Return the turkey, breast side up, to the pan. Pour ¾ cup of the broth into
the pan. Cover and bake for 1 hour.
3. Stir the carrots, potatoes, and celery into the pan juices, coating well. Cover
and continue baking until the vegetables are tender and an instant-read
thermometer inserted into the thickest part of the breast registers 160°F, 1 to 1 ½
hours longer. Transfer the turkey to a cutting board and tent loosely with foil. Let
rest for 20 minutes. (The breast temperature will continue to rise to 170°F as it
rests.) Transfer the vegetables to a bowl and cover with foil.
4. Pour the pan juices from the Dutch oven into a measuring cup or gravy
separator. Let stand until the fat rises to the top, 1 to 2 minutes. Skim off the fat
and reserve 3 tablespoons, discarding the rest (or, if using a separator, carefully
pour the juices into a measuring cup and reserve 3 tablespoons of the fat
remaining in the separator). Add the pan juices to the remaining 2 ¼ cups broth.
Return the 3 tablespoons of fat to the pan and place on a burner over mediumhigh heat. Scrape up any browned bits from the pan with a wooden spoon. Stir in
the flour and cook for 2 minutes, stirring constantly. Whisk in the broth mixture
and bring to a boil, stirring. Cook until thickened, about 3 minutes. Strain the
gravy. Taste and add more salt and/or black pepper if you think it needs it. To
serve, carve the breast and lay it out on a pretty platter with the vegetables
scattered around. Pass the gravy at the table.
YOU’VE GOT OPTIONS
You can change up this dish in so many ways. Try it with different vegetables
like parsnips or turnips. Or fiddle with the herbs. Switching out sage and
rosemary for thyme, lemon thyme, or parsley makes it a whole new dish.
Remove the legs and wings of the turkey. Carve each breast by slicing
parallel to the breast in a sweeping motion, using a long, sharp knife.
CLASSIC ROAST TURKEY AND DRESSING
I don’t save turkey just for Thanksgiving Day—Michael and I love it too much.
But I do love to make this traditional recipe for the holiday (or any other big
buffet dinner). The dressing is cooked out of the bird, and the turkey itself gets
an onion, a head of garlic, and some herbs in the cavity to give the meat that
much more flavor. I brush the bird with butter as it roasts until it is bronze and
ready to serve. Along with the dressing and gravy, you’ve got a meal that takes
me right back to every Thanksgiving table I ever sat at, from my Grandmama
Paul’s to the little turkeys I roasted back when we were a small family of three,
just me and my boys.
SERVES 8 TO 10
Turkey Broth
Neck and giblets from the turkey (liver discarded)
2 cups chicken broth
1 medium yellow onion, finely chopped
Dressing
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter 1
½ cups chopped celery
1 bunch scallions, chopped
8 cups large chunks day-old bread (1 ½ pounds)
1 sleeve saltine crackers (about 40 crackers), coarsely crushed
2 cups chicken broth
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
2 teaspoons chopped fresh sage
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
Turkey
1 whole turkey (8 to 10 pounds)
Salt and black pepper
1 medium yellow onion, quartered
1 head garlic, halved crosswise
1 small bunch (about 10 sprigs) fresh sage
8 tablespoons (1 stick) plus about 3 tablespoons butter, melted
¼ cup all-purpose flour
1. To make the broth: In a large saucepan, combine the turkey neck, giblets,
chicken broth, and onion. Bring to a simmer and cook over low heat for 1 hour.
Strain the broth into a bowl. Discard the neck, giblets, and onion. Let cool
completely, then refrigerate, covered, until ready to use.
2. To prepare the dressing: Grease a 13 by 9-inch pan with butter, oil, or
cooking spray. In a large skillet, melt the butter. Add the celery and scallions and
cook until softened, 5 to 7 minutes. In a large bowl, combine the bread, cracker
crumbs, and celery mixture. Stir in the chicken broth, eggs, sage, salt, and black
pepper. Transfer the dressing to the prepared pan.
3. To prepare the turkey: Preheat the oven to 350°F. Place a roasting rack in a
large roasting pan. Rinse the turkey and pat it dry. Season the inside of the turkey
with 1 teaspoon each of salt and black pepper; season the outside with 2
teaspoons salt and 1 teaspoon black pepper. Stuff the onion, garlic, and sage into
the cavity.
4. Place the turkey, breast side up, on the roasting rack. Brush the turkey with
¼ cup of the melted butter. Tent the turkey with foil. Transfer the turkey and the
pan of dressing to the oven. Bake the dressing, uncovered, until golden, about 45
minutes. Remove and set aside. Continue roasting the turkey for 1 hour and 15
minutes longer.
5. Remove the foil, brush the turkey with another ¼ cup of the melted butter,
and increase the oven temperature to 425°F. Roast until an instant-read
thermometer inserted into the thickest part of the thigh registers 170°F, 25 to 30
minutes longer. Let the turkey rest for 15 minutes before carving. (The
temperature will continue to rise while the meat rests.) 6. Reduce the oven
temperature to 250°F. Cover the dressing with foil and return it to the oven to
warm through while you make the gravy.
7. Pour the pan juices out of the roasting pan into a measuring cup or gravy
separator. Let stand until the fat rises to the top, 1 to 2 minutes. Skim off the fat
and reserve (or, if using a separator, carefully pour the juices into a measuring
cup and reserve the fat remaining in the separator). Measure the turkey fat,
adding enough of the remaining melted butter to equal ¼ cup.
8. Straddle the roasting pan across two burners over medium-high heat. Add
the fat and heat until bubbling. Whisk in the flour and cook for 1 minute. Slowly
whisk in the reserved turkey broth and the degreased pan juices, scraping up any
browned bits from the bottom of the roasting pan. Simmer until the gravy is
slightly thickened, about 5 minutes. Taste and see if it needs more salt and/or
black pepper. Proudly serve the turkey with the dressing and gravy alongside!
STRESS-FREE ENTERTAINING
I know, I know, this recipe may look a little daunting. But, I promise you, folks,
it’s all in the preparation. To make your entertaining fun and easy, go ahead and
make the turkey broth and the dressing a day ahead. The dressing can then be
warmed up 45 minutes before you’re ready to serve, leaving you more time for
family and friends on the special day.
MOLASSES GAME HENS
Many Southern men love to hunt small game birds, and some Southern wives are
obliging enough to dress and cook their haul. For the rest of us who might not
hunt, the good, hearty, chicken-like flavor of Cornish game hen is easy enough
to order from a good butcher. I love to give these little birds a sweet, tangy glaze.
They make for a very elegant main course.
SERVES 4 TO 6
¾ cup molasses 6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
1 tablespoon plus
½ teaspoon apple cider vinegar
¼ teaspoon plus ⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper
Salt
3 Cornish game hens (1 ½ pounds each), rinsed and patted dry Black
pepper
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Place a roasting rack in a roasting pan.
2. In a small saucepan, combine the molasses, butter, vinegar, cayenne pepper,
and 1 ½ teaspoons salt. Simmer over medium heat for 5 minutes.
3. Lightly sprinkle the hens all over with salt and black pepper. Brush each
hen with about 2 tablespoons of the molasses mixture and place them on the
roasting rack. Roast the hens, basting them two or three times with more of the
glaze, until the juices run clear when the hens are pierced with a knife in the
thickest part of the thigh, about 1 hour.
GOOD THINGS IN SMALL PACKAGES
Cornish game hens, sometimes called Rock Cornish hens, are young chickens
that have a really wonderful flavor. For the prettiest presentation, I like to place
them on a platter either whole or halved.
QUAILS IN GRAVY
Back in Albany, Georgia, when I was a little girl, I remember that our claim to
fame was how President Eisenhower would come to the nearby plantations to do
his quail hunting. Quail is a fairly fancy food to serve these days, but it was not
so rare when I was growing up, and we always enjoyed eating a down-home dish
like this one while thinking to ourselves that the president might be having the
same thing for supper.
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
8 quail (preferably semiboneless), rinsed and patted dry
1 teaspoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour
2 cups chicken broth
2 tablespoons heavy cream
2 tablespoons dry sherry
2 dashes of Worcestershire sauce
1 bay leaf
Salt and black pepper
1. In a large skillet with a lid, heat the butter and oil over medium-high heat.
Season the quail with the House Seasoning. Add to the skillet and cook until
browned, about 2 minutes per side. Transfer to a plate.
2. Whisk the flour into the skillet and cook, stirring constantly, for 1 minute.
Add the broth, cream, sherry, Worcestershire sauce, and bay leaf and bring to a
boil, stirring constantly. Return the quail and any accumulated juices to the pan.
Reduce to a gentle simmer, cover, and cook until the quail are cooked through,
about 10 minutes. Discard the bay leaf. Taste the gravy and add salt and black
pepper if you think it needs it.
QUALITY QUAIL
When buying quail, look for those with a creamy yellow skin. Make sure they
don’t have blemishes and that they smell fresh. Quail are very lean and have a
lovely, delicate flavor.

CAJUN CHICKEN-FRIED LIVERS WITH CREAM GRAVY
I adore chicken livers, and when it comes to folks who aren’t so sure about them,
I consider myself an expert: all you’ve got to do is fry something and dunk it
down in some cream gravy, and folks will come around to it. And, hey, if I can’t
convince everybody, well then, that’s more for me!
SERVES 4
Spicy Chicken Livers
½ cup all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon Cajun seasoning
2 teaspoons salt
2 pounds chicken livers
⅓ cup vegetable oil
Cream Gravy
1 cup milk
1 cup heavy cream
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
Salt and black pepper
1. To prepare the spicy chicken livers: In a medium bowl, combine the flour,
Cajun seasoning, and salt. Dredge the livers in the flour mixture, tapping off the
excess.
2. In a large skillet, heat the oil over high heat until very hot. Fry the livers,
turning them once, until golden on both sides and still slightly pinkish inside, 1
to 2 minutes per side. Transfer the livers to a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
Pour off all but about ¼ cup of the oil from the skillet.
3. To make the cream gravy: In a small saucepan, combine the milk and
cream. Slowly heat until hot to the touch, 5 to 10 minutes.
4. Return the skillet with the reserved oil to medium-high heat, add the flour,
and stir until pale golden, about 2 minutes. Slowly whisk in the cream and milk
and cook, stirring constantly, until thick and bubbling, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir in 1
teaspoon salt and black pepper to taste. Taste and add more salt if you think it
needs it. Serve up the chicken livers and pass the cream gravy around.
THE GRAVY TRAIN
Getting gravy to just the right consistency takes some good old TLC. Don’t
worry if your gravy comes up too thick. You can fix that by adding hot water to
it in small teaspoonfuls until it reaches the right consistency.

I have always said I don’t care for uppity food and I can’t cook it. When I was
opening my restaurant, I knew I needed to stick with the down-home cooking I
grew up with, and I’ve been so glad I did. But the funny thing is, when I really
think about my childhood, the things we were eating back then would be
considered fancy today! I remember as a child having fish roe with grits for
breakfast. And here in the South, we’ve always been able to enjoy beautiful crab
cakes, oysters, and the sweetest, freshest shrimp, just the kinds of foods
restaurants charge a lot for these days.
Folks can eat like royalty when fresh fish and seafood are swimming outside
the door. Here in Georgia, you’ve got rivers like the Flint and the Savannah full
of freshwater, and salt water from the Atlantic Ocean, too. I went from Saturdaynight catfish fries growing up in Albany, Georgia, to picking crab and shelling
shrimp off the beach in Savannah. I recall one of the first things Michael taught
me to cook was shrimp, which I love because you can make it a hundred
different ways, from BBQ Shrimp (page 191) to Easy Shrimp Bake (page 189),
and you can serve it morning, noon, and night. When Michael goes out back to
fish or crab, the first thing he does is cast right down where we’re standing and
pull up a big old net of shrimp to use for bait. Well, honey, I don’t see the point
of that! I head straight into the house with that bait to make my Shrimp and Grits
(page 193).
Even living the high life here where I can fix Creamy Charleston Crab
Casserole (page 196) and Creamy Scallop Bake (page 199), I started to miss
freshwater fish. So I told Michael I was going to have a pond put in our front
yard. Of course he said, “What are you doing that for? You got an ocean in your
backyard!” But I don’t know from the tides and the bait you use on the saltwater
side, so I got my pond put in. And every so often I catch me some catfish. I like
to slide a few into the fryer to make the freshest, crispiest Catfish Po’ Boy (page
205) you ever had. And since farmed catfish is sold in most parts of this country,
there’s no reason you can’t cook up some Cajun Blackened Catfish (page 203)
no matter where you live.
One of our true glories down here is Low-Country Boil (page 206), which is
one of those fabulous one-pot wonders. It’s got everything: sausage, starch,
protein, and a whole bunch of flavor. I love the ease of it: we’ll just throw a little
of whatever we’ve got in there. You can even add some firm types of fish and
crab, plus add sausage for richness and potato, then simmer it together with
plenty of sweet shrimp. Y’all, just one taste of Low-Country Boil is enough to
r
e
m
i
n
d
y
o
u
t
h
a
t
d
o
w
n
S
o
u
t
h
e
v
e
n
i
f
y
o
u
’
r
e
p
o
o
r
i
n
t
h
e
p
o
c
k
e
t
,
y
o
u
’
r
e
r
i
c
h
i
n
t
h
e
b
e
l
l
y.
SHRIMP ÉTOUFFÉE
I couldn’t call this book a Southern bible without including étouffée. This
flavorful New Orleans classic—full of stewed tomatoes along with the “trinity”
of bell peppers, onions, and celery—really showcases the sweet Gulf shrimp and
has a nice spicy kick to it. Served over rice, it’s a true feast.
SERVES 6 TO 8 AS A MAIN COURSE
½ cup vegetable oil
½ cup all-purpose flour
1 cup chopped yellow onion
½ cup chopped green bell pepper
1 cup chopped celery
3 cloves garlic, finely chopped
½ teaspoon black pepper
½ teaspoon white pepper
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon Cajun seasoning
½ cup finely chopped scallions, plus extra for garnish
½ cup finely chopped fresh parsley
2 to 3 dashes of hot sauce
1 bottle (8 ounces) clam juice
1 can (14½ ounces) diced tomatoes with green chilies
Salt
2 pounds small or medium shrimp, peeled and deveined
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
6 cups cooked rice, for serving
1. In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine the oil and flour over low
heat to prepare the roux. Whisk the flour into the oil to form a paste. Continue
cooking over low heat, whisking constantly, until the mixture turns a caramel
color and gives off a nutty aroma, 15 to 20 minutes.
2. Add the onion, bell pepper, celery, and garlic and cook over low heat until
the vegetables are tender, about 5 minutes. Add the black pepper, white pepper,
cayenne pepper, Cajun seasoning, ½ cup scallions, the parsley, and hot sauce.
Pour in the clam juice and diced tomatoes, stirring to blend. Add salt, starting
with 1 teaspoon, then add more if you’d like. Bring the mixture to a boil. Reduce
to a simmer and cook for 10 to 15 minutes.
3. Add the shrimp and stir. It will take only about 3 minutes for the shrimp to
cook, so be sure you don’t overcook them. Remove the saucepan from the heat
and stir in the butter. The heat from the dish will melt the butter. Place the
étouffée in a pretty tureen or serving bowl. Serve it over rice, garnished with
scallions.
AN OIL-BASED ROUX
For an étouffée full of flavor, you want to cook that roux for a good long time.
That’s why I go with oil in this roux. If you cook butter for as long as I cook the
oil, you’ll wind up with a burned mess.
BEAUFORT SHRIMP PIE
Situated on one of South Carolina’s Sea Islands is the beautiful town of
Beaufort, where old Southern mansions overlook the gorgeous coastline. The
town has a long-standing shellfish industry, which is celebrated yearly at the
Beaufort Shrimp Festival. But you can celebrate it anytime, anywhere, with this
delectable bacon-topped shrimp casserole.
SERVES 6 TO 8
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
½ cup chopped yellow onion
¼ cup chopped green bell pepper
Salt
3 cups cooked, peeled, and deveined large shrimp
2 cups fresh bread crumbs
2 cups whole milk
2 large eggs
¼ teaspoon black pepper
3 slices bacon, cut into 2-inch lengths
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Lightly grease an 8-inch square baking pan or
coat with cooking spray.
2. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the onion,
bell pepper, and a pinch of salt. Cook, stirring, until the vegetables have
softened, about 5 minutes.
3. In the prepared pan, layer the shrimp, bread crumbs, and vegetable mixture.
In a small bowl, beat together the milk, eggs, ½ teaspoon salt, and the black
pepper. Pour the egg mixture into the pan. Lay the bacon across the top. Bake
until the filling is set, 30 to 40 minutes. If you like bacon the way I sure do, just
before serving, run the pie under the broiler to make it extra-crispy.
SHRIMP SHORTCUT
Buying already cooked, peeled, and deveined shrimp is a great time-saver. You’ll
pay a little more per pound for the work that’s been done at the shop, but it’ll
save you some precious minutes.
EASY SHRIMP BAKE
This sweet, cheesy casserole full of mushrooms and shrimp comes together so
fast, you can have it in the baking dish in minutes. Better yet, you can refrigerate
it in the baking dish for up to a day, then pop it in the oven just before serving.
Y’all, isn’t life sweet?
SERVES 6
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1 cup sliced white mushrooms
4 scallions, chopped
2 cups cooked, peeled, and deveined large shrimp
6 to 8 slices day-old bread, trimmed, buttered, and cubed
2 cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (8 ounces)
3 large eggs
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
½ teaspoon mustard powder
Pinch of paprika 1
½ cups whole milk
1. Grease a shallow 2-quart baking dish with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the
mushrooms and scallions and cook, stirring, until the vegetables are tender, 3 to
5 minutes.
3. Place the shrimp, the mushroom mixture, half of the bread, and 1 cup of the
Cheddar in the prepared baking dish and stir gently. Top with the remaining
bread and 1 cup Cheddar. Lightly beat the eggs with the salt, black pepper,
mustard powder, and paprika. Stir the milk into the eggs and pour it all into the
baking dish. Cover the dish with plastic wrap and let it sit in the fridge for 30
minutes or up to overnight (see box below).
4. When you’re ready to bake it, preheat the oven to 325°F. Bake until the
casserole is set and golden brown, 40 to 50 minutes.
THE BIG FREEZE
Did you know that almost all shrimp you can get your hands on has been frozen
at some point since it was caught? So go ahead and feel free to buy that frozen
shrimp for your next shrimp dinner.
A GOOD SOAKING
Not only will it make your morning easier if this casserole is ready the night
before you bake it, but if you ask me, it tastes better, too. Letting the bread soak
in the egg custard overnight lets it get good and flavorful—and you can go off to
dreamland knowing you’ve got one less item on your to-do list for tomorrow.
CRUNCHY FRIED SHRIMP
Oh, my, but everything is better fried! These little shrimp are so good, you won’t
find yourself with any leftovers.
SERVES 4
2 cups self-rising flour
Salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
2 cups buttermilk
3 tablespoons hot sauce
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
About 2 quarts peanut oil, for deep-frying
2 pounds medium shrimp, peeled and deveined
1. In a wide, shallow bowl, whisk together the flour, 1 tablespoon salt, and the
black pepper. In a separate wide, shallow bowl, whisk together the buttermilk,
hot sauce, and lime juice.
2. In a medium saucepan, heat 2 inches of oil over medium-high heat until it
reaches 375°F on a deep fry thermometer. Pat the shrimp dry and dredge them in
the flour mixture first, then coat with the buttermilk mixture, and finally dredge
in the flour mixture again. Give the shrimp a good shake after each coating to
shake off any excess flour or batter.
3. Working in batches, fry the shrimp until golden brown, about 2 minutes.
With a slotted spoon, transfer the shrimp to a paper towel–lined baking sheet to
drain. Sprinkle with extra salt, if you’d like, and serve warm for maximum
crunch.
DON’T GO UP IN SMOKE
When deep-or shallow-frying, it’s best to use a mild-flavored oil like peanut or
vegetable oil. Lard is also a good option. But stay away from butter and olive oil
—they burn at a lower temperature than peanut and vegetable oils.
BBQ SHRIMP
Shrimp cook in no time flat, and they are so readily available here in Savannah
that I find myself making this whenever we need supper on the table fast. I love
to serve these saucy shrimp over grits or else alongside a nice big slice of corn
bread to soak up all the good, buttery juices. Get out your paper napkins and
enjoy, y’all!
SERVES 4
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
2 teaspoons Creole seasoning
Pinch of cayenne pepper
12 jumbo shrimp, with heads and tails (see box)
½ cup lager-style beer
Freshly squeezed juice of ½ lemon
½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme
Chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
1. In a large skillet, melt 4 tablespoons of the butter over medium-high heat.
Sprinkle the Creole seasoning and cayenne pepper over the shrimp. Add the
shrimp to the pan and cook for about 1 minute per side.
2. Stir in the beer, lemon juice, Worcestershire sauce, and thyme. Let the sauce
bubble vigorously for 30 seconds. Reduce the heat to low, cover the pan, and
cook until the shrimp are pink and opaque, about 2 minutes. Stir in the remaining
4 tablespoons butter and garnish with parsley. Serve bubbling hot.
HEADS AND TAILS
You’ll notice this recipe calls for shrimp with heads and tails on. Now, don’t be
scared by that! The heads and tails bring a load of flavor to this dish. It can be
made without them, but you’ll be sacrificing some of that intense shrimp taste.
BUTTERY CAJUN SHRIMP
The smell of these shrimp in the oven is enough to just make a person weak in
the knees. Full of seasoning and, of course, plenty of butter, it’s the sauce that
makes this dish. Whenever I serve shrimp in the shell, it’s an occasion all on its
own—just rolling up your sleeves and peeling them with your fingers turns a
tasty supper into a bit of a party.
SERVES 4
1 ½ sticks (6 ounces) butter, melted
3 tablespoons Worcestershire sauce
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
2 tablespoons Cajun seasoning
1 ½ teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
¾ teaspoon hot sauce
3 scallions, finely chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
2 pounds medium shrimp, with shells
1 lemon, thinly sliced
French bread, for dipping
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.
2. In a medium bowl, combine the butter, Worcestershire sauce, lemon juice,
Cajun seasoning, House Seasoning, hot sauce, scallions, and garlic. Pour half
this sauce into a 2-quart baking dish. Layer half the shrimp and half the lemon
slices in the dish; then make a second layer with the remaining shrimp and
lemon slices. Pour the remaining sauce into the dish.
3. Bake, uncovered, stirring occasionally, until the shrimp are pink, about 20
minutes. Ladle the sauce into pretty individual serving dishes. Serve the shrimp
with plenty of French bread for dipping in the tangy, buttery sauce.
PEEL APPEAL
Sometimes I like to keep my shrimp unpeeled, especially in a recipe like this one
that cooks at a high heat for a fairly long time. With the peel on, I know my
shrimp has its protective shell to keep it nice and moist.
SHRIMP AND GRITS
Creamy grits topped with sweet, succulent shrimp cooked with ham and
vegetables: no wonder folks were tripping over themselves to get to the shrimp
and grits we served at our wedding. Michael is a shrimp guy, and I’m a grits gal,
so I felt it was fitting that our friends and family ate those shrimp and grits
together. I could feel the love, y’all.
SERVES 2
Salt 1 cup quick-cooking grits (not instant grits)
2 tablespoons olive oil
½ cup chopped tasso ham (see box, page 97)
2 tablespoons chopped leek, white part only
2 tablespoons chopped yellow onion
2 tablespoons chopped green bell pepper
20 medium to large shrimp, peeled and deveined, with tails
2 tablespoons white wine (see box)
1 cup heavy cream
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1 scallion, chopped, for garnish
1. In a small saucepan, combine 2 cups water and ¾ teaspoon salt. Bring to a
boil over medium-high heat. Slowly stir in the grits and stir thoroughly until the
grits are well mixed. Return to a boil, then reduce to a simmer, cover, and cook,
stirring from time to time, until the grits have the consistency of smooth cream
of wheat, about 20 minutes.
2. Meanwhile, in a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add the
tasso and cook, stirring once, until crisp, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the leek, onion, and
bell pepper and cook, stirring, until tender, about 5 minutes. Add the shrimp and
cook until pink, 30 to 45 seconds. Remove the shrimp from the pan and set
aside.
3. Add the wine to the pan and cook for 30 seconds. Slowly add the cream and
let reduce until thickened, 5 to 10 minutes. Season with ½ teaspoon salt and the
black pepper.
4. Divide the grits between two plates. Line the edges of each plate with 10
shrimp. Pour the sauce over the grits and garnish with a scattering of scallion.
GLAZE OVER
Pouring wine or another liquid into a skillet after you’ve sautéed meat or seafood
in it is called deglazing. That little bit of wine picks up all the rich flavor that the
shrimp leaves on the bottom of the pan. And this is the flavor foundation for the
sauce. If you don’t have white wine handy, you can substitute fish or chicken
broth or, in a pinch, a little water.
SHRIMP GUMBO CASSEROLE
If you ever want to feel like you’re cooking on TV, fix a dish like this casserole:
it’s just so pretty when you pull it out of the oven that you’ll feel like shouting,
“Ta da!” This is my lighter version of gumbo, with plenty of colorful veggies,
including red pepper and green okra, plus a real hit of flavor from the thyme. It
is a bright change of pace from heavier gumbos, and while it’s in the oven,
you’ll have time to run, change into a nice clean apron, fix your hair, and make it
all look easy.
SERVES 4
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 cup crushed Ritz crackers
1 teaspoon dried thyme
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
1 cup coarsely chopped yellow onion
1 cup coarsely chopped celery
1 cup coarsely chopped red bell pepper
1 clove garlic, chopped
1½ tablespoons all-purpose flour 1
½ cups chicken broth
½ cup bottled clam juice
1 cup sliced fresh or frozen okra, thawed if frozen
¼ teaspoon hot sauce
1 bay leaf 1
½ pounds large shrimp, peeled and deveined
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Grease a baking dish with butter, oil, or cooking
spray. In a small saucepan, melt 2 tablespoons of the butter. Pour the melted
butter into a medium bowl. Add the cracker crumbs and thyme and toss together.
Set aside.
2. In a medium saucepan, heat the remaining 2 tablespoons butter and the oil
over medium heat. Add the onion, celery, and bell pepper, and cook until
softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the garlic and cook for 1 minute. Sprinkle with the
flour and cook, stirring constantly, for 1 minute. Add the broth, clam juice, okra,
hot sauce, and bay leaf, and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat a tiny bit and
simmer until thickened, about 2 minutes. Remove and discard the bay leaf.
3. Add the shrimp to the pan and stir to coat all over. Transfer to the prepared
baking dish. Top with the cracker crumb mixture. Bake until the top is golden
brown and the shrimp are cooked through, about 15 minutes. You won’t believe
your eyes. This is just the prettiest gumbo dish ever.
CLAM UP
You’ll find clam juice bottled in most supermarkets. It’s a great thing to have in
the fridge, as it adds huge amounts of flavor to fish stews, sauces, and chowders.
And try adding a few drops to your next Bloody Mary—y’all won’t believe how
good it is.
GOLDEN FRIED OYSTERS
Maybe it’s got something to do with my marrying a seafaring man, but I have
always considered oysters among my tools in the romance department. They’re
the food to make for your lover when you want to really savor the textures of a
sensual feast. And frying oysters just puts me right over the edge. I do it fast, so
they stay moist and succulent inside that crisp coating. Then we dip those honeys
in a cool, sweet tartar sauce and—oh, baby.
SERVES 4
Tartar Sauce
¼ cup mayonnaise 1 tablespoon pickle relish
¼ teaspoon finely chopped fresh tarragon
Fried Oysters
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
¼ cup finely ground cornmeal
½ pound shucked fresh oysters, drained and patted dry
Salt and black pepper
1. To make the tartar sauce: In a small bowl, stir together the mayonnaise,
relish, and tarragon. Refrigerate until ready to use.
2. To prepare the oysters: In a medium saucepan, heat 2 inches of oil over
medium-high heat until it reaches 375°F on a deep fry thermometer.
3. Place the cornmeal in a wide, shallow bowl. Lightly sprinkle the oysters
with salt and black pepper. Dip each oyster in the cornmeal, turning to coat
evenly. Shake off any excess coating.
4. Working in batches, use a slotted spoon or a spider (see illustration) to
lower half the oysters into the hot oil. Be extra careful, as that oil may splatter a
bit. Fry, stirring occasionally, until crisp and golden, about 2 minutes per batch.
Transfer to a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Serve with the crunchy, creamy,
tangy tartar sauce for dipping.
A spider is a strainer used in deep-frying. It has a round basket at the end of
a long handle for scooping food out of the hot oil.
A LITTLE SIZZLE
I strongly recommend having a deep fry thermometer in the house, but if you
don’t have one on hand, you can flick a drop of water into the oil to see if the oil
is ready to fry. If it’s ready, it should sizzle. Just be careful with this test. The hot
oil may spatter, and you don’t want to get any of it on you.
CREAMY CHARLESTON CRAB CASSEROLE
When life events—good or bad—take place, I like to bring a casserole dish to a
friend’s house ready for baking. “Honey, preheat your oven,” I’ll say. “I’m
bringing you a casserole.” This deliciously creamy, crisp-topped crab number
has been to more births and funerals than I can count. Of course, it’s so
delicious, there’s no cause to wait for something important to happen. Just pick
up some crab and enjoy it anytime.
SERVES 4
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour
2 cups whole milk
3 tablespoons dry sherry
¾ cup shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (3 ounces)
1 pound crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see box, page 8)
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
¼ cup dried bread crumbs
¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese (about 1 ounce)
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease an 8-inch square baking pan or coat with
cooking spray.
2. In a large skillet, melt 2 tablespoons of the butter over medium heat. Whisk
in the flour. Cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Slowly whisk in the milk and sherry
and cook for 2 minutes. Whisk in the Cheddar until the mixture is smooth.
Remove from the heat and stir in the crab, salt, and black pepper. Pour the
mixture into the prepared pan.
3. In a small bowl, toss together the bread crumbs and Parmesan. In a small
saucepan, melt the remaining 2 tablespoons butter over medium heat. Pour over
the bread crumb mixture and toss to combine. Scatter the mixture over the
casserole.
4. Bake the casserole until golden and bubbling, 25 to 30 minutes. Let sit a
few minutes, then serve it up.
TOP CHOICE
Instead of bread crumbs, you can try crushed-up Ritz crackers or saltines or fresh
bread cubes.
SAVANNAH CRAB CAKES
When it comes to crab cakes in Savannah, you’d better be ready for everyone to
be a critic: few foods are as contested in these parts. I load my cakes with crab,
go easy on the bread crumbs, and use only Kraft mayonnaise and a nice hit of
Old Bay seasoning, which is just so perfectly delicious with seafood. Peanut oil,
nice and hot, gives the crab cakes a nice clean-tasting fry. A squeeze of lemon is
all they need after that!
SERVES 4 TO 6
1 pound crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see box, page 8)
½ cup dried bread crumbs
⅓ cup mayonnaise
¼ cup finely chopped scallions
1 large egg, lightly beaten
1 tablespoon Old Bay seasoning
1 teaspoon mustard powder
½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
¼ teaspoon hot sauce Peanut or vegetable oil, for frying
1 lemon, cut into wedges, for serving
1. In a large bowl, combine the crab, bread crumbs, mayonnaise, scallions,
egg, Old Bay seasoning, mustard powder, Worcestershire sauce, and hot sauce.
Shape into six 3-inch patties.
2. In a large skillet, heat ¼ inch of oil over medium heat. When the oil is hot,
carefully place the crab cakes, in batches, in the pan and fry until the undersides
are golden, 4 to 5 minutes. Carefully flip the crab cakes and fry on the other side
until golden brown, about 4 minutes. Serve warm, with pretty lemon wedges.
TAKE A DIP
I love to pair these crab cakes with tartar sauce. And it doesn’t get much easier
or much more delicious than the tartar sauce from my Golden Fried Oysters
(page 195).
DEVILED CRAB
Well, I just can’t pass up anything deviled. I devil fresh crabmeat by folding it
into my usual mayo and mustard combination along with some half-and-half to
loosen up the mixture. Then I add some spice. But you know what really makes
the difference here? Potato chips. Crush ’em over the top, bake the whole thing,
and you’re golden: a crab dish that no mortal can resist.
SERVES 4 TO 6
1 pound crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see box, page 8)
2 cups fresh bread crumbs (from 4 to 5 slices bread)
1 cup mayonnaise
1 cup half-and-half
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon onion powder
1 teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper
1 cup lightly crushed potato chips
¼ teaspoon paprika
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a shallow 1-quart baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium bowl, toss together the crab and bread crumbs. In a separate
medium bowl, mix together the mayonnaise, half-and-half, mustard, onion
powder, salt, and cayenne pepper. Add to the crab mixture and gently stir to
combine.
3. Transfer the crab to the prepared dish. Top with the potato chips and
sprinkle the paprika over the top. Bake until golden and bubbling, about 45
minutes. Just wait until you try this deviled crab. It tastes like it came straight
from heaven.
CRAB PICKING
You’ll find a wide variety of crabmeat options on the store shelves. Steer clear of
“sea legs” or imitation crabmeat, since it’s not true crab. Your best bet is the
grade of real crab called white meat “lump,” but you’ll pay a little extra for it.
You can save a little money with claw meat, which is dark meat from the claws
a
n
d
l
e
g
s
,
o
r
b
a
c
k
f
i
n
,
w
h
i
c
h
i
s
f
l
a
k
e
s
o
f
l
u
m
p
a
n
d
o
t
h
e
r
w
h
i
t
e
c
r
a
b
m
e
a
t.
CREAMY SCALLOP BAKE
A scallop is a beautiful thing. Like so many of the recipes I love, this one has
very few ingredients and tastes like you slaved over it. I love to serve this
elegant dish over wild rice—or even with just a crusty loaf of bread—to catch
the wonderful sauce. Skinny little green beans are a nice way to round out the
plate if you’re using your fancy china.
SERVES 4
1 cup heavy cream
1 tablespoon dry sherry
1 clove garlic, lightly crushed
Salt and white pepper
½ pounds sea scallops
¼ cup grated Parmesan cheese
1 tablespoon chopped fresh basil
Crusty bread, for serving
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.
2. In a small saucepan, combine the cream, sherry, and garlic and bring to a
gentle boil over medium heat. Cook, stirring occasionally, until reduced to ¾
cup. Discard the garlic clove and season to taste with salt and white pepper.
3. Meanwhile, lightly sprinkle salt and white pepper over the scallops. Divide
them among 4 individual baking dishes pretty enough to serve in. In a small
bowl, toss the Parmesan with the basil.
4. Pour the sauce over the scallops and top with the cheese mixture. Bake until
the scallops are opaque, about 15 minutes. Serve with the crusty bread to sop up
the creamy sauce.
SCALLOP COUSINS
The two types of scallops you’ll come across are bay and sea. The sea scallops
used here are the larger of the two. I like them in this recipe because they tend to
stand up to oven heat better than their bayside cousins.
GROUPER WITH SHRIMP BUTTER
Well, I’d eat shrimp butter off a spoon if no one was looking, but you really must
try it on grouper, a firm, moist, slightly sweet fish that I absolutely adore.
SERVES 4
4 grouper fillets (8 ounces each), skin removed
Salt and black pepper
½ batch Shrimp Butter (page 37)
1 lemon, cut into wedges, for serving
1. Preheat the broiler. Line a baking sheet with foil.
2. Lightly sprinkle each fillet with salt and black pepper. Place on the baking
sheet and spread the top of each fillet with a generous 2 tablespoons of Shrimp
Butter. Broil until the fish is just cooked through, 5 to 8 minutes. Serve hot, with
pretty lemon wedges.
A PERFECT PAIR
What is it about lemon and fish that make them so amazing together? The acidy
flavor and smell of lemon have just the perfect effect on fish, bringing out all the
wonderful flavors that fish has to offer. Try another citrus like orange or lime for
some variety.
DRESS UP
When I call a fish “dressed,” what I mean is that a whole fish has been scaled
and cleaned of its innards and is ready to be stuffed. If you choose to take it
home without the head, make sure you take a look at the eyes before the head is
removed; they should be clear, not cloudy. That is the best sign of a fresh fish.
CRAB-STUFFED FLOUNDER
When I want to serve an impressive fish dish, I get a nice big whole fish and
stuff it. To really up the ante—and make sure the fish won’t dry out in the oven
—I lay bacon over it. This is such a beautiful and festive dish, a perfect
centerpiece for a dinner party.
SERVES 8
1 whole dressed flounder (see box opposite), at least 7 pounds
Salt and black pepper
Garlic powder
Onion salt
2 pounds crabmeat, picked over to remove bits of shell (see box, page 8)
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
1 sleeve saltine crackers, crushed
6 slices bacon
2 slices lemon
¼ teaspoon dried dill, or 1 tablespoon chopped fresh dill
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil. Grease the
foil with oil or coat with cooking spray.
2. Place the fish on the prepared baking sheet and sprinkle liberally inside and
out with salt, black pepper, garlic powder, and onion salt. Make two slits on the
side of the fish facing up but do not slice through.
3. In a large bowl, combine the crab, eggs, onion, cracker crumbs, and salt and
black pepper to taste. Stuff this mixture into the cavity of the fish. If it is more
than the fish will hold, that’s just fine. Just place it all around the cavity. Lay the
bacon and lemon slices over the fish and sprinkle lightly with the dill.
4. Cover the fish with foil and bake for 50 minutes. Remove the foil and bake
until lightly golden, 10 minutes longer.
Stuff the fish with the crab filling, then lay the bacon and lemon slices on
the fish and sprinkle lightly with the dill.
CRISPY TORTILLA-CRUSTED TILAPIA
Tilapia is such a nice, light fish, with a firm, flaky texture and a nice, mild
sweetness. I give it zing by coating the fillets with tortilla chip crumbs, butter,
and lime zest. Then I bake it until crispy.
SERVES 4
1 cup crushed tortilla chips
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
2 teaspoons finely grated lime zest
½ teaspoon dried basil
4 skinless tilapia fillets (4 ounces each)
1 teaspoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1. Preheat the oven to 425°F. Line a baking sheet with foil.
2. In a medium bowl, combine the crushed chips, melted butter, lime zest, and
basil.
3. Place the fish on the prepared baking sheet and season with the House
Seasoning. Spread the tortilla mixture over the fish, pressing down to make it
stick. Bake until the fish is opaque and just cooked through and the tortilla
crumbs are golden around the edges, 12 to 15 minutes.
QUICK COOK
Always go for a quick-cooking, high-heat method when you’re using fish fillets.
That way, you’ll be sure to get a nice crust on the outside while keeping the fish
tender and moist on the inside.
CAJUN BLACKENED CATFISH
When chef Paul Prudhomme made Cajun blackened fish all the rage at his
Louisiana restaurant, K-Paul’s, back in the ’80s, my own restaurant dreams were
still almost a decade away. The secret of his recipe is to cook the fish in a skillet
so hot, the butter darkens and the spices toast—and to do it pretty fast so nothing
burns. The result is a nice crust and a ton of flavor. Turn on the fume hood, y’all,
and cook up some Louisiana love.
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons paprika
2 teaspoons ground thyme
1 teaspoon onion powder
½ teaspoon garlic powder
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
4 skinless catfish fillets (5 to 6 ounces each)
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
1 lemon, cut into wedges, for serving
1. In a small bowl, mix together the paprika, thyme, onion powder, garlic
powder, salt, and black pepper.
2. Dip the fish into the melted butter, letting any excess drip off, then dip into
the spice mixture to coat thoroughly.
3. Heat a large, preferably cast-iron, skillet over medium-high heat until very
hot. Add the fillets and cook, turning once, until a fork slides easily through the
thickest part of the fish, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Serve with lemon wedges on the
side.
FISH SWITCH
If you aren’t a catfish fan, this recipe will work with any nice white fish fillet.
Try tilapia or flounder if that’s what you’ve got.
To season a new cast-iron pan, coat with oil (lard is best) and heat in a low
oven (300°F) for up to 1 hour. Each time the pan is washed, season it again
by wiping it with an oil-soaked paper towel and heating it on the stovetop
over low heat until it begins to smoke.
FRIED CATFISH
Living in Savannah, you’d think crab boils were the only way to enjoy life. But
in landlocked southwest Georgia, where I grew up, it was all about the fish fry.
We love our lake fish fried with a spicy cornmeal coating, and you will, too.
SERVES 4 TO 6
About 4 quarts peanut or vegetable oil, for deep-frying
1 ½ cups all-purpose flour
1 ½ cups cornmeal
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
8 skinless catfish fillets (5 to 6 ounces each)
Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
1. Fill a large, deep pot halfway with oil (there should be at least 3 inches) and
heat over medium-high heat until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry thermometer.
2. In a wide, shallow bowl, combine the flour, cornmeal, and cayenne pepper.
Generously sprinkle both sides of each fillet with House Seasoning.
3. Working in batches, dredge the catfish in the flour mixture and carefully
lower into the hot oil. Fry until the fish is golden and just cooked through, 7 to 8
minutes. Set on a paper towel–lined baking sheet to drain.
FISH FLIP
Unless you’ve got yourself a good, flat spatula, getting that catfish out of the hot
oil can prove a little tricky, so I recommend having one of these simple kitchen
tools in your drawer. Sometimes called an egg flipper, it is a long-handled,
broad, slotted metal spatula that is flexible.
CATFISH PO’ BOY
Oh, my goodness, there is nothing so spectacular as a fried fish po’ boy. You get
your creamy mayonnaise, your sweet pickles, your hot sauce, your crusty toasted
French bread, and your lettuce, tomato, and onion all set up to fix the world’s
best sandwich. Then you fry up a batch of catfish, put it all together, and, oh,
honey.
SERVES 4
½ cup mayonnaise
2 tablespoons chopped sweet pickles
1 ½ teaspoons liquid from the pickle jar
¼ teaspoon Paula Deen’s House Seasoning (page 435)
Dash of hot sauce
1 to 2 baguettes (French bread)
4 Fried Catfish fillets (opposite)
2 medium beefsteak tomatoes, sliced
cup shredded iceberg lettuce
1 red onion, thinly sliced
1. Preheat the broiler.
2. In a small bowl, combine the mayonnaise, pickles, pickle liquid, House
Seasoning, and hot sauce, to make a homemade tartar sauce.
3. Cut the bread crosswise into four 7-inch sections, then split each section
horizontally. Place the bread cut side up on a baking sheet. Broil until toasted,
about 1 minute.
4. Spread the cut surfaces of the toasted bread with the tartar sauce. For each
serving, sandwich the fish, tomato, lettuce, and onion between 2 bread halves.
Serve while the fish is hot.
DIY SAUCE
Homemade tartar sauce is real easy. It’s just a mayonnaise sauce with a coarsely
chopped pickled vegetable stirred through. I like to add some liquid from the
pickle jar for a little extra zing, and maybe some herbs like tarragon, dill, basil,
o
r
p
a
r
s
l
e
y
t
o
f
a
n
c
y
i
t
u
p.
LOW-COUNTRY BOIL
At its simplest, a good old Low-Country boil can be cooked up in a big pot on a
fire on the beach, then poured out onto newspapers to enjoy right there. But you
can create the same carefree beach feeling in your home, too—just get out your
biggest pot, pick up some summer corn and new taters along with your fresh
shrimp and smoked sausage, and put it all together. While it’s cooking, lay
newspapers down on a big table, put on your flip-flops, chill some drinks, and
call in everyone around. Wherever you make it, Low-Country boil is a party in a
pot!
SERVES 6
Crab boil seasoning (see box)
12 small red potatoes
pieces (4 inches long) good smoked sausage, such as andouille
6 ears corn
3 pounds large shrimp, with shells
Butter, for serving
Toasted bread, for serving
1. Fill a large pot with enough water to cover all the ingredients. Add 2
teaspoons crab boil seasoning for every quart of water and bring to a boil over
medium-high heat. (Add more crab boil if you like a lot of spice.) 2. Add the
potatoes and sausage to the boiling water and cook over medium heat for 20
minutes. Add the corn and cook for 10 minutes. Add the shrimp and cook for no
more than 3 minutes. You do not want to overcook the shrimp!
3. Drain and serve with plenty of butter for the corn, piping-hot toast, and icecold beer.
ON THE BOIL
There are two ways you can go with the crab boil seasoning for your LowCountry boil: the spicier Louisiana style (like Zatarain’s) or the milder Maryland
style (like Old Bay).

Down South, we cook outside just about year-round, so folks get creative. The
way I see it, there are two great reasons to grill and barbecue outside: the flavor
is incredible, and it’s just about the most fun you can have making dinner. When
I fire up our outdoor kitchen, I intend to cook a no-mess, no-fuss meal, and to
stay out there while I do it—chatting and enjoying the view. I tell you, there is
no better appetizer in the world than smelling those good smells and waiting for
your food to be cooked just right.
Whether you have a full outdoor kitchen or a tabletop grill, there are so many
things you can do. Go out there with your rib eye on a plate and your bowl of
mustard glaze, or your fresh salmon and some maple glaze. Then sear the meat
or fish good on both sides, brush on your sauce, and, honey, that’s all she wrote.
Give your steak or seafood a hit of big flavor, like I do for my Cajun Flank Steak
with a Kick (page 218). Don’t move the meat around too much or you won’t get
a nice brown crust. I love my Perfect Char-Grilled Filet Mignon (page 217) for
that reason. And I don’t think you’ll need to be convinced about my grilled
Butter Burgers (page 219): they’re so darn good they’ll make you wanna slap
your mama!
Anytime I run out of ideas in my kitchen, I head out back to make Beer Can
Chicken (page 211). When you stand the bird up on that can of beer, the entire
chicken gets so beautifully browned. I stick rosemary sprigs in the beer and it
just permeates the whole thing. Another go-to recipe is Quick BBQ Chicken
(page 213) with my Daddy’s Tangy Grilling Sauce (page 212). For the last 15
minutes of cooking he would swab his grilled chicken with that sauce until it
was cooked to perfection.
If grilling is the speedy hare, Southern barbecue is the good old tortoise: the
low, slow cooking that folks take so seriously on the barbecue circuit. To me,
you can’t get any more Southern than smoking a whole pig over wood. Where I
come from, that is barbecue. And nothing fills my heart like sticking my head
out the door to check up on Michael while he’s trying out some type of wood in
his smoker, keeping his eye on a few racks of Memphis Dry-Rub Ribs (page
225).
Here in Georgia we’re mainly pig eaters, but when I was shooting one of my
shows, I had the opportunity to do some traveling along the barbecue belt, and
some of the finest ’cue that I tasted was in San Antonio, Texas. I met this
cowboy with a real old-timey chuck wagon, and he had a big fire going, making
his own charcoal and cooking brisket. That cowboy slow-cooked that meat and
worked that fire for 10 hours. And it was out of this world. I hardly knew the
man, but when he cut me a piece of that brisket I said, “I’m sorry, but I’m in love
with you. That is the best thing I’ve ever tasted!” There’s something so powerful
about cooking outside, y’all, it could make you kiss a man you just met!
These days most people have gas grills, but if you have a charcoal grill,
proceed as usual with the recipes here. Just be sure to watch those flames!
BEER CAN CHICKEN
When you stand that bird up on a can of beer, you achieve two things: You
expose every bit of that skin to the heat of your oven, so it has the chance to get
browned and crispy all over. And your can of beer is going to turn into steam as
it heats, giving off great flavor and cooking the chicken from the inside out. I use
a rotisserie chicken–style spice rub on the skin and a real traditional barbecue
sauce, and I tell you, it is just a revelation every time we make this.
SERVES 4
Dry Rub 2 teaspoons salt
2 teaspoons paprika
2 teaspoons light brown sugar
1 teaspoon celery salt
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 teaspoon mustard powder
1 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon garlic powder
1 teaspoon chili powder
inch of cayenne pepper
Barbecue Sauce
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
¾ cup finely chopped yellow onion
2 teaspoons finely chopped garlic
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons light brown sugar
1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
½ cup ketchup
2 tablespoons yellow mustard
½ cup apple cider vinegar
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
Dash of Worcestershire sauce
Chicken
1 whole chicken (5 pounds), rinsed and patted dry
1 can (12 ounces) light beer
3 sprigs fresh rosemary (optional)
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.
2. To make the dry rub: In a medium bowl, combine all the ingredients. (The
dry rub can be stored in an airtight container and kept for 6 months.) 3. To make
the barbecue sauce: In a medium saucepan, heat the oil over medium-high heat.
Add the onion and garlic and cook until soft, about 5 minutes. Stir in remaining
ingredients and ¼ cup water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat and simmer for
10 minutes. Remove from the heat. Reserve some of the barbecue sauce for
serving.
NEAR BEER
If you’d rather not use a regular beer, go ahead and substitute a nonalcoholic
beer. Your chicken won’t know the difference!
4. Preheat the grill to medium. Rub the chicken all over with 2 to 3
tablespoons of the dry rub, making sure to get some around the cavity opening as
well. Open the beer can and pour out about ¼ cup. Stick the rosemary sprigs, if
using, in the can, then place the can, keeping it upright, into the rear cavity of the
chicken. Carefully place the chicken, standing up on the can, in the center of the
grill. Try not to spill any beer.
5. Cover the grill and cook the chicken for about 1 hour, turning as necessary
to get an even color. The chicken is done when its juices run clear when pierced
with a fork. Carefully remove the beer can from the chicken using oven mitts
and let the chicken rest 10 minutes before carving. The chicken will be crispycrunchy on the outside and falling off the bone on the inside. Serve with the
reserved barbecue sauce on the side and just watch them dig in.
Hold the cleaned and seasoned chicken, neck side up, over a beer can and
insert the can into the cavity of the chicken. Pull the chicken legs forward to
form a tripod so the chicken stands upright.
DADDY’S TANGY GRILLING SAUCE
My daddy’s sauce endeared him to many of the people in our little community in
Albany, Georgia. I remember a fine lady named Ms. Plant—she was the Dean of
Girls at my school, a member of our church, and a sponsor of our cheerleading
team—and she once attended one of our family’s chicken barbecues. Ms. Plant
just went crazy for Daddy and his sauce, and I think she fell in love with them
both! You’ll see why when you taste this buttery, tangy sauce. There’s nothing
better.
MAKES 1 ½ CUPS
1 cup Worcestershire sauce
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
Juice of 2 lemons
In a medium saucepan, combine all the ingredients and simmer for 10
minutes. And just like that, you’ve got the most wonderful grilling sauce for all
types of meat.
DON’T CRASH AND BURN
When you’re using grilling sauces or barbecue sauces, especially those with
sugar in them, be extra careful that your marinade doesn’t burn on the outside of
your meat. Don’t brush the sauce over your meat until the last 10 or 15 minutes
of grilling time, to prevent any charred flavor in your dish.
QUICK BBQ CHICKEN
This is your weeknight, feed-everyone-fast barbecue chicken, and it cannot be
beat. Children and adults adore this recipe, so you might want to pick up an extra
pack of legs and thighs in case everyone eats twice their share. It has happened.
SERVES 4
1½ cups bottled barbecue sauce
½ teaspoon freshly grated orange zest
¼ cup orange juice
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
2 dashes of hot sauce
1 whole chicken (3½ pounds), rinsed, patted dry, and cut into 8 pieces
1. In a large bowl, combine the barbecue sauce, orange zest, orange juice,
garlic, and hot sauce. Remove½ cup of the sauce and set aside to use as a baste.
Add the chicken to the sauce remaining in the bowl and toss to coat. Let the
chicken sit in the marinade while you preheat the grill.
2. Lightly grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium.
Place the chicken skin side up on the grill, cover, and cook for 10 minutes. Turn
the chicken, baste with half of the reserved basting sauce, cover, and cook for
another 10 minutes. Turn the chicken skin side up, brush with the remaining
sauce, cover, and cook until an instant-read thermometer registers 170°F when
inserted into the breasts and 180°F when inserted into the thighs, about 10
minutes more. Let rest for 5 minutes before serving. And don’t forget to pass
around plenty of napkins!
ALMOST HOMEMADE
Just because you’re short on time doesn’t mean you have to be short on flavor.
Using store-bought sauce as a starting point for homemade dinners is a great
time-saver. But if you happen to have some leftover homemade barbecue sauce,
you can use that instead.
SHRIMP KEBABS
Folks love kebabs—they’re fun to put together and they look so pretty on the
plate. Well, that’s fine by me, as long as they cook fast and have a ton of flavor.
This shrimp number fills the bill on all counts.
SERVES 6
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
1 ½ teaspoons Paula Deen’s House Seasoning(page 435)
¼ cup sliced scallions
tablespoons vegetable oil
pound large shrimp, peeled and deveined
Thread the shrimp onto two skewers to prevent them from spinning when
you turn them on the grill.
1 ½ cups cherry tomatoes
2 teaspoons chopped fresh parsley, for garnish
12 metal skewers
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the lemon juice and House Seasoning.
Whisk in the scallions and oil. In a large bowl, combine the shrimp and
tomatoes. Pour the lemon marinade over the shrimp mixture. Cover with plastic
wrap and refrigerate for 1 hour.
2. Thread the shrimp and tomatoes onto the metal skewers; pierce each shrimp
with two skewers and the tomatoes with one.
3. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to high.
4. Place the kebabs on the grill, cover, and cook, turning once halfway through
the cooking time, until the tomatoes are lightly charred and the shrimp are just
cooked through and pink, about 2 minutes per side. Serve sprinkled with the
parsley.
KNOCK ON WOOD
If you don’t have metal skewers in your kitchen drawer, you can always
substitute wooden ones. Just be sure to give them a good soak in water for about
30 minutes before you thread them—that way they won’t burn on the grill.
MUSTARD-GLAZED RIB EYES
I believe that you should let your meat taste like meat. I never douse my steak in
steak sauce, and it always makes me a little sad to see a nice thick steak cooked
past medium-rare. But give it a little something, like this delicious glaze of
mustard, bourbon, and brown sugar, and you’re just saying, “Here you go, y’all,
my special rib eye steaks, treated respectfully, with a light hand on the
seasonings to just celebrate how stinkin’ delicious this beef is.”
SERVES 2 TO 4
2 boneless rib eye steaks (1 pound each, 1½ inches thick)
Salt and black pepper
2 teaspoons olive oil
1 teaspoon plus
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard
1 tablespoon bourbon
1 tablespoon plus
2 teaspoons light brown sugar
1. Generously sprinkle the steaks all over with salt and black pepper. Rub
them with the oil and the 1 teaspoon mustard.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the bourbon, brown sugar, ½ teaspoon
salt,½ teaspoon black pepper, and the 2 tablespoons mustard to make the glaze.
3. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
Place the steaks on the grill, cover, and cook for 3 minutes. Flip the steaks,
cover, and cook for 3 minutes longer. Brush the tops with half the glaze, flip the
steaks, cover, and cook for 2 minutes. Brush the tops with the remaining glaze,
flip once more, and cook uncovered until the steaks reach the doneness you like,
2 minutes more for medium-rare. Let rest for 5 minutes before slicing and
serving up with all their yummy juices.
HIGH STEAKS
Rib eye is the true steak lover’s steak. With its excellent marbling of fat, it is just
jam-packed full of good beef flavor. And talk about tender! In my opinion, this is
the ultimate grilling steak.
GRILLED RIB EYE WITH GARLIC BUTTER
I recall the first time I came face-to-face with a snail in a fancy French
restaurant. All I could do was wiggle my nose over the little things. What was
that wonderful smell? Well, to my relief, it was garlic butter, which y’all can
make anytime and serve over just about anything. It makes one heck of a partner
for a nice steak. I just love my beef buttery.
SERVES 2 TO 4
4 large cloves garlic, finely chopped Salt
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter, at room temperature
2 teaspoons dried thyme
½ teaspoon black pepper
2 boneless rib eye steaks (1 pound each, 1 ½ inches thick)
1. Using a mortar and pestle or the flat side of a knife, mash the garlic with a
large pinch of salt until it forms a paste. In a medium bowl, combine the garlic
paste, butter, thyme, black pepper, and 1 teaspoon salt. Smear half the mixture
on both sides of the steaks. Cover with plastic wrap and let stand for 30 minutes
at room temperature to soak up all that flavor.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
Place the steaks on the grill, cover, and cook, turning occasionally, until the
steaks reach the doneness you like, about 5 minutes per side for medium-rare.
Place on a plate and drop the remaining garlic butter on the hot steaks. Let rest
for 5 minutes before slicing and serving. The garlic butter will melt on the hot
steak and give it a rich buttery sauce.
COMPOUND INTEREST
Compound butter is just a fancy term for a butter that has been softened and then
mixed with a flavoring, like the one above. Compound butters can be combined
with anything from dried spices to fresh herbs, from citrus zest to spirits. Wrap
the butter tightly in plastic wrap and keep it in your fridge for up to a month.
PERFECT CHAR-GRILLED FILET MIGNON
Tenderloin is so buttery that cooking it right is the name of the game. Here, you
give it a boost of flavor with a flavorful dressing, then you wrap those steaks in
bacon and cook them on the grill until they have a perfect char and a great
smoky flavor from the bacon. If you’ve got yourself a meat-and-potatoes type of
man, this is a great start for a romantic evening. Start the meat marinating, light
the grill, then slip into something more comfortable.
SERVES 2
1 bottle (8 ounces) zesty Italian salad dressing
2 beef tenderloin fillets (10 ounces each, 1 ½ to 2 inches thick)
2 slices bacon
2 tablespoons Lea & Perrins steak sauce
1. Pour the salad dressing into a shallow pan. Place the steaks in the pan and
coat all over with the marinade. Cover with plastic wrap and let marinate in the
refrigerator for 3 to 4 hours.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
Wrap a strip of bacon around each steak, securing it with a toothpick. Place the
steaks on the grill, cover, and cook, turning only once, until the steaks reach the
doneness you like, about 8 minutes per side for medium-rare. Transfer the steaks
to a platter. Combine the steak sauce with 2 teaspoons water and baste the steaks
on each side. Let rest for a few minutes, then serve it up.
WAIT YOUR TURN
For perfectly cooked fillet mignon, you’ve got to leave them be. Turn them only
once during cooking and they will come out evenly cooked on both sides.
To create direct heat when using a charcoal grill, mound charcoal into the
center of the grill. Light the coals, and when they are white hot, cook the
meat directly over the hottest spot.
CAJUN FLANK STEAK WITH A KICK
I love a piece of beef with a little chew, and flank steak is perfect in that regard.
It also has a real beefy flavor, which is so satisfying. This recipe delivers with a
nice hit of fire thanks to hot sauce, cayenne pepper, and spicy Cajun seasoning.
Chill some drinks to put out the flames and get out your steak knives.
SERVES 4
1 ½ pounds flank steak
Salt 2 tablespoons olive oil
4 teaspoons Cajun seasoning
½ teaspoon hot sauce Pinch of cayenne pepper
1. Generously sprinkle both sides of the steak with salt. In a wide, shallow
bowl, combine the oil, Cajun seasoning, hot sauce, and cayenne pepper. Rub the
mixture all over the steak. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 2
hours or overnight.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high
heat. Place the steak on the grill, cover, and cook until the steak reaches the
doneness you like, 4 to 5 minutes per side for medium-rare. Let rest for 5
minutes before slicing and serving. This one packs a punch, folks!
FABULOUS FLANK
Flank steak is a wonderful grilling meat, and it is one of the less expensive beef
cuts, so it can be on the tough side if it’s not marinated. But once you’ve slapped
a marinade on a flank steak, the grill is where it ought to be cooked.
BUTTER BURGERS
Here’s a story about my butter burgers, y’all: One night I had all the family over
for hamburgers. Now, I was in the mood for a good ol’ char-grilled hamburger,
and I took my real cold butter and cut it up in little cubes. And I salted and
peppered my burger meat, and then I worked those cubes of butter up in that
meat. And my nephew Jeremy came over and said, “What’s that in the
hamburgers?” So my niece, Corrie, leaned over and told him, “Jeremy, that’s
garlic!” “It’s garlic?” I said. Then she whispered, “He won’t eat it if he knows
there’s butter in there because he’s workin’ on his diet.” So after dinner he came
up and said, “Aunt Paula, that garlic was so good in those burgers. It gave them
such flavor!” Corrie and I just busted out laughin’ and we finally told him. There
is nothin’ better than a butter burger, and sometimes deception is the most
delicious policy.
SERVES 4
2 pounds ground beef
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, cut into small cubes
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon black pepper
4 hamburger buns, split Tomato slices, onion slices, and lettuce, for
serving
1. In a large bowl, mix together the beef, butter, salt, and black pepper. Form
into 4 patties about 1 inch thick. Place on a baking sheet.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium. Place the
burgers on the grill, cover, and cook, turning once, until the burgers reach the
doneness you like, 7 to 9 minutes for medium-rare. Just before the burgers are
done, put the buns on toward the back of the grill to toast.
3. Sandwich the burgers in the buns and top with tomato, onion, lettuce, and
whatever other delicious toppings y’all like on your burgers.
BBQ TOAST
When I’m grilling up burgers, I like to go ahead and toast my hamburger buns
right there on the grill toward the last minute or so, so they’re ready when my
burgers are!

GRILLED RED PEPPER SCALLOPS
To me, a good grilled scallop is so delicious and buttery—few things taste better!
And this is such a pretty way to dress one up. I char my red bell peppers, peel
’em, then cut strips of that smoky red pepper flesh to wrap around the scallops.
You can grill or broil the scallops, and count on “Ooh’s” and “Aah’s” either way.
SERVES 6
1 ½ pounds large sea scallops
2 tablespoons olive oil Grated zest of
1 lemon Black pepper
4 large red bell peppers
1. In a medium bowl, combine the scallops, oil, lemon zest, and black pepper
to taste. Cover tightly with plastic wrap and refrigerate while you prepare the
bell peppers.
2. Preheat the broiler or grill to high heat. Halve the bell peppers lengthwise
and remove the stems, seeds, and ribs. If broiling, place the bell peppers skin
side up on a baking sheet; if grilling, place the peppers skin side down. Broil or
grill, without turning, until the skin is charred, 6 to 10 minutes. Place in a paper
bag, close the top up tight, and let the bell peppers steam for 10 minutes.
Remove the charred skins and cut the bell peppers lengthwise into ¾-inch-wide
strips.
3. Wrap a bell pepper strip around each scallop to cover completely,
overlapping the pepper ends. Secure the strips by running a 10-inch metal
skewer through the scallop and the bell pepper. Divide the scallops among 6
skewers.
4. If the grill is not already on, grease the grate and preheat. Place the skewers
on the grill, cover, and cook, turning once, until the scallops are almost firm to
the touch, 1 to 2 minutes on each side. (Or cook under the broiler for about 3
minutes per side.) Then serve them up just as soon as you can.
DO AHEAD
When I broil or grill red bell peppers, I like to do a big batch so that I have them
on hand in the fridge. After they’re cooked, just cover them in olive oil, close
them up tightly, and they will keep in the fridge for up to a week. Those leftover
peppers can be added to sandwiches and salads.
MAPLE-GLAZED SALMON
To my taste, a nice rich piece of salmon needs just a little lift—like this tangysweet glaze, which has a pinch of mustard powder and a nice splash of vinegar
in it to pep up the syrup. The glaze caramelizes as you grill the fish, and it is just
a lovely everyday (or special-occasion) way to serve this popular fish.
SERVES 4
4 skin-on salmon fillets (6 to 8 ounces each)
Salt and black pepper
2 teaspoons olive oil
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
3 tablespoons maple syrup
1 ½ teaspoons apple cider vinegar
¾ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
¾ teaspoon mustard powder
1. Generously sprinkle the salmon all over with salt and black pepper. Rub
each fillet with ½ teaspoon of the oil.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the butter, syrup, vinegar, Worcestershire
sauce, mustard powder, and ¾ teaspoon black pepper to make the glaze.
3. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
Place the salmon skin side down on the grill, cover, and cook for 4 minutes.
Brush the tops generously with the glaze, flip the salmon, cover, and cook until
they reach the doneness you like, about 5 minutes for medium-rare. Carefully
remove the fish from the grill and place skin side down on a pretty serving
platter.
UNDER
THE SKIN Keeping the skin on this salmon is important for a couple reasons.
First, under the skin is a layer of fat next to the meat that keeps the fish moist
and flavorful. The skin also provides stability for flipping the fillet, ensuring that
the salmon won’t curl up and flake apart.
BENNE SEED GRILLED TUNA STEAKS
My Bobby grills him some tuna about five nights out of the week, so when I
make him a meal, either I’ll go whole hog and serve that boy up some fried pork
chops or I’ll get with his program and pick up some tuna steaks. But I like to
jazz up grilled tuna with a soy-bourbon marinade and a nice coating of benne
seeds, which are also known as sesame seeds.
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons soy sauce
2 tablespoons bourbon
¾ teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 tablespoon sesame oil
4 tuna steaks (8 ounces each)
¾ cup benne seeds (sesame seeds)
1. In a wide, shallow bowl, whisk together the soy sauce, bourbon, and black
pepper, then whisk in the oils. Add the tuna steaks and toss to coat well with the
mixture. Cover tightly with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 1 hour.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
Place benne seeds in a shallow bowl or pie plate and place next to the grill. Place
the tuna steaks on the grill, cover, and cook, turning once, for 2 minutes per side.
Remove the steaks from the grill and quickly press each side of the steaks in the
benne seeds. Return to the grill to cook, turning once, until the seeds are lightly
browned, about 1 minute per side.
A HAPPY MEDIUM
If you like your tuna cooked more than medium-rare, add 1 to 2 minutes to the
cooking time before coating the tuna with the benne seeds. That way, the seeds
won’t burn. Once you’ve got those seeds on your tuna, you want to cook it only
another minute or two.
BOBBY’S GRILLED TUNA BURGERS
Bobby will eat a Butter Burger (page 219) if I stare him down, but he’s happier
fixing these healthy patties made with fresh tuna as a lighter alternative. You
can’t compare—it’s apples to oranges—but these are mighty satisfying and
flavorful, I must say.
SERVES 4
1 ½ pounds yellowfin tuna, finely chopped
¼ cup finely chopped Vidalia or other sweet onion
3 tablespoons Dijon mustard
2 teaspoons finely chopped garlic
2 teaspoons finely grated lemon zest
1 ½ teaspoons salt
¾ teaspoon black pepper
4 hamburger buns, split
Mayonnaise, tomato slices, and shredded lettuce, for serving
1. In a medium bowl, combine the tuna, onion, mustard, garlic, lemon zest,
salt, and black pepper. Mix gently and shape the mixture into 4 patties 1 inch
thick. Cover tightly with plastic wrap and refrigerate until cold and firm, about
30 minutes.
2. Grease the grate well by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to mediumhigh.
3. Place the burgers on the grill, cover, and cook, turning once, until well
browned all over and just cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Place the
buns on the grill, cut side down, for the last minute of cooking and toast lightly.
4. Spread the cut sides of the buns with a little mayonnaise. Sandwich the
burgers in the buns, and top with tomatoes and lettuce. I’m telling you, these
burgers are so good, they’ll give my Butter Burgers a run for their money!
PUT THE CHILL ON
Try not to overhandle the tuna while you’re getting your patties ready. And give
the patties 30 minutes in the fridge after you’ve formed them so that they hold
together nicely on the grill.
GRILLED VEGGIE BASKET
There’s always something to be said for grilling your whole meal outside, once
you’re out there, so I love a side like this that comes together easy and cooks
right next to your main protein. I use a dressing-type marinade to soften the
veggies and give them a nice flavor before I cook them, and I just love the sweet,
blackened bits that appear on their edges.
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
¼ teaspoon dried oregano
1 clove garlic, finely chopped
3 tablespoons olive oil
8 ounces white mushrooms, stems trimmed and caps halved
1 zucchini or summer squash, cut crosswise into ¼ -inch-thick slices
1 green bell pepper, cut into ¼ -inch-wide strips
1 red onion, cut into ¼ -inch-thick rings
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the vinegar, salt, black pepper, oregano, and
garlic. Whisk in the oil to make the marinade. Combine the mushrooms,
zucchini, bell pepper, and onion in a shallow dish. Pour the marinade over the
vegetables and let stand while the grill heats up.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
Place the vegetables in a grill basket. Cover and cook, turning once, until the
vegetables are slightly charred and cooked through, about 20 minutes. Serve the
vegetables hot and just wait and see—even the meat lovers will flock to this one.
GRILL GADGET
A grill basket is a big help when you’re grilling foods that could easily slip
through the spaces in the grill grate. There are open grill baskets that look just
like flat-bottomed colanders and enclosed grill baskets with long handles. With a
grill basket, you can turn your food without worrying that it will slip through the
grate as you’re flipping it over.
MEMPHIS DRY-RUB RIBS
You can just do so much with ribs. As long as you give them time to cook, you
will be very happy you bothered. I love doing ribs on the grill or in the oven, and
I like to use a dry rub to really infuse them with flavor all through. This
particular blend of seasonings—brown sugar, paprika, and a host of other spices
—is my tribute to the fine barbecue of Memphis, Tennessee. Michael teases me
about my habit of gnawing on bones, but you just try to use a knife and fork on
these babies—you’d be missing out!
SERVES 4
2 racks (1 ½ pounds each) baby back ribs
1½ teaspoons salt 2 teaspoons light brown sugar
2 teaspoons paprika 1
1½ teaspoons garlic powder
1½ teaspoons chili powder
½ teaspoons ground cumin
1 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon dried oregano
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
1. Place the ribs in a large roasting pan. In a small bowl, combine all the
remaining ingredients to make the spice rub. Rub the spice mixture all over the
ribs. Get in there real good and make sure you don’t miss any spots. Cover
tightly with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 2 hours or overnight.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. When you are ready to cook the ribs,
preheat the grill. Adjust the heat for low, indirect grilling. Place the ribs over
indirect heat, cover, and cook, turning occasionally, until the ribs are tender and
just about falling off the bone, 3 to 3½ hours. These ribs are certainly worth the
wait.
If using a charcoal grill, start the charcoal as usual, then push the coals to
either side of the grill, creating an area in the middle that does not have
coals burning directly underneath. If using a gas grill, leave the center
burner unlit but light the side burners. Place the ribs over the center.
OVEN VARIATION
Try cooking these ribs in the oven if the weather outside is rotten. Simply
preheat the oven to 325°F, pour a few tablespoons of water into the bottom of a
roasting pan, and place the ribs in the pan. Cover the pan and cook until the ribs
are very tender, about 2 ½ hours. Run the ribs under the broiler for a few minutes
to brown them up before serving.
SMOKY STEAK FAJITAS
Making fajitas is always a fiesta. You know it’s all about the fixings, from the
guacamole and salsa and sour cream to that indispensable squeeze of fresh lime
juice. I marinate flank steak with lime and spices before grilling to give it extra
flavor.
SERVES 4 TO 6
1 ½ pounds flank steak
¼ cup olive oil
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
1 jalapeño pepper, finely chopped (leave in the seeds if you want more
heat)
½ teaspoons ground cumin
¾ teaspoon garlic powder
Salt and black pepper
1 green bell pepper, cut lengthwise into ¼ -inch-wide strips
1 Vidalia or other sweet onion, cut into ¼ -inch-thick slices
6 flour tortillas (8 inches)
Guacamole, salsa, and sour cream, for serving
1. Place the steak in a shallow bowl. In a small bowl, whisk together the olive
oil, lime juice, jalapeño, cumin, garlic powder, 1 teaspoon salt, and ½ teaspoon
black pepper. Pour the marinade over the steak, turning to coat all over. Cover
the bowl with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 1 hour or overnight. Let the
steak come to room temperature for 30 minutes before grilling.
2. Grease the grate by brushing with oil. Preheat the grill to medium-high.
3. Brush the bell pepper and onion with some olive oil and sprinkle lightly
with salt and black pepper. Place the onion in a single layer in a grill basket.
Place the basket on the grill, cover, and cook, turning, until the onion is soft and
slightly charred, 4 to 5 minutes per side. Set the onion on a plate.
4. Place the bell pepper in a single layer in the grill basket. Place the basket on
the grill, cover, and cook, turning, until the bell pepper is tender and slightly
charred, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Set on a plate separate from the onion.
5. Increase the grill heat to high. Remove the steak from the marinade, place
on the grill, cover, and cook, turning once, until the steak reaches the doneness
you like, 4 minutes per side for medium-rare. Let the steak rest for 5 minutes on
a cutting board before slicing thinly.
FILL ’ER UP
Why stop with just steak? Fajitas are such a great party food! I like to set out
grilled shrimp, chicken, portobello mushrooms, you name it. You can use the
same marinade for shrimp, chicken, and vegetables as you use for the steak in
this recipe.
6. Place the tortillas on the grill and cook, uncovered, until lightly colored,
about 1 minute per side.
7. Set everything out on a big table and let your guests fill the tortillas with
steak, bell peppers, and onion and top with guacamole, salsa, and sour cream.
Roll up the tortillas and let the fun begin.
BBQ PORK LOIN
Cooking a pork loin on the grill is a healthy way to get your grilled pork fix. I
slather on plenty of my daddy’s sauce, and that hunk of meat ends up just tender,
juicy, and full of flavor. It satisfies carnivores and health kickers, and you know
I’ve got both in my family!
SERVES 6 TO 8
4 cloves garlic, finely chopped Salt
¼ cup olive oil
1 ½ teaspoons black pepper
1 boneless pork loin roast (3 pounds)
Daddy’s Tangy Grilling Sauce (page 212) or 1½ cups of your favorite
sauce
1. Using a mortar and pestle or the flat side of a knife, mash the garlic with a
pinch of salt until it forms a paste. In a medium bowl, whisk together the garlic
paste, oil, 1 ½ teaspoons salt, and the black pepper. Place the pork in a large
bowl and rub the mixture all over the pork. Cover with plastic wrap and
refrigerate for at least 2 hours or overnight.
2. When you are ready to cook the pork, preheat the grill. Adjust the heat for
low, indirect grilling. Place the pork over indirect heat, cover, and cook, turning
occasionally, for 30 minutes.
Remove from the heat and brush the pork with half the grilling sauce. Return
the pork to indirect heat on the grill, cover, and cook, turning occasionally, until
an instant-read thermometer registers 155°F when inserted into the pork, about
30 minutes. Place on a cutting board and brush with the remaining sauce. Let
rest for 10 minutes before slicing and arranging on a pretty platter.
GENTLE HEATING
Large pieces of meat that need longer cooking on the grill are best cooked using
indirect heat, meaning not directly over a flame. To create indirect heat in a
charcoal grill, you need to bank all the coals to either side of the grill, leaving an
area in the center that has no hot coals directly beneath. Then, I put a pan with a
little water in it under the grate in the space where there aren’t any coals. When
the grill cover is closed, this creates a nice and steamy environment for the meat
to cook gently. If you’re using a gas grill, just turn on the burners to either side
of the area where your meat is placed.

Southern food takes some bad hits, y’all: people say it’s not very healthy. Well, I
happen to know a lot of old Southerners who have lived long, long lives eating
the Southern staples down here. And since I’ve had the opportunity to travel
around the United States, I have deduced that there’s something to this: The
South eats more vegetables than any other region I’ve been in. We eat more
cucumbers, tomatoes, butter beans, black-eyed peas, fresh corn, and okra, not to
mention our pickles, and our collards, turnip greens, and mustard greens.
Southerners don’t just buy vegetables at the store, we also grow our own, so
we know the glory of freshly harvested corn and peas from the garden. When I
was a girl, my Aunt Peggy and Uncle George would let me plant a bit of their
garden. I grew okra, peas, and tomatoes. Grandmama Paul and I would go out
there and harvest, and make all kinds of pickles. Gardening brought my
grandmama so much pleasure. Even after she could hardly walk, she would put
down a piece of cardboard, get on her hands and knees, and scoot along her
rows, then get back up holding on to her walker.
While I don’t have much land (or time) for it, I do garden year-round. In cold
weather I grow broccoli, cauliflower, lettuces, mustard greens, and collards. I
mix together all my cooking greens in one big pot, simmer them down till
they’re tender and silky, then add some butter at the end, and they are so stinkin’
outrageous. People rave over those greens. In the spring we plant our cucumbers,
tomatoes, and all the herbs that I love. To just have an opportunity to have a few
things from my own garden is a reward that I look forward to. Making Fried
Green Tomatoes (page 254), Fried Cabbage (page 266), Sautéed Summer Squash
(page 263), and Southern-Style Green Beans with Bacon and Tomato (page 262)
from my very own garden allows me to stay in touch with where I came from.
In addition to the bounty of the garden, grits are one of the biggest Southern
staples. That’s because corn was one of those crops that we could count on down
here, and grits are nothing but ground-up dried hominy corn. I swear, we have
found a way to eat it four times a day—at breakfast, lunch, and dinner, and in a
pie for dessert. I remember Mama would pour any leftover grits into a glass and
put it in the refrigerator, and the next day she’d take her knife, run it around her
glass so this cylinder came out, and slice that up to fry into grits cakes. I do my
grits plain, or I do Cheese Grits (page 234) or even Cheesy Tomato Grits (page
235). Grits are very inexpensive, so they’re a great way to fill up a hungry
family for almost no money. But you can’t convince me that they’re not worth a
million dollars.
ORIGINAL GRITS
Grits are such a staple down South, you’d be hard-pressed to find a household
that doesn’t have them in the pantry. This recipe is so easy—you could just do it
in your sleep! It’s a true Southern classic that can be dressed up or down,
depending on the occasion.
SERVES 4
1 cup stone-ground grits (not instant or quick-cooking)
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
In a medium saucepan, bring 4 cups water to a boil. Slowly whisk in the
grits, salt, and black pepper. Whisk constantly for 1 minute. Reduce the heat to
the lowest possible setting and cook the grits until all the water is absorbed and
the grits are thick and creamy, about 40 minutes or a bit longer. Take the grits off
the heat and stir in the butter until it melts. Keep the grits covered until you’re
ready to serve them so that a hard skin doesn’t form on the top of the grits.
TODAY’S GRITS, TOMORROW’S GRITS CAKES
To make a day-after treat out of leftover grits, spoon warm grits into a clean can
or wide-mouthed jar. Cover with the lid or just use some plastic wrap and
refrigerate until fully chilled, at least 3 hours or overnight. When you’re ready to
make up your cakes, run a thin, flexible knife or an offset spatula around the
edge of the can to loosen the grits and pop them out of the can. Slice the grits log
crosswise into ½-inch slabs and fry them in hot butter until golden brown and
heated through. Now, that is a true taste of the South!
CHEESE GRITS
I enjoy plain old grits so much, I might neglect to make these delicious cheesy
baked grits. But cheese makes these simple grits so luxurious and silky, I could
eat the whole mess if I didn’t have to share ’em. Stone-ground grits are
wonderful, but because they take so long to cook, I usually go with quickcooking grits—which I also love. But I never make the instant kind—some
things a Southerner just won’t do!
SERVES 6
1 cup quick-cooking grits
1 ½ teaspoons salt
2 large eggs
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, cut up
1 ½ cups shredded combined Monterey Jack and Cheddar cheese (6
ounces total), plus extra for topping
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
Dash of cayenne pepper
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. In a medium saucepan, bring 4 cups water to a boil. Slowly whisk in the
grits and salt. Whisk constantly for 1 minute. Reduce the heat, cover, and cook
for 20 minutes, or until the grits are thick and creamy.
3. In a small bowl, lightly beat the eggs. Take about 1 tablespoon of the hot
cooked grits and whisk it into the eggs. Stir the warmed eggs back into the pan
of grits and stir well to combine. Stir in the butter, cheese, garlic, and cayenne
pepper.
4. Spoon the mixture into a 2-quart baking dish. Bake for 45 minutes. And go
ahead and top the casserole with some extra grated cheese in the last 5 minutes
of baking, because you just can’t get enough of a good thing.
TEMPER, TEMPER
I tell you, eggs are a temperamental food! They have a nasty habit of scrambling
on you when you’re adding them to something that’s hot. In order to avoid that
mess, you need to “temper” them before adding them to a hot food. That’s what
you’re doing in this recipe when you add that tablespoon of hot grits to the eggs
before pouring the eggs into the pan. You’re just bringing the temperature of the
eggs closer to the temperature of the hot food. Then, when you add the
“tempered” eggs to the pan of hot grits, be sure to stir well and constantly so the
eggs can get used to the hotter temperature.
CHEESY TOMATO GRITS
I think of this as being a bit like the Deep South’s answer to lasagna. With
cheese, spicy tomatoes, and plenty of seasonings, this is a grits casserole for
folks who like a lot of flavor. I don’t like to make generalizations, but aren’t
those always the most interesting people to have around?
SERVES 8
1 ¼ cups whole milk
1 cup quick-cooking grits
1 teaspoon salt 2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
⅓ cup finely chopped scallions
4 ounces cream cheese spread with garlic and herbs
2 ½ cups shredded Cheddar cheese (10 ounces)
1 can (10 ounces) Ro*Tel or other spicy diced tomatoes
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 9-inch square baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium saucepan, combine 2 cups water and the milk and bring to a
boil over medium-high heat. Slowly whisk in the grits and salt. Whisk constantly
for 1 minute. Reduce the heat, cover, and cook for 3 minutes. Uncover and stir in
1 tablespoon of the butter, stirring until the butter is melted. Cover and cook for
20 minutes, or until the grits are thick and creamy. Then take those grits off the
heat and let them sit a minute.
3. In a large skillet, melt the remaining 1 tablespoon butter over medium heat.
Add the scallions and cook for 1 minute.
4. Add the cream cheese spread, ½ cup of the Cheddar, and the grits to the
skillet and stir until the cheese is melted. Add the tomatoes and mix well. Stir in
the eggs. Pour the grits mixture into the prepared baking dish and bake for 35
minutes. Sprinkle the remaining 2 cups Cheddar over the top and bake until the
cheese has melted, about 5 minutes longer.
STIR CRAZY
The secret to preparing good grits is the initial stirring of the pot. So go ahead
and get yourself a workout when you’re making grits. Some good hearty stirring
will make your final dish the creamiest and silkiest possible—so your Southern
grandma can be proud.
MAPLE BACON AND HOMINY
When I talk about pork candy, I’m talking about this: crispy, maple-glazed
pieces of golden-brown bacon. It gives plump hominy corn such a nice saltysweet contrast. Everyone will love this even if they never saw a kernel of
hominy corn in their sweet life. That’s the beauty of bacon.
SERVES 4
6 slices bacon, patted dry
⅓ cup maple syrup
3 tablespoons butter
2 cans (15 ounces each) hominy, rinsed and drained
¼ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper and
coat the paper with cooking spray.
2. Arrange the bacon in a single layer on the prepared baking sheet. Coat the
bacon evenly with the syrup. Bake until the bacon is golden and caramelized,
about 25 minutes. When the bacon is cool enough to handle, chop it into bitesize pieces.
3. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the hominy and
cook, stirring, until heated through, about 5 minutes. Stir in the salt, black
pepper, and bacon and serve up.
AMAZING MAIZE
I like to say, before you can have grits, you’ve got to have hominy. That’s
because hominy is the dried white or yellow corn kernels that are ground up to
produce grits. But, believe me, they are delicious whole, too! You can find
hominy frozen, dried, or canned. Just remember that for dried hominy you need
to soak it overnight and then boil it to soften it up. The canned and frozen
hominy are already cooked and soft
NEW YEAR’S HOPPIN’ JOHN
My Granddaddy Paul was so superstitious. He would not allow me to have
goldfish as a child because they were bad luck; we could not open an umbrella in
the house because that just brought on an early death; we could not walk
underneath a ladder; and we could not have New Year’s Day come and go unless
we had collard greens to represent the money we were going to make during the
year and hoppin’ John made with black-eyed peas to bring us good luck. Go
figure. Hoppin’ John is really just a mean recipe for rice and beans and it’s
delicious any day of the year.
SERVES 6 TO 8
3 tablespoons butter
2 celery stalks, chopped
1 small green bell pepper, chopped
1 small yellow onion, chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
1 ham hock, rinsed and patted dry
2 cups frozen black-eyed peas or 2 cups canned black-eyed peas, rinsed
and drained
2 cups cooked white rice
½ teaspoon saltHot sauce
1. In a large pot, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the celery, bell
pepper, onion, and garlic and cook, stirring, until the vegetables are very tender,
7 to 10 minutes.
2. Add the ham hock, pour in enough water to just cover the ham hock, and
bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer and cook, uncovered, for 30 minutes.
3. Stir in the black-eyed peas and rice and simmer for 15 minutes longer.
Season with the salt and hot sauce to taste and be sure to invite some friends
around for this one.
DOWN THE DRAIN
Be sure to rinse your canned beans free of their canning liquid to avoid making
the dish too salty. It’s especially important to rinse in recipes that have a ham
hock or bacon in them, because those meats bring a lot of salt to the pot, too.

YAM CASSEROLE WITH PECAN CRUMBLE
Well, if there is a more Southern combination than yams and pecans out there, I
don’t need to know about it. This casserole comes together like a dessert crisp,
with a crunchy, buttery topping of nuts, cheese, and cracker crumbs scattered
over creamy sweet potatoes. I love this too much to serve it only at
Thanksgiving, but it does make a perfect side for a holiday meal.
SERVES 8 TO 10
2 cups heavy cream
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
3 to 4 medium yams or orange sweet potatoes (2½ pounds), peeled and
cut into ⅛-inch-thick rounds
1 ½ teaspoons salt
¾ teaspoon black pepper
¾ teaspoon dried thyme
1 cup crushed saltine crackers (about 20 crackers)
⅔ cup grated Parmesan cheese
½ cup chopped pecans
tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Lightly grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with
oil or coat with cooking spray.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the cream and cayenne pepper.
3. Arrange one-third of the yams in an even layer on the bottom of the
prepared dish. Season with ½ teaspoon salt and ¼ teaspoon each of the black
pepper and thyme. Pour in ⅔ cup of the cream mixture. Repeat for 2 more
layers.
4. In a small bowl, combine the cracker crumbs, Parmesan, pecans, and
melted butter. Give it a good stir so the butter coats the crackers and pe-cans.
Scatter the mixture over the top of the casserole.
5. Cover the dish with foil and bake for 15 minutes. Uncover and bake until
the top is golden brown, the yams are tender, and the house is filled with the
most wonderful sweet and buttery smells, 30 to 45 minutes longer.
AIN’T IT SWEET
Now, don’t let me confuse you with my Southernism here. The yams I call for
may be called sweet potatoes where you live. When I say yams, I’m talking
about the orange-fleshed potato that cooks up nice and sweet.
HOMEY TOMATO CASSEROLE
Southern cooks have been making meals out of a little bit of barely anything
from the garden forever, and this is the kind of good, down-home cooking that
gives me so much respect for that tradition. All you need are a few tomatoes and
some sweet, juicy Vidalia onions, and you’ve got the makings for a real
satisfying cheesy casserole. Try it alongside a few ears of steamed corn and a
steak or a piece of grilled fish for a beautiful summertime meal.
SERVES 6
2 tablespoons olive oil
4 large Vidalia or other sweet onions, cut into ¼ -inch-thick rings
1 ¼ teaspoons plus a pinch of salt
4 tomatoes (1¾ pounds), cut into ½-inch-thick slices
½ teaspoon dried oregano
1 ¼ teaspoon black pepper
½ cups shredded Cheddar cheese (6 ounces)
½ cup stale bread crumbs
2 tablespoons butter (¼ stick), melted
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Lightly grease a shallow 2-quart baking dish
(pretty enough to bring to the table) with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium-high heat. Add the onions and
cook until golden and soft, 5 to 7 minutes. Sprinkle with the pinch of salt.
3. Layer half the tomatoes in the prepared baking dish and top with half the
onions, ½ teaspoon of the salt, ¼ teaspoon of the oregano, and ⅛ teaspoon of the
black pepper. Scatter ¾ cup of the Cheddar on top. Repeat with the remaining
tomatoes and onions, another ½ teaspoon of the salt, and the remaining ¼
teaspoon oregano, ⅛ teaspoon black pepper, and ¾ cup Cheddar.
4. In a small bowl, combine the bread crumbs, melted butter, and the
remaining ¼ teaspoon salt. Sprinkle over the casserole. Bake the casserole until
the top is golden brown and the tomatoes are tender, 30 to 35 minutes. Bring that
pretty casserole right to the table.
TOP TOMATO
I like to stick with good old trusty beefsteak tomatoes for this casserole because
they are fleshy and meaty and will stay intact during the cooking process. More
important, though, look for nice ripe tomatoes so that you get all the sweetness
you can in this dish. They’ll be red all over and will yield a bit when pressed
close to the stem.
BEST BRAISED SOUTHERN GREENS
As far as I’m concerned, in order to cook good greens, you have to grease ’em a
little with bacon or butter, or—y’all know me—both! I love how after a nice
braise, this traditional mess o’ greens gives you that delicious pot liquor—the
tastiest, healthiest broth at the bottom of the braising pot. You can serve that
broth with corn bread or hoecakes to soak it up, or just slurp it up in the kitchen
all by itself in a cup. I had an elderly gentleman who came into the restaurant
regularly and never needed to order. I would just bring him a coffee mug full of
pot liquor. It’ll cure whatever ails you.
SERVES 4 TO 6
8 slices bacon, cut crosswise into ½-inch pieces
1 medium Vidalia or other sweet onion, thinly sliced
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
2 pounds collard greens, stems removed and leaves cut into ½-inch strips
Salt
Hot sauce
1. In a large saucepan, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp,
about 5 minutes. Add the onion and butter and cook until the onion is tender,
about 5 minutes longer.
2. Add 2 cups water and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to medium-low and
simmer for 10 minutes. Add the collard greens and cook, uncovered, until very
soft, about 20 minutes. Season with salt and hot sauce to taste. Place the greens
in a pretty serving bowl along with the pot liquor and set out on the table.
GREEN IS GOOD
Like most Southerners, I cannot get enough of hearty greens like collards, turnip
greens, and mustard greens. Here’s a quick way to prep ’em. First, use this trick
to trim out the thick stem (sometimes called a rib) in the center of the leaves:
Fold the leaves in half and, starting from the top, at its thinner end, pull the stem
away from the leaf. Or lay the leaves down flat on a cutting board, make a cut
down either side of the stem, and cut out the stem. Roll the leaves up (the long
way) like a cigar and then slice them crosswise to create strips.
VERY VEGGIE BRAISED GREENS
I have got to have my pot greens, and I usually like to cook them down forever
with some bacon or ham hocks. But these days we just never know when we’ll
have a vegetarian among us, so I started doing my greens with just some butter,
onion, and vegetable broth, and you know what? They’re absolutely delicious!
SERVES 6 TO 8
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 medium yellow onion, finely chopped
2 cups vegetable broth
¾ teaspoon salt
2 ½ pounds mixed greens (such as turnip greens, collards, and mustard
greens), stems removed and leaves coarsely chopped
Black pepper
1. In a very large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the
onion and cook, stirring, until softened, about 5 minutes.
2. Add the broth and salt and bring to a gentle simmer. Add the greens, a
handful at a time, letting each batch wilt a little bit before adding more. Once all
of the greens have been added, cover the pan and reduce the heat to low. Cook,
tossing from time to time, until the greens are tender, about 20 minutes. If you
like them silken and Southern, continue cooking the greens for 20 to 30 minutes
longer. Sprinkle with a pinch of black pepper before serving.
Remove the ribs from greens by stripping the leaves from the hard, inedible
center stem. Alternatively, cut along both sides of the stem with a small
sharp knife to release the leaves.
GO GREEN
Collard greens have broad, fanlike, dark green leaves with a thick stem, and
they’ve got a nice nutty flavor to them. Mustard greens are a lighter green with a
frilly edge to the leaves and have a sharper flavor than the collards. And turnip
greens are a shade of green somewhere between the collards and the mustards
and can be a little bitter if they’re not cooked through.
TURNIPS AND GREENS
I always say, “Don’t turn up a turnip till you’ve tried it.” Children are sometimes
suspicious of these big old round root vegetables, but they are a true comfort
food, and with a little braising or roasting, they become tender, sweet, and, oh,
just divine! And they are so, so good for you, too! I look for a bunch of turnips
with nice greens so I can cook it all down together.
SERVES 4
4 cups chicken broth
1 smoked turkey neck or wing
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 ½ teaspoons salt
½ teaspoon sugar
1 bunch turnip greens (about ¾ pound), stems removed and leaves
coarsely chopped
2 large turnips (about 1 pound), coarsely chopped
Hot sauce (optional)
1. In a large pot, combine the broth and smoked turkey neck or wing. Bring to
a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce to a gentle simmer and cook, uncovered,
for 20 minutes. Stir in the butter, salt, and sugar. Add the greens and turnips and
simmer, uncovered, until the vegetables are tender, about 30 minutes.
2. Remove the greens and turnips with a slotted spoon and place in a shallow
serving dish. Season with hot sauce, if you’d like, and serve.
BITTERSWEET
To reduce the natural bitterness of turnip leaves, be sure to cook them with
something salty like a smoked turkey neck or a ham hock. And be sure to add
some sugar to the pan to complement that bitterness with a touch of sweetness.
That should win ’em over!
OL’ NO. 7 YAMS
I love pulling out all the ingredients for this festive wintertime dish: whiskey,
orange peel, nutmeg, cinnamon, brown sugar, and butter. What’s better than all
that? We often make this for Christmas supper and all those good smells just put
us into the right frame of mind. You could convince yourself it was a white
Christmas in June if you fixed a pan of these yams.
SERVES 4
4 large yams or orange sweet potatoes (3 ½ to 4 pounds)
⅓ cup Jack Daniel’s Old No. 7 whiskey
1 cup packed light brown sugar
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
cinnamon stick (3 to 4 inches)
1 long strip orange peel
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Bake the yams until they are tender when
pierced with a fork, about 1 hour. Reduce the oven temperature to 350°F.
Remove the yams but leave the oven on. When the yams are cool enough to
handle, peel them and cut crosswise into ½-inch-thick rounds.
2. Meanwhile, in a large saucepan, combine 3 cups water, the whiskey, brown
sugar, butter, nutmeg, cinnamon stick, and orange peel. Bring to a boil over
medium-high heat. Reduce to a simmer and cook until the sauce is slightly
thickened and syrupy, 30 to 45 minutes.
3. Place the yams in a medium baking dish. Pour the syrup over them and
return to the oven to bake until the yams are fork-tender, about 30 minutes. Your
house will smell so good while this is baking, you’ll be holding them back from
the table!
DO AHEAD
To make this dish faster, bake the yams the night before, leave the skin on, and
pop them in the refrigerator. When you’re ready to bake your casserole, peel and
slice the yams while the syrup is simmering. Great for entertaining!
CANDIED YAM SOUFFLÉ
This is how we make our yams with mini marshmallows, and you know it’s not
just the children who adore this holiday favorite. You can assemble this dish in
advance, so all you have to do is bake it right before dinner. Watch out, though:
those caramelized marshmallows get scorching hot, and if you try to sneak a
little of it off the top when you pull it out of the oven, you’ll wish you had
waited. I ought to know; I still haven’t learned.
SERVES 6 TO 8
3 cans (15 ounces each) candied yams, drained
tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
½ cup whole milk
3 large eggs
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon grated nutmeg
½ teaspoon salt
4 cups mini marshmallows
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a food processor or blender, puree the yams until smooth. Add the melted
butter, milk, eggs, cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt. Continue to puree until smooth
and well combined. Scrape the mixture into the prepared dish and bake for 20
minutes.
3. Increase the oven temperature to 400°F. Top the yams with the
marshmallows and bake until the marshmallows are golden and melted, 10 to 15
minutes. Serve piping hot.
LIGHT AS AIR
This is not one of those soufflés that you see in a French restaurant, but it’s a
soufflé nonetheless, because “soufflé” simply means that it’s all puffed up. And
that’s exactly what you do to these yams when you puree them with the eggs.
They come out so light and airy, just like a fancy French soufflé.
SWEET POTATO BALLS
I’ve been makin’ these tasty fellows for years—they are just perfect around
holiday time. The orange juice, brown sugar, cinnamon, and marshmallows are
familiar friends, but just wait till you taste how delicious coconut is in a sweet
potato dish. These are wonderful served with turkey or ham.
SERVES 4 TO 6
4 large sweet potatoes (about 2 ½ pounds)
⅔ cup packed light brown sugar
1 tablespoon orange juice
½ teaspoon grated nutmeg
2 cups sweetened shredded coconut
½ cup granulated sugar
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
8 large marshmallows
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.
2. Place the sweet potatoes in a medium baking dish and bake until they are
soft to the touch, about 1 hour. Remove the sweet potatoes but leave the oven on.
Reduce the oven temperature to 350°F and line a baking sheet with foil. (The
potatoes can be baked the day before and kept covered in the fridge with their
skins on.)
3. When the sweet potatoes are cool enough to handle, peel them. Place them
in a large bowl and mash well. Stir in the brown sugar, orange juice, and nutmeg.
4. In a medium bowl, toss the coconut with the granulated sugar and
cinnamon. Press the sweet potato mixture around each marshmallow to create 8
balls, then roll the balls in the coconut mixture. Place on the prepared baking
sheet.
5. Bake until browned and bubbling, 15 to 20 minutes. Watch carefully for the
last few minutes of cooking; the expanding marshmallows can cause the potato
balls to burst open.
ZIP IT UP
For a zestier flavor, use lemon or lime juice instead of orange juice.
Shape the balls by pressing the mashed potato mixture around the
marshmallows. Roll with the palm of your hand to create a 2-to 3-inchdiameter ball.
BAKED ACORN SQUASH WITH PINEAPPLE
A baked acorn squash is just about the prettiest thing you can put on your dinner
plate in the autumn and winter months. I love the sweet and tart taste of
pineapple with the mellow, silky baked squash.
SERVES 4
1 can (8 ½ ounces) crushed pineapple, drained
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
2 tablespoons light brown sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
⅛ teaspoon black pepper
2 medium acorn squash, halved lengthwise, seeds and pulp removed
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Line a baking sheet with foil.
2. In a small saucepan, combine the pineapple, butter, brown sugar, salt, and
black pepper. Simmer over medium heat until syrupy, about 5 minutes.
3. Place the squash halves, cut side up, on the prepared baking sheet. Spoon
the pineapple mixture into the cavities, making sure to cover all the cut surfaces
with the syrup. You don’t want to miss 1 square inch with this delightful syrup.
Bake until the squash is tender and golden brown, about 1 hour.
THE FIRST CUT
Use a strong, sharp knife when cutting your acorn squash because it’s real tough.
To make it easier to slice through, make a few cuts in the skin of the squash so it
won’t explode, and place it in the microwave for a minute or two. The outside
should soften up just a little bit.
To prevent hard squash from slipping while cutting, cut on a dish-towellined cutting board using a serrated knife.
CREAMED POTATOES
I love to serve this elegant recipe for tiny round potatoes in cream sauce at a
spring dinner party. They’re classy and remind me of a delicious chive-flavored
potato chip.
SERVES 4
1 ½ pounds medium creamer potatoes, unpeeled, halved
1 tablespoon butter
½ small yellow onion, finely chopped
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour
1 cup whole milk
teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives
1. In a large pot, cover the potatoes with cold salted water. Bring to a boil over
medium-high heat and cook until the potatoes are almost tender, 15 to 20
minutes; drain well.
2. In a medium pot, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onion and cook
until almost soft, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle with the flour and stir for 1 minute.
Slowly whisk in the milk, salt, and black pepper. Bring to a boil, reduce to a
simmer, and cook until thickened, about 5 minutes. Add the potatoes and cook
until they are tender, about 5 minutes. Serve sprinkled with the chives to give it
some pretty color.
SIZED UP
When cooking potatoes, pay attention to the size of the potatoes called for in
your recipe in relation to the cooking time, especially in a recipe like this one.
Y’all want to make sure you don’t overcook the potatoes in the first step, or
you’ll just end up with a mushy mess when you cook them again in the second
step.
BUTTERY BUTTERMILK MASHED POTATOES
Buttermilk is indispensable in the South because of its rich, creamy flavor. It
makes these potatoes smooth and tangy at the same time.
SERVES 4
1¾ pounds baking potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks
½ cup buttermilk
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 teaspoons salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
⅛ teaspoon grated nutmeg
1. In a large pot, cover the potatoes with cold salted water. Bring to a boil over
medium-high heat and cook until the potatoes are very tender, 20 to 25 minutes;
drain well and transfer to a bowl.
2. While the potatoes are still hot, using a potato masher, mash in the
buttermilk, butter, salt, black pepper, and nutmeg. Mash until the potatoes are the
consistency you like. Serve piping hot.
CRÈME DE LA CRÈME
If you really want to go all out, substitute sour cream for the buttermilk—it will
make your dish even richer and creamier.
For smooth and fluffy mashed potatoes, use a ricer or food mill. Fill the
ricer with drained boiled potatoes and press out through the holes.
Alternatively, fill a food mill with the potatoes and turn the crank in a
circular motion to press them through the perforated disk.
TURNIP MASHED POTATOES
Let the turnips be your little secret if you’re cooking for picky eaters. These
underrated root veggies just make your mashed taters so light and silky and
delicious—anyone will be a convert! Especially if you don’t tell them until after
they’ve cleaned their plate.
SERVES 4
1 pound small red potatoes, halved
½ pound turnips, cut into chunks
½ cup hot heavy cream
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, at room temperature
Salt and black pepper
1. In a large pot, cover the potatoes and turnips with cold salted water. Bring
to a boil over medium-high heat and cook until the vegetables are tender, 15 to
20 minutes; drain well.
2. Transfer the vegetables to a large bowl and, using a potato masher or an
electric mixer, mash in the hot cream and butter until the mash is the consistency
you like. Mix in salt and black pepper to taste, starting with 1 teaspoon of salt
and ¼ teaspoon of pepper. Mound into a pretty serving bowl.
HIGH AND DRY
For the smoothest, silkiest mash, be sure your potatoes are as dry as possible
after you’ve boiled them. To prevent them from absorbing too much water while
they boil, cut the potatoes into big pieces; don’t make them small. And after you
drain your potatoes, pop them into the hot pot and put them back over low heat
for a minute to get rid of any excess moisture.
SHRIMP MASHED POTATOES
I’ve been making this fun, tasty shrimp-and-tater mash for at least as long as I’ve
lived in Savannah, and it never fails to give folks a pleasant surprise. The shrimp
are so sweet and the whole dish is pretty and pink.
SERVES 4
4 pounds red potatoes (8 to 10 medium), cut into ¼ -inch-thick rounds
½ cup hot whole milk, plus more if needed
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
½ cup sour cream
Salt and black pepper
1 cup chopped cooked shrimp
teaspoon paprika
1. In a medium pot, cover the potatoes with cold salted water. Bring to a boil
over medium-high heat and cook until the potatoes are tender, 15 to 20 minutes;
drain well and transfer to a large bowl.
2. Using a potato masher or an electric mixer, mash the potatoes with the ½
cup hot milk, the butter, and the sour cream until the mash is the consistency you
like. Mash in salt and black pepper to taste. Don’t overbeat the potatoes, now; a
few lumps are nice. Add the shrimp and mash again until mixed. You can adjust
the thickness by adding more hot milk if it needs it. Stir in the paprika for flavor
and some pretty color. Feel free to make this dish a little ahead of time and reheat in a 375°F oven if you need to.
CAN’T BEAT THAT
The electric mixer is the fastest way to mash your potatoes, but you’ll need to
keep an eye on them while you’re beating. Potatoes can turn gluey if you beat
them too far. Keep checking the potatoes in the mixer.
TWICE-BAKED POTATOES
When my boys were growing and nothing ever seemed to fill them up, I could
always count on a good, hearty twice-baked potato. You can stuff these simply
or really do them up, and either way they’re bound to please.
SERVES 6
6 large baking potatoes (as large and oval as possible) (about 5 pounds)
Vegetable oil, for coating the potatoes
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, cut into small bits
2 cups sour cream
Salt and black pepper
1 teaspoon dried parsley flakes
Paprika
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line a baking sheet with foil. Prick the potatoes
lightly in several places with a fork. Coat each potato entirely with the oil. Place
on the prepared baking sheet and bake until the potato skins are very crisp and
the insides are very soft, 1 to 2 hours. Remove the potatoes but leave the oven
on.
2. Drop the butter into a large bowl. Carefully, as the potatoes will be hot,
slice off the top one-third of each potato lengthwise. Gently scoop out the insides
of the potatoes with a spoon (leaving enough so the potato skin will stay intact
and not tear) and add to the bowl with the butter. Using a potato masher, mash in
the sour cream and salt and black pepper to taste, mashing until it’s the
consistency you like. (Be careful not to overmash.)
3. Stir in the parsley flakes. Gently stuff the mixture back into the potato
skins, being careful not to break them. Pile the potato mixture as high as you can
above the tops of the potato skins. Sprinkle lightly with paprika. The potatoes
can be frozen at this point for serving later.
4. Return the potatoes to the baking sheet and bake until the potato tops are
golden brown, 20 to 30 minutes. The potatoes will be crunchy on the outside and
creamy and buttery on the inside.
STUFFED
Sometimes I like to make my stuffed potatoes a meal of their own, especially
when I’ve got leftovers in the fridge. I mix in bacon and broccoli or cut-up
cooked shrimp with fresh herbs, or cubes of ham and grated Cheddar. You can
get creative and clean out the fridge in one fell swoop.
ROASTED POTATOES WITH ROSEMARY
I use two different potatoes, yellow and red, to make this dish look pretty and
because I love how different they taste. The garlic in the pan is a real treat—you
can serve it right along with the rosemary potatoes for everyone to peel and eat,
or you can consider it the cook’s reward and have yourself a little appetizer
course in the kitchen.
SERVES 4
¾ pound Yukon Gold potatoes, cut into 1¼ -inch chunks
¾ pound red potatoes, cut into 1 ¼ -inch chunks
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
4 cloves garlic, unpeeled
2 sprigs fresh rosemary
¾ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
Preheat the oven to 425°F. Spread the potatoes on a large rimmed baking sheet
and toss with the oil, garlic, rosemary, salt, and black pepper. Roast the potatoes,
turning occasionally, until they are golden and tender, 30 to 35 minutes. It’s that
easy, folks.
GOOD OLD BAY
If you don’t have any fresh rosemary on hand, you can throw a couple of bay
leaves onto the baking sheet instead, but be sure to remove them before you
serve.
CHEESY ASPARAGUS
I don’t know why they don’t serve roasted cheesy asparagus at the movies
instead of popcorn. With the thin crust of golden baked cheese, it is just so darn
good.
SERVES 4
1 pound asparagus, woody ends snapped off
1 tablespoon olive oil
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
½ cup grated Parmesan cheese
Preheat the oven to 400°F. Spread the asparagus on a baking sheet and toss
with the oil, salt, and black pepper. Sprinkle generously with the Parmesan. Bake
until the asparagus is tender and the cheese is melted and slightly golden, 10 to
12 minutes. Serve just as soon as you can.
ALL SIZED UP
Some folks swear that skinny asparagus stalks have the most flavor, and others
say the same about the thick, meaty stalks. I say they’re both as tasty as can be.
The important thing is to get asparagus stalks that are all roughly the same size.
That way they’ll all cook and become tender (but not mushy) at just the same
time.
Snap off the woody stems of asparagus by holding the spear with one hand
at the base of the stalk and the other hand 1 or 2 inches toward the tip. Bend
the spear to break the asparagus at the woody point.
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES
This is how my Grandmama Paul used up her straggler tomatoes—the ones
hanging on the vine at the end of the season. Firm and green and tangy, they
were perfect for frying. Grandmama Paul always breaded them with cornmeal so
they’d be real crunchy, and she had a heavy hand with the black pepper. I use her
method but prefer flour. I salt the tomatoes and let them sit; this gets rid of the
extra moisture so they fry up nice and crisp.
SERVES 6
4 large, firm green tomatoes
Salt
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
2 cups self-rising flour or self-rising cornmeal
1 teaspoon black pepper
1. Slice the tomatoes to the thickness you like (I like mine thin). Lay out on a
baking sheet and sprinkle lightly with salt. Place in a colander set in the sink and
let sit for 30 minutes so the salt can pull water out of the tomatoes.
2. In a large skillet, heat 2 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry
thermometer.
3. In a shallow bowl, mix the flour with the black pepper. Coat the tomatoes in
the flour mixture, shaking off any excess. Add to the hot oil and deep-fry until
golden brown, about 2 minutes per side. Serve right away so they’re nice and
crunchy.
A SOUTHERN STAR
Just make sure the green tomatoes you buy at the store are actually unripe. Some
tomatoes stay green even after they’ve ripened, and you definitely don’t want
any of those because the texture won’t be right.
STEWED TOMATOES
This is another garden-fresh recipe that brings me back to a time when my Aunt
Peggy grew the most wonderful tomatoes. Since you cook them forever to get a
reduced, sweet, and saucy dish, you can also use a can of diced tomatoes. Butter,
sweet onion, and a bit of sugar round out the tomatoes’ tangy edge, making a real
comforting dish.
SERVES 4
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
1 medium yellow onion, finely chopped
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped
4 cups peeled (see box), and chopped fresh tomatoes, or 1 can (28
ounces) diced tomatoes
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
2 tablespoons sugar
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley
1. In a medium skillet, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onion and
cook, stirring, until softened, 7 to 10 minutes. Stir in the garlic and cook for 1
minute. Stir in the tomatoes, salt, and black pepper. Simmer, covered, over
medium-low heat for 30 minutes.
2. Stir in the sugar and simmer, uncovered, until the liquid reduces by about
half, about 15 minutes. Stir in the parsley just before serving to add some pretty
green to the dish.
PEEL AWAY
If you use fresh tomatoes here, you’ll need to peel them first. Bring a pot of
water to a boil. Set up a bowl filled with ice and water. With a small knife, make
a little X through the skin at the blossom end of each tomato. Lower the
tomatoes into the boiling water for about 15 seconds. Using a slotted spoon, lift
the tomatoes out and place them directly in the ice water. Let them cool a few
seconds and peel!
CHEESY CORN PUDDING
This is my cheesy version of spoon bread, a traditional Southern cornmeal
pudding that you can serve with just about anything. Muffin mix makes the
recipe a cinch, and sour cream makes it so moist and tender you could cry!
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 box (8 ½ ounces) corn muffin mix
1 can (15 ounces) cream-style corn
1 ½ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (6 ounces)
¾ cup sour cream
½ cup finely chopped scallions
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Grease a 9-inch square baking pan with oil or
coat with cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, stir together the muffin mix, corn, ¾ cup of the Cheddar,
the sour cream, scallions, melted butter, eggs, and black pepper. Scrape the
mixture into the prepared pan. Scatter the remaining ¾ cup Cheddar over the top.
3. Bake the pudding until golden and firm, 25 to 30 minutes. Let the pudding
cool for 10 minutes or so before cutting into squares so that it has a chance to
set, and your squares will come out nice and clean.
STIR IT IN
While it’s great as is, I like to get creative with this pudding. If I’ve got some
leftover ham in the fridge, I just cube it up and stir it through. There’s nothing
like the flavor of smoked ham with sweet creamy corn. Or cut up some red bell
peppers and stir them in to give this pudding amazing color.
SOUTHERN SPOON BREAD
I love simple Southern food so much that I don’t see the need to gussy up an oldfashioned, barebones recipe like this one. Spoon bread is just that: a corn bread
so custardlike, you serve it with a spoon. Oh, how I love it with a good old plate
of greens, tomatoes from the garden, and maybe some grilled fish or chicken.
SERVES 6
1 cup stone-ground cornmeal
1 ½ teaspoons salt
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, cut into small bits
1 cup cold whole milk
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Grease an 8-inch square baking pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a small saucepan, combine the cornmeal, salt, and 1 ½ cups water. Bring
to a simmer over medium-high heat and cook until most of the liquid has been
absorbed, about 10 minutes. Whisk in the butter until melted. Remove the pan
from the heat and whisk in the milk. Slowly whisk in the eggs.
3. Scrape the mixture into the prepared pan. Bake until golden and almost
firm, 45 to 50 minutes. Spoon out onto plates while hot.
CHEESY SPOON BREAD
If you like a richer spoon bread, you might try stirring a cup or so of grated
cheese into the batter. Cheddar is my favorite, but y’all can use whatever you
like.
LOUISIANA FRIED CORN
When it comes to good sweet corn, the simpler, the better. This is a farmhousestyle recipe that I just love. The corn stays juicy and fresh tasting, and the bits of
bacon and scallion give it a real zing. This is one of those side dishes that I make
just for myself if I’m eating solo, and I don’t need anything else.
SERVES 4 TO 6
4 ears corn 2 slices bacon, cut crosswise into 1-inch pieces
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
4 scallions, finely chopped
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper Large pinch of sugar
1. Cut the kernels from the cobs with a sharp knife and place them in a
medium bowl. Run the back of the knife down the cobs to extract any corn milk,
and add it to the bowl of corn.
2. In a large skillet, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, about 5
minutes. Set the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
3. Add the butter to the skillet and melt over medium-high heat. Add the corn
(and corn milk) and scallions. Reduce the heat to medium, cover, and cook for
10 minutes. Uncover and cook until tender, 5 to 10 minutes longer. Season with
the salt, black pepper, and sugar and cook for 2 minutes longer. Top with bacon
pieces and serve.
AW, SHUCKS
We like to shuck outside so that we don’t make a big old mess in my kitchen. To
shuck the corn, grab the outermost pieces of the husk from the top of the corn
and pull down. Break the husk off at the other end, then scrape off as much of
the silk as you can while the corn is still dry. Give it a rinse and you’re done.
FRIED OKRA
Don’t sell okra short; it may look humble, but it’s a real Southern treat and is
surprisingly hearty, too. I fry mine like my mama did, tossed with buttermilk,
then cornmeal, and deep-fried. Oh honey, it’s so good—it’ll make you see Jesus!
SERVES 4
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
⅓ cup buttermilk
½ cup fine cornmeal
½ teaspoon salt
6 ounces okra (about 20 pods), sliced into ½-inch rounds
1. In a medium pot, heat 2 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry
thermometer.
2. Pour the buttermilk into a shallow bowl.
In another shallow bowl, mix the cornmeal with the salt. Dip the okra in the
buttermilk, letting the excess drip off. Dredge the okra in the cornmeal mixture,
shaking off any excess. Working in two batches, fry the okra until golden and
crisp, 1 to 2 minutes; do not overcrowd the pot. Set on a paper towel–lined plate
to drain. Serve hot and just tell me who can stop popping these little goodies into
their mouth.
PUT
YOUR COAT ON I find that the best way to coat these pieces of okra in the wet
and dry batter is to use two slotted spoons to dip, one for the wet buttermilk and
one for the dry cornmeal. This method is less fiddly and your hands won’t get all
covered in coating as you’re dipping and dredging.
STEWED OKRA AND TOMATOES
Frozen sliced okra is a real convenience and it gives this saucy side dish just
enough body. I love eating this over grits with a nice dash of hot sauce to give it
a punch.
SERVES 6
3 tablespoons butter
1 medium yellow onion, finely chopped
3 cloves garlic, finely chopped
2 cans (14 ½ ounces each) diced tomatoes
2 cups sliced fresh or frozen okra
1 teaspoon saltBlack pepper
1. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the onion and
cook, stirring, until softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the garlic and cook for 1
minute.
2. Pour the tomatoes into the skillet, reduce to a simmer, and cook until the
mixture becomes a thick, hearty sauce, about 20 minutes.
3. Stir in the okra and simmer for 20 minutes longer. Add the salt and spice it
up with black pepper to taste.
OKAY OKRA
If you’re buying fresh okra, look for pods about 3 to 4 inches in size and bright
green in color. They should be firm enough that they’d snap in half if you bent
them, and their coat should be fuzzy and soft without any dark blemishes.
MAQUE CHOUX
Here is a real traditional recipe for one of Louisiana’s finest culinary creations,
pronounced “mock shoe.” It’s got all the favorite ingredients of that region—
corn, bell pepper, celery, scallions, and tomatoes—simmered down with a touch
of cream. Top this side off with something simple, like grilled shrimp, and make
it into a lovely summertime meal.
SERVES 6
3 tablespoons butter
1 medium yellow onion, chopped
½ medium red bell pepper, chopped
1 celery stalk, chopped
Kernels from 3 ears corn (about 2 cups)
3 scallions, chopped, dark green tops kept separate for garnish
1 large tomato, chopped
1 tablespoon chopped fresh thyme leaves
Pinch of cayenne pepper
½ cup heavy cream
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the onion,
bell pepper, and celery. Cook, stirring, until the vegetables are softened, 5 to 7
minutes. Stir in the corn and chopped scallions. Reduce the heat to medium and
cook, covered, for 5 minutes.
2. Uncover the skillet and stir in the tomato, thyme, and cayenne pepper. Cook
until the tomato is soft, about 3 minutes. Stir in the cream and cook until slightly
reduced, about 2 minutes. Season with the salt and black pepper. Sprinkle with
the reserved chopped dark green scallion tops. I tell you, the reds, yellows, and
greens in this dish are such a pretty sight to see on your table.
MAKE IT A MAIN
Make this a one-pot dinner by adding cooked shredded chicken or cooked
crawfish or shrimp toward the end of the cooking time. Or serve over a fluffy
bed of rice. That’s Southern comfort food.

SOUTHERN-STYLE GREEN BEANS WITH BACON AND
TOMATO
If you served a Southern cook a bowl of crisp steamed green beans, she’d
probably march them right back into the kitchen and cook them again. We love
how soft and sweet vegetables get when you really cook them through, and this
dish is a fine example. Bacon, tomato, and onion in the sauce take those beans to
a whole new level.
SERVES 4 TO 6
4 slices bacon
1 small yellow onion, finely chopped
1 pound green beans
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
1. In a large skillet, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, 5 to 7
minutes. Set the bacon on a paper towel–lined plate to drain.
2. Add the onion to the skillet and cook, stirring, until very soft, 7 to 10
minutes.
3. Toss in the green beans, tomatoes, salt, and black pepper. Reduce the heat to
medium-low, cover, and cook, tossing occasionally, until the beans are very
tender and the tomatoes are falling apart, about 30 minutes.
4. Serve with the bacon crumbled all over the top.
CAN DO
Go ahead and switch out canned tomatoes for fresh tomatoes in this recipe. A
28-ounce can of diced tomatoes should do, but make sure you drain the tomatoes
of their juices first.
To quickly remove the stem ends of green beans, line up the beans on a
cutting board parallel to you with the stem ends even. With one cut, slice
off the stem ends of all the beans with a large, sharp knife.
SAUTÉED SUMMER SQUASH
If you turn your back on a Southern garden, you’ll wind up with zucchini and
summer squash so big you might trip on them. I keep tabs on my vines because I
love to harvest the real thin, firm summer squash before they grow as big as my
arm. Little squash just taste so sweet in this fresh, simple recipe.
SERVES 4
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
½ medium yellow onion (halved lengthwise), thinly sliced crosswise
½ teaspoon plus a pinch of salt
2 small yellow summer squash or zucchini (about 6 ounces each), cut
crosswise into ¼ -inch-thick rounds
2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme leaves
¼ teaspoon black pepper
1. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium-high heat. Add the onion and
the pinch of salt and cook, stirring, until the onion is soft and light golden, about
7 minutes.
2. Add the squash to the pan in a single layer. Sprinkle evenly with the ½
teaspoon salt, the thyme, and the black pepper. Cook, stirring from time to time,
until the squash is tender and the onion is caramelized, 5 to 7 minutes.
A SEASONAL DISH
Although you can usually find summer squash and zucchini in the dead of
winter, save this dish for late spring and summer when you can get nice, locally
grown, in-season squash. It’s worth the wait.
THE LADY’S INDIAN SUCCOTASH
We serve this colorful, high-flavor succotash at the restaurant. Don’t leave out
the ham hock, y’all—that smoky-salty meat gives a real nice flavor to the sweet
corn—and that salty-sweet combination will just knock you right off your feet.
SERVES 6 TO 8
1 ham hock (about ½ pound)
½ teaspoon Paula Deen's House Seasoning (page 435)
¼ teaspoon Paula Deen Collection Seasoned Salt or other seasoned salt
1 package (16 ounces) frozen green butter beans or lima beans, or 2 ½
cups fresh green butter beans
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
½ teaspoon Paula Deen Collection Hot Sauce, or another hot sauce or 1
small chili pepper, finely chopped
4 slices bacon, chopped
1 package (16 ounces) frozen shoepeg corn (or 1⅔ cups fresh if you can
get it)
2 cups sliced fresh or frozen okra
⅓ cup chopped fresh parsley
1 teaspoon chicken bouillon granules
4 tomatoes, cut into chunks
1. Put the ham hock in a large stockpot with 2 quarts water. Bring to a boil
over medium-high heat. Reduce to a simmer, then add the House Seasoning and
seasoned salt. Cover and cook for 1 ½ hours. Add water as needed (up to 2 more
cups) to keep the meat covered as it cooks. Remove the ham hock and reserve it
for another purpose.
2. Add the beans, 2 tablespoons of the butter, and the hot sauce and return to a
boil. Reduce the heat, cover, and cook over low heat until the beans are tender,
about 20 minutes. Remove the beans from the pot and reserve the cooking
liquid.
3. In a large skillet, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, about 5
minutes. Add the corn, okra, cooked beans, and about 1 ½ cups of the cooking
liquid from the bean pot. Simmer for 10 minutes. Add the parsley and chicken
bouillon; cover and simmer, stirring occasionally, for 20 minutes.
4. Throw in the tomatoes and the remaining 4 tablespoons butter at the last
minute. Simmer until the tomatoes are hot. This dish delivers with its beauty and
its flavor!
SWEET CORN
Shoepeg corn is a Southern favorite that is related to white sweet corn and highly
prized for its sweetness. It features smaller, more tightly packed kernels than the
corn you’re used to. It’s probably most readily available these days in frozen
form, but if you can get your hands on some fresh shoepeg, you’ll be ever so
happy.
VIDALIA ONION PIE
Did y’all know that the Vidalia onion is Georgia’s official state vegetable? Well,
in this dish it hardly seems like a vegetable at all, but it is surely a divine savorysweet side dish to set out on a buffet. The cheesy Ritz cracker crust is a real
favorite of mine.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
1 ½ cups crushed Ritz crackers
1 ½ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese(6 ounces)
7 tablespoons butter, melted
2 large eggs
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour
1 ½ cups sour cream
½ cup whole milk
1 teaspoon plus a pinch of salt
3 cups thinly sliced Vidalia onion (about 2 small)
¼ teaspoon paprika
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. In a large bowl, combine the cracker crumbs, 1 cup of the Cheddar, and 4
tablespoons of the melted butter until they form a moist, crumbly mixture.
3. In another large bowl, whisk together the eggs and flour. Whisk in the sour
cream, milk, and the 1 teaspoon salt.
4. Pour the remaining 3 tablespoons melted butter into a large skillet and heat
over medium-high heat. Add the onion and cook, tossing, until very soft and
golden, about 15 minutes. Season with the pinch of salt and the paprika.
5. Press the cracker mixture evenly onto the bottom and sides of a 9-inch pie
plate. Scatter the onion over the piecrust. Pour the sour cream mixture over the
onion and scatter the remaining ½ cup Cheddar over the top. Bake the pie until
just firm (it will have a custardy appearance even when it’s done), 30 to 35
minutes. Let cool completely before slicing and serving.
PRESSED FOR TIME
The press-in crust is such an easy way to make homemade crusts. Just mix
melted butter with crushed-up crackers (if you are going for a sweet crust, use
crushed graham crackers) and press it into your pie plate with the tips of your
fingers. The melted butter holds it all together and saves you the time of rolling
and cutting.
FRIED CABBAGE
The last time I grew a nice big green cabbage, I was so proud. We ate that thing
for about a week, every which way, including this one. Frying it with garlic and
red pepper brings out everything I love about cabbage—its heartiness, crunch,
and flavor.
SERVES 6
¼ cup vegetable oil
2 cloves garlic, finely chopped Red pepper flakes
16 cups shredded green cabbage (1 small head)
Salt
1. In a large skillet, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the garlic and ¼
teaspoon red pepper flakes and cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 1 minute.
2. Increase the heat to medium-high. Add the cabbage, a handful at a time,
letting each handful wilt a little bit before adding more. Sprinkle with 1 teaspoon
salt and cook, tossing the cabbage, until tender, about 10 minutes. Taste and add
more salt or red pepper flakes if you think it needs it.
THE BITTER END
When you sauté garlic and red pepper flakes, it’s important to stir constantly and
make it a quick cook. If you overcook garlic by even a few seconds, it becomes
bitter, and that flavor gets into the whole dish.

Baking is big in the South—whether it’s a biscuit or a roll, we love something in
our hand to put some butter on, or to sop up pot liquor. My Grandmama Paul, for
instance, baked well into her old age. I was at her house one day when she was
in her eighties, and she was just standing there in the kitchen, rapping a tube of
canned biscuits on the edge of the counter to pop it open. She looked at me and
said, “I was so damn glad when they came out with these!” Those were her
words exactly.
Because, you know, down South we just revere biscuits, and I guess
Grandmama Paul never thought she had mastered the art. Southerners just adore
our canned biscuits and crescent rolls, and I use them all the time. But I do love
to roll my own homemade dough from time to time, especially since you can
improvise more that way, whether you want to make Fluffy Sweet Potato
Biscuits (page 279), Chive and Cheddar Biscuits (page 280), or your standard
Buttery Buttermilk Biscuits (page 277).
Corn bread, right along with biscuits, is a reliable favorite of the Southern
breadbasket. There aren’t many days at home when I don’t bake corn bread in a
big hot greased skillet. Corn bread, corn sticks, hush puppies, and biscuits are
such a quick, satisfying way to put food on your table, and they are such an
important Southern tradition.
Of course I do slow down from time to time to bake a nice loaf of OldFashioned White Bread (page 281), say, if I’m planning a real special sandwich.
But soda-raised muffins and breads are more popular down here than yeast
breads are. Why, for my niece Corrie’s wedding gift bags, she and her mother
and I got in the kitchen and made over one hundred pumpkin breads! Now, I
can’t bake a loaf of my Streusel Pumpkin Bread (page 286) without getting a
little choked up thinking on how beautiful my Corrie was in her wedding gown.
Banana bread is another real favorite of mine. Whenever I make my banana
bread with chocolate chips for Corrie, I have to make another loaf chock-full of
toasted walnuts for Michael. He won’t put up with a chocolate chip in his banana
bread. That man’s got strong opinions about scones as well. “Why would anyone
want to eat a big dry biscuit?” he’ll say. But, you know, I do a tender, flaky sour
cream scone that is so yummy. Back in my catering days, if I was doing
something casual, I’d whip up biscuits for a breakfast or brunch, but for the
fancy ladies who were coming to town, I always made sure I had Sour Cream
Tea Scones (page 287) on the platter.
All the breads in this chapter make such a nice snack, and children adore
helping to bake them. They don’t have to be sweet, either. I make an herbed
cream cheese to top my Zucchini Bread (page 285) that is just the thing when
your stomach starts growlin’ in the afternoon. Of course, the basic ingredients in
these items are things you’ll find in every Southern pantry: butter, shortening,
cornmeal, and self-rising flour. What’s amazing is how many different ways
Southern bakers have developed for combining them. I view it as another case of
limitations inspiring creativity.
JALAPEÑO HUSH PUPPIES
Well, there are just about as many stories about how hush puppies got their name
as there are Southerners with opinions, but the most popular view is that the
name derived from hunters or fishermen who would fry something in cornmeal,
and toss a piece or two to their dogs to “hush” them up. In any case, these fried
corn bread balls are too darn good to throw to the dogs. I like to spice mine up
good with fresh jalapeño, and they are just addictive. Serve them as a side with
everything from eggs to chili, or pop a few of these with a cold drink and put
your feet up. And since I can’t get enough of spicy food, sometimes I serve these
with a sweet and spicy dipping sauce to really knock their socks off!
MAKES ABOUT 22 FRITTERS
About 4 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
1 cup yellow cornmeal
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon sugar
2 teaspoons salt
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 cup buttermilk
1 large egg
¼ cup finely chopped jalapeño pepper (leave some seeds if you want
more heat)
1. In a deep pot, heat 3 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry
thermometer.
2. While the oil is heating, in a medium bowl, whisk together the cornmeal,
flour, sugar, salt, baking powder, and baking soda. In another medium bowl,
whisk together the buttermilk, egg, and jalapeño. Add the wet ingredients to the
cornmeal mixture and fold to combine.
3. Using a small ice cream scoop or a large spoon, drop the batter into the oil
and fry, in batches of 4 at a time, until golden and crisp, 2 to 3 minutes per batch.
Set on a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Serve hot.
THREE’S A CROWD
Don’t crowd your hush puppies when you’re deep-frying them. By frying them
up in batches, you’ll ensure that the oil temperature in your pot stays nice and
hot. The key is to cook them hot and fast.
BRUNCHTIME POPOVERS
Recipes like this one feel as if you’re cheating: popovers rise up like they were
baked by a fancy pastry chef, when all you did was whisk four ingredients
together and throw them in the oven. Get your brunch guests ready and bring the
popovers out warm. They’re delicious plain or spread with your favorite jelly.
MAKES 12 POPOVERS
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, melted, plus more for greasing the pan
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup whole milk
3 large eggs
1. Position a rack in the center of the oven and preheat to 450°F. Generously
butter a 12-cup popover pan or muffin tin.
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour and salt. In another medium
bowl, whisk together the milk and eggs until combined. Add the milk mixture to
the flour mixture and stir to combine. Don’t go too crazy with the mixing; a
slightly lumpy mixture is okay, as long as all the flour has been incorporated.
Fold in the melted butter.
3. Divide the batter evenly among the cups of the prepared pan. Bake until the
popovers are puffed and dark golden brown, about 25 minutes. Serve warm.
FULL STEAM AHEAD
The secret to making these popovers puff up is the high liquid content in the
batter—no baking soda or baking powder needed! Combined with a very hot
oven, the steam trapped inside the popovers pushes the batter up, so when you
cut into them, you’ll see they’re practically hollow.
SKILLET CORN BREAD
This is the corn bread that I make in my big, heavy skillet. First I get that thing
real hot and swirl in my grease, then I pour in the batter and it forms a great,
golden crust right off the bat.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH ROUND
¼ cup lard or vegetable shortening
2 cups fine yellow cornmeal
2 teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup buttermilk
2 large eggs
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. In a 9-inch cast-iron skillet, melt the lard or
shortening over medium heat. Swirl the melted fat around the sides of the pan to
coat it all over.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the cornmeal, baking powder, baking soda,
and salt. In a small bowl, whisk together the buttermilk and eggs. Using a rubber
spatula, fold the buttermilk mixture and the melted lard or shortening into the
flour mixture. Gently mix to combine.
3. Scrape the batter into the skillet. Bake until light golden brown and firm to
the touch, about 25 minutes. Cut into wedges and serve warm or at room
temperature.
SUBSTITUTE SKILLET
If you haven’t got yourself a cast-iron skillet, just use a heavy-bottomed,
ovenproof 9-inch skillet. If it happens to have a wooden handle, just cover that
handle with foil.
CORN STICKS
We love our corn bread in the South and have come up with a variety of ways to
dress it up. I love the sour cream and chives in these, and how well they go with
a bowl of tomato soup.
MAKES 12 CORN STICKS
1 cup fine yellow cornmeal
½ cup all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon sugar
1 teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
¾cup sour cream
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, melted
2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Lightly grease two 6-stick corn stick pans with
butter, oil, or cooking spray. If you don’t have corn stick pans, you can use
muffins tins.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the cornmeal, flour, sugar, baking powder,
baking soda, and salt. In a separate bowl, whisk together the sour cream, eggs,
and melted butter. Using a rubber spatula, stir the wet ingredients into the
cornmeal mixture until just combined. Fold in the chives.
3. Divide the batter between the prepared pans without making too much of a
mess (just wipe the sides with a paper towel if you drip). Bake until the corn
sticks are golden and a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean, 15 to
20 minutes. Let cool for 5 minutes in the pans before serving.
A CLASSIC PAN
The corn stick pan is a traditional Southern pan, but these days you can buy one
just about anywhere. It’s rectangular in shape, it’s made of cast iron (of course),
and it has anywhere from 6 to 9 wells shaped just like an ear of corn. It’s great to
have on hand when you’re entertainin’—you can give your guests their
individual corn breads!

ANGEL BISCUITS
Is there anything better than biting into a hot, fresh buttered biscuit? And I love
how biscuits can take you right through the day from sweet to savory to sweet
again. You can butter that biscuit, then reach for the jam, honey, or syrup; you
can toast a cold biscuit on the griddle and eat it with dip eggs or gravy; and you
can use up leftovers in a shortcake, pudding, or dressing. I never get upset when
I make too many biscuits: these fluffy yeast-raised beauties reheat flawlessly.
MAKES ABOUT 3 DOZEN BISCUITS
1 envelope (¼ ounce) active dry yeast
½ cup lukewarm (100° to 110°F) water
5 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
2 tablespoons sugar
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
¾cup vegetable shortening, chilled
2 cups buttermilk
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Grease a baking sheet with butter, oil, or cooking
spray.
2. Sprinkle the yeast over the lukewarm water in a small bowl. In a large
bowl, mix together the flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. Cut in
the shortening with a pastry blender, your hands, or two knives (see illustration,
page 277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Add the yeast mixture and
buttermilk and mix well.
3. Sprinkle a small handful of flour over a work surface. Turn the dough onto
the floured surface and roll out to a 1-inch thickness.
4. Using a 2½-inch round biscuit cutter, cut the dough into biscuits. Gently
reroll the scraps and cut out more biscuits. Place the biscuits on the prepared
baking sheet and bake until light golden brown and firm to the touch, about 12
minutes. Serve warm or at room temperature.
LUKEWARM TO THE TOUCH
The water you mix with the yeast should be lukewarm, never hot—otherwise it
can kill the yeast. Even if you don’t take its temperature with a thermometer,
always dip a finger or knuckle in to make sure it’s not too hot. And remember,
your internal body temp is around 98°, so 100° to 110° won’t feel too much
different from the temperature of your own skin.
IT’S JUST GRAVY
It’s no secret that we Southerners love gravy with our biscuits. Here are two we
can’t live without.
Chocolate Gravy
Makes enough for 6 to 8 servings
⅔ cup sugar
½ cup sifted unsweetened cocoa powder
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour
Pinch of salt
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
2 cups whole milk
1. In a small bowl, whisk together the sugar, cocoa powder, flour, and salt.
2. In a large skillet, heat the butter over low heat. Once the butter is melted,
whisk in the sugar mixture. Whisk until all the dry ingredients have been
incorporated.
3. Slowly pour the milk into the skillet, whisking quickly and constantly to
remove lumps. Cook, whisking constantly, until the gravy has thickened, 5 to 7
minutes; take care not to scorch it. Serve hot over Angel Biscuits.
Sawmill Gravy
Makes about 1½ cups
It’s not hard to understand sausage gravy: 3 ingredients, 5 minutes… this is the
kind of hearty, savory breakfast you can throw together before you’ve even made
the coffee. Griddle up last night’s biscuits—or roll out a fresh batch—and you’ve
got yourself one fine start on the day.
½ pound breakfast sausage links, casings removed
¼ cup all-purpose flour
1 cup whole milk
Salt and black pepper
In a large skillet, cook the sausage over medium heat, breaking it up with a
spoon, until browned, about 5 minutes. Once the sausage is browned, sprinkle in
the flour. Slowly pour the milk into the skillet, whisking quickly and constantly
to get rid of any lumps of flour. Cook, whisking constantly, until the gravy has
thickened, about 5 minutes. Season to taste with salt and black pepper. Serve hot
over Angel Biscuits.
WHISK IT SMOOTH
Whether your gravy taste runs sweet or savory, I’m sure you can agree that
lumpy gravy has no place on your biscuits. For the smoothest gravy, there is just
no substitute for constant whisking.
BUTTERY BUTTERMILK BISCUITS
When you want to savor the taste of butter, this is your biscuit. It just has
unbeatable flavor from plenty of butter and tangy buttermilk, and those same
ingredients give it a light, flaky texture as well.
MAKES 9 BISCUITS
2¼ cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
1 tablespoon baking powder
2 teaspoons sugar
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
1 cup buttermilk
1. Place a rack in the center of the oven and preheat to 450°F. Grease a baking
sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, sugar, baking
soda, and salt. Cut in the butter with a pastry blender, your hands, or two knives
(see illustration) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Using a rubber spatula,
fold the buttermilk into the flour mixture until all the flour is moistened.
3. Sprinkle a small handful of flour over a work surface. Turn the dough out
onto the surface and knead lightly two or three times with the palms of your
hands until the mixture comes together. Pat the dough out until it’s a 6-inch
square. Cut the dough twice lengthwise and twice widthwise to make 9 squares.
4. Place the biscuits on the prepared baking sheet and bake until light golden
brown and firm to the touch, about 12 minutes. Serve warm or at room
temperature.
STRAIGHT FROM THE FRIDGE
For an airy and flaky dough, make sure your butter is cold when you’re cutting it
into flour mixtures for biscuits, piecrusts, and the like. Work quickly so that it
doesn’t start to melt on you, especially if you’re using your hands.
Cut chopped chilled butter into dry ingredients by rubbing with your
fingertips until the butter and dry ingredients have combined to create the
texture of coarse meal. Be careful not to overwork. Alternatively, crisscross
two knives across the butter and dry ingredients until the texture becomes
like coarse meal.
SAUSAGE BISCUITS
These meaty, slightly peppery biscuits are a welcome appearance on a brunch
buffet, and one of the most wonderful portable foods you could take along for
the day.
MAKES ABOUT 8 BISCUITS
¼ pound breakfast sausage links, casings removed
2 cups self-rising flour
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
4 tablespoons (½ stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
¼ cup lard or vegetable shortening, chilled
1 cup buttermilkAll-purpose flour, for dusting
1. In a large skillet, cook the sausage over medium heat, breaking it up with a
spoon, until browned, about 5 minutes. Set the sausage on a paper towel–lined
plate to drain and cool.
2. Place a rack in the center of the oven and preheat to 425°F. Grease a baking
sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
3. In a large bowl, whisk together the self-rising flour, salt, and black pepper.
Cut in the butter and lard with a pastry blender, your hands, or two knives (see
illustration, page 277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Add the cooled
sausage and stir to combine. Using a rubber spatula, fold the buttermilk into the
flour mixture until all the flour is moistened.
4. Sprinkle a small handful of all-purpose flour on a work surface. Turn the
dough out onto the surface and knead lightly two or three times with the palms
of your hands until the mixture comes together. Pat the dough out to a ¾-inchthick round.
5. Using a 2½-inch round biscuit cutter, cut the dough into biscuits. Gently
reroll the scraps and cut out more biscuits. Place the biscuits on the prepared
baking sheet and bake until light golden brown and firm to the touch, 17 to 18
minutes. Serve warm or at room temperature with gravy, for a real Southern
touch.
FEEL THE KNEAD
With biscuits, it’s important that you knead just enough, but not too much. If you
knead too much, your dough will toughen up. But you want to make sure you get
a few good kneads in there so that your biscuits end up with nice soft layers.
FLUFFY SWEET POTATO BISCUITS
You can buy a tube of darn good buttermilk biscuits if you’re in a rush, but sweet
potato biscuits—fluffy, delicious, slightly sweet, orange biscuits like these—are
worth the extra effort. They come together fast and are perfect in the breadbasket
during the fall and the holidays.
MAKES ABOUT 9 BISCUITS
¾ cup cooked, mashed sweet potato (about 1 large)
⅓ to ½ cup whole milk
1½ cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
2 tablespoons sugar
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
6 tablespoons cold butter, cut into small bits
1. Place a rack in the center of the oven and preheat to 425°F. Grease a baking
sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the sweet potato and ⅓ cup milk. Set aside.
3. In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt.
Cut in the butter with a pastry blender, your hands, or two knives (see
illustration, page 277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Add the sweet
potato mixture and fold gently to combine. Add the remaining milk a little at a
time until all the flour is moistened. The amount you will need will depend on
the moisture of the sweet potato.
4. Sprinkle a small handful of flour on a work surface. Turn the dough out
onto the surface and knead lightly two or three times with the palms of your
hands until the mixture comes together. Pat the dough out to a ½-inch-thick
round.
5. Using a 2½-inch round biscuit cutter, cut the dough into biscuits. Gently
reroll the scraps and cut out more biscuits. Place the biscuits on the prepared
baking sheet and bake until light golden brown and firm to the touch, 12 to 14
minutes. Serve these fluffy biscuits warm or at room temperature.
TIME-SAVER
Sweet potatoes freeze so well and are such a great pantry staple that I like to
make up big batches and freeze them. Just boil ’em up, peeled or unpeeled, dry
and cool ‘em completely, and then either slice ’em up or mash ’em. They’ll keep
in sealed plastic bags for up to 6 months.
CHIVE AND CHEDDAR BISCUITS
Sweet, oniony little green chives are just about the best partner to a nice sharp
Cheddar cheese that I can think of. If you have a half foot of dirt to plant them
in, chives will take over, growing like crazy in the ground or a pot. I love
grabbing a handful to chop into my extra-cheesy biscuits.
MAKES ABOUT 12 BISCUITS
2 cups all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon sugar
2 teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
6 tablespoons cold butter, cut into small bits
1¼ cups shredded sharp Cheddar cheese (5 ounces)
¼ cup finely chopped fresh chives
1 cup buttermilk
1. Place a rack in the center of the oven and preheat to 425°F. Grease a baking
sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar, baking powder, baking
soda, and salt. Cut in the butter with a pastry blender, your hands, or two knives
(see illustration, page 277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Add 1 cup
of the Cheddar and the chives to the flour mixture and toss to combine. Using a
rubber spatula, fold the buttermilk into the flour mixture until all the flour is
moistened.
3. Using an ice cream scoop or a large spoon, scoop the mixture and place on
the prepared baking sheet. Sprinkle the remaining ¼ cup Cheddar over the
biscuits. Bake until light golden brown and firm to the touch, 13 to 15 minutes.
Serve warm or at room temperature.
SPICE KICK
For a spicy version of these beautiful biscuits, use pepper Jack cheese instead of
Cheddar. And you can experiment with different herbs like parsley or cilantro.
OLD-FASHIONED WHITE BREAD
Now, listen, y’all, I’m a busy lady, but I’m telling you, sometimes it’s time to
slow down. Baking yeast bread is such a fulfilling way to get back to basics, and
that first slice, with a nice pat of butter… it just doesn’t get more satisfying than
this.
MAKES TWO 8-INCH LOAVES
1 envelope (¼ ounce) active dry yeast
½ cup lukewarm (100° to 110°F) water
6 cups all-purpose flour
2 tablespoons sugar
1½ teaspoons salt
2 cups whole milk, scalded (see box, page 282)
2 tablespoons vegetable shortening
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Grease two 8 by 4 by 3-inch loaf pans with
butter, oil, or cooking spray. Sprinkle the yeast over the lukewarm water in a
small bowl.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar, and salt. Using a rubber
spatula, fold in the hot milk, shortening, and yeast mixture until all the flour is
moistened. Knead the dough until it’s uniform and all the ingredients are
incorporated.
With floured hands, knead the dough by pressing down very firmly on it
with the heels of your hands, pushing the dough away from you, then
folding it back over itself. Give the dough a little turn and repeat. Continue
turning and kneading until the dough has a smooth, silky consistency.
3. Divide the dough in two and shape into loaves. Place in the prepared pans.
Bake until a toothpick inserted in the center of a loaf comes out clean, 45 to 50
minutes. Homemade bread. What a treat.
A GOOD SCALDING
By scalding the milk, you will ensure a nicely structured and textured finished
loaf. To scald, heat the milk up almost to the boiling point, while stirring all the
while so that a skin doesn’t appear on the surface of the milk and a crust doesn’t
form on the bottom of the pan. Keep a close eye on your pan and pull it off the
heat just as the milk is about to come up to a boil.
CINNAMON TOAST MUFFINS
I remember when I barely had time to sprinkle cinnamon and sugar on toast for
my boys before they headed out the door to school. Well, now I like to fix ’em
these delicious, tender muffins dipped in butter and cinnamon sugar whenever I
get the chance. They have a flavor reminiscent of those helter-skelter mornings.
Isn’t it amazing the things you end up looking back on fondly?
MAKES 12 MUFFINS
Muffins
3 cups all-purpose flour
2½ teaspoons baking powder
¾teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon grated nutmeg
¼ teaspoon baking soda
¾cup whole milk
2 tablespoons buttermilk
8 tablespoons (1 stick) plus 2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, at room
temperature
¾cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar
2 large eggs
Coating
1 cup sugar
1 tablespoon ground cinnamon
8 to 12 tablespoons (1 to 1½ stickes) butter, melted
1. To make the muffins: Preheat the oven to 375°F. Grease a 12-cup muffin tin
with butter, oil, or cooking spray and dust with flour.
2. In a medium bowl, sift together the flour, baking powder, salt, nutmeg, and
baking soda. In a small bowl, whisk together the milk and buttermilk.
3. In the bowl of an electric stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or
using a handheld mixer, cream the butter and sugar together at medium speed
until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Beat in the eggs, one at a time, beating
well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
4. With the mixer at low speed, beat one-fourth of the flour mixture into the
butter mixture. Beat in one-third of the milk mixture. Add the rest of the two
mixtures, alternating the dry and wet ingredients, ending with the dry
ingredients. Take care not to overmix. You just want the ingredients to come
together.
5. Scrape the batter into the prepared muffin tin, filling the cups just to the rim
with batter. Bake until lightly golden and firm to the touch, about 20 minutes.
Let the muffins cool in the pan for 5 minutes, then remove them and transfer to a
wire rack set on a baking sheet.
6. To prepare the coating: In a small bowl, combine the sugar and cinnamon.
Brush each muffin top generously with the melted butter. Then sprinkle
generously with the cinnamon sugar and watch them come running to the
kitchen.
CREAM AND SUGAR
I reckon that creaming is pretty much the most important step in baking sweets.
By whipping together your butter and sugar until they are light and fluffy, you
are certain to end up with baked goods that rise well in the oven and are light
and fluffy in texture. For best results, make sure the butter is nicely softened so
that it incorporates easily into the sugar.
WALNUT BANANA BREAD
This is the sweet, nutty banana bread I fix for Michael for a special treat—he just
adores it. I toast my walnuts a bit to give them extra crunch, and I use some
vanilla in the batter, which makes this bread smell heavenly while it is baking
and gives it a real nice flavor.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH LOAF
1¼ cups mashed ripe bananas (2 large or 3 medium)
1 cup sugar
½ cup vegetable oil
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1¾ cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon baking soda
¾cup chopped walnuts, lightly toasted (or you can use chocolate chips
instead)
1. Place a rack in the bottom third of the oven and preheat to 350°F. Grease a
9 by 5-inch loaf pan with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the bananas, sugar, oil, eggs, and vanilla. In
a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, salt, and baking soda.
Using a rubber spatula, gently fold the flour mixture into the banana mixture just
to combine. Stir in the walnuts. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan and
smooth the top.
3. Bake until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean and the top
is golden brown, 1 hour and 10 minutes to 1 hour and 15 minutes. Let cool in the
pan on a wire rack for 10 minutes. Then pop the bread out of the pan and let cool
completely on the rack before slicing and serving.
SAVING A BUNCH
I’m sure you’ve seen it time and again, a bunch of bananas browning too fast on
the countertop. When this starts to happen, I peel my bananas and pop them
whole into airtight plastic bags. They keep in the freezer for 2 or 3 months.

ZUCCHINI BREAD
When I made zucchini bread on my show, I whipped up an herb cream cheese to
spread on top that was so darn delicious, it nearly undid me. Y’all, I ate so much
cream cheese that day, I almost thought I’d overdone it! But seriously, I adore
how you can take a moist, slightly sweet zucchini bread in a savory direction or
just keep it sweet.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH LOAF
1 cup grated zucchini (from 1 medium)
1 cup sugar
½ cup vegetable oil
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1½ cups all-purpose flour
1½ teaspoons ground cinnamon
¾teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon baking powder
1. Place a rack in the bottom third of the oven and preheat to 350°F. Grease a
9 by 5-inch loaf pan with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the zucchini, sugar, oil, eggs, and vanilla. In
a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, cinnamon, salt, baking soda, and
baking powder. Using a rubber spatula, gently fold the flour mixture into the
zucchini mixture just to combine. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan and
smooth the top.
3. Bake until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean and the top
is golden brown, 1 hour and 5 minutes to 1 hour and 10 minutes. Let cool in the
pan on a wire rack for 10 minutes. Then pop the bread out of the pan and let cool
completely on the rack before slicing and serving.
FOR SPREADING
You can make herbed cream cheese by letting cream cheese come to room
temperature and stirring in chopped parsley, chives, or whatever fresh herbs you
may have on hand.

STREUSEL PUMPKIN BREAD
In case you hadn’t noticed, I do like to gild the lily from time to time. So I
sprinkle a sweet, buttery cinnamon streusel right on top of my pumpkin bread.
Why not make it that much more special?
MAKES ONE 9-INCH LOAF
Streusel
2½ tablespoons packed light brown sugar
2½ tablespoons all-purpose flour
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
Pinch of salt
2 tablespoons cold butter
Pumpkin Bread
1 cup canned unsweetened pumpkin puree
1½ cups packed light brown sugar
½ cup vegetable oil
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1½ cups all-purpose flour
2¼ teaspoons pumpkin pie spice
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon baking powder
½ cup raisins
1. Place a rack in the bottom third of the oven and preheat to 350°F. Grease a
9 by 5-inch loaf pan with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. To prepare the streusel: In a medium bowl, whisk together the brown sugar,
flour, cinnamon, and salt. Cut in the butter with a pastry blender, your hands, or
two knives (see illustration, page 277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal.
Set the streusel mixture aside while you make the pumpkin bread.
3. To make the pumpkin bread: In a large bowl, whisk together the pumpkin
puree, brown sugar, oil, eggs, and vanilla. In a medium bowl, whisk together the
flour, pumpkin pie spice, baking soda, salt, and baking powder. Using a rubber
spatula, gently fold the flour mixture into the pumpkin mixture just to combine.
Stir in the raisins. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan and smooth the top.
Top with the streusel mixture.
4. Bake until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean and the top
is golden brown, 55 minutes to 1 hour. Let cool in the pan on a wire rack for 10
minutes. Then pop the bread out of the pan and let cool completely on the rack
before slicing and serving.
KEEP COOL
Cool your bread in the pan for 10 minutes: any longer might make it difficult to
get the bread out. Then invert it out of the pan onto a wire rack to cool
completely. As it cools, the bread has time to finish cooking with the heat still
trapped inside the loaf. And the wire rack lets the loaf cool on all sides so you
don’t end up with a sticky bottom on your bread. This cooling process ensures
firm slices when it’s time to cut.
SOUR CREAM TEA SCONES
When it comes to scones, I don’t have time for those perfect-looking ones at
most coffee shops, because I can just see how dry they are. But these buttery
little numbers are nice and moist thanks to the sour cream, and they’re full of
tangy little currants. Just pat your dough out gently, and leave the scones a little
rough-looking, and you’ll wind up with the most tender and delicious scones you
ever had. Serve with jelly and whipped cream for slathering on top.
MAKES 8 LARGE SCONES
2 cups self-rising flour
¼ cup sugar
1 teaspoon salt
1½ sticks (6 ounces) cold butter, cut into small bits
1 cup dried currants
1 cup sour cream
1 large egg
All-purpose flour, for dusting
1. Place a rack in the center of the oven and preheat to 425°F. Grease a baking
sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the self-rising flour, sugar, and salt. Cut in
the butter with a pastry blender, your hands, or two knives (see illustration, page
277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Stir in the currants. In a small
bowl, whisk together the sour cream and egg. Using a rubber spatula, fold the
sour cream mixture into the flour mixture until all the flour is moistened.
3. Sprinkle a small handful of the all-purpose flour over a work surface. Turn
the dough out onto the surface and knead lightly two or three times with the
palms of your hands until the mixture comes together. Pat the dough out to an 8-
inch round. Cut the round into 8 wedges.
4. Place the scones on the prepared baking sheet. Bake until light golden
brown and firm to the touch, 20 to 22 minutes. Serve warm or at room
temperature.
ON THE PULSE
While I prefer to cut my butter in with a pastry blender, a food processor is a fine
option as well. Use the pulse button so that you don’t overwork the mixture. Just
like when you cut in by hand, you want to end up with a texture that resembles
coarse meal.

Life is too short to wonder where you hid your waffle maker when the urge
strikes and then go looking for it, so I keep mine right up on the counter,
alongside my built-in griddle, where I can make my hoecakes and buttermilk
pancakes at the drop of the hat; my boys just love that. But truthfully, y’all, the
majority of the recipes in this chapter are not ones I make every day. When I do,
you just want to slap your mama! Homemade doughnuts, fruit fritters, and coffee
cakes are simply some of the most rewarding things to cook: people cannot stop
singing your praises when you set down a warm Gooey Gorilla Bread (page 305)
just dripping with butter, cinnamon, and brown sugar. Pulling that warm, sweet
bread apart is an event.
For all the fuss folks make, you’d think making such recipes as doughnuts
would take you hours and hours. But it just depends on how long it takes you to
pop open a can of biscuits! That tube of dough is just about all you need to make
Gooey Gorilla Bread, and it was my mama’s trick to bringing a plate of fresh
Biscuit Doughnuts (page 293) into the family room after dinner when Bubba and
I were watching TV and wanting something sweet.
Now, I know my mama wasn’t the only woman in the South to make Biscuit
Doughnuts because I talk to other people my age, and they share some of the
same memories. She would take those canned biscuits, poke her finger in the
middle of each biscuit, and work ’em into a doughnut. She would deep-fry ’em,
with some powdered sugar ready, and oh, my goodness! Of course my Michael
has a preference for filled doughnuts, and I hate to let that man go without, so I
have also perfected a fluffy, plump yeast doughnut with plenty of space to fill
with jelly.
Now, mind, y’all, this is not our definition of a regular breakfast. So when I
get up in the morning and fry a big plate of doughnuts, you know it’s a special
day. And the same goes for my towering, crumb-a-licious Cherry-Almond
Coffee Crumb Cake (page 303) and my Pineapple-Pecan French Toast Casserole
(page 302). For a more everyday treat, say on a lazy morning, I just love to make
waffles for my whole big family. They’re Corrie’s absolute favorite breakfast,
and nothing gets folks out early like telling them I’m planning to make my
Waffles with Blackberry Syrup (page 301).
You know, I still recall my feeling of wonder when I walked into my
Grandmama Paul’s kitchen to find her freshly fried peach, apple, or pineapple
fritters just made. Oh, my, they are a delightful snack—I would never want to
leave out her fruit fritter recipes. And I love to think that my grandbaby Jack
might have some of the same sweet memories of his grandma. The recipes in
this chapter are all so sweet and special: make them for someone you love. And
don’t forget to make them for yourself.
BISCUIT DOUGHNUTS
My mama’s biscuit-dough doughnuts were so delicious, I never felt the need to
set foot in a doughnut shop—I knew how to make my own. But once I did, I just
took inspiration from all those glazes and sprinkles, and I make those now, too.
There is nothing better than a fresh-made doughnut, and homemade is the
freshest they get.
MAKES 16 TO 20 DOUGHNUTS AND 16 TO 20 DOUGHNUT HOLES
About 4 quarts peanut oil, for deep-frying
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ cup granulated sugar
2 cups confectioners’sugar
5 tablespoons whole milk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¼ cup unsweetened cocoa powder
2 cans (16.3 ounces each) refrigerated buttermilk biscuit dough
Colored sprinkles, for decorating
Chocolate sprinkles, for decorating
1. In a deep pot, heat 3 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep-fry
thermometer. In a shallow bowl, stir together the cinnamon and granulated sugar
and set aside.
2. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, whisk together 1 cup of the confectioners’
sugar, 2 tablespoons of the milk, and the vanilla. Set the vanilla icing aside. In
another medium bowl, whisk together the remaining 1 cup confectioners’ sugar,
the cocoa powder, and the remaining 3 tablespoons milk. Set the chocolate icing
aside.
3. Lay out the biscuits on a cutting board and with a 1-inch round cookie or
biscuit cutter, cut out a hole from the middle of each biscuit.
4. Set a wire rack on a baking sheet and place near the pot of hot oil. Fry the
doughnuts, 2 or 3 at a time, taking care not to crowd the pot, until golden brown,
2 to 3 minutes each side. Fry the doughnut holes, also in batches, about 1 minute
per side. Transfer the doughnuts and doughnut holes to the rack to cool
completely. Toss in the cinnamon sugar or drizzle with one of the icings and
decorate the icing with sprinkles. Have fun with the decorating, y’all. This is
where you can get creative.
HOLESOME FUN
Don’t waste an ounce of this biscuit dough. Fry up the cut-out doughnut holes
along with the doughnuts. The little ones especially love these.
RED VELVET CAKE DOUGHNUTS WITH CREAM CHEESE
ICING
Now, my cousin Johnnie Gabriel, owner of the fabulous Gabriel’s Desserts in
Marietta, Georgia, makes absolutely the best red velvet cupcakes I’ve ever put in
my mouth. I got to thinking one day, why couldn’t you make a cream cheese–
glazed red velvet cake doughnut? Why not? I said to myself, and went right into
the kitchen to make me some.
MAKES 10 TO 12 DOUGHNUTS AND 10 TO 12 DOUGHNUT HOLES
Doughnuts
2¼ cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
1 cup sugar
¼ cup unsweetened cocoa powder
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
¾cup buttermilk
2 large eggs
5 tablespoons butter, melted
1 tablespoon red food coloring
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
About 4 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
Icing
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature1
6 tablespoons sugar
3 to 4 tablespoons buttermilk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Pinch of salt
1. To prepare the doughnuts: In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar,
cocoa powder, salt, baking powder, and baking soda. In a medium bowl, whisk
together the buttermilk, eggs, melted butter, food coloring, and vanilla to
combine. Using a rubber spatula, fold the buttermilk mixture into the flour
mixture just until combined. Cover the bowl with plastic wrap and refrigerate for
1 hour.
2. Meanwhile, make the icing: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the
paddle attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the cream cheese and sugar
at medium speed until soft and lump-free, about 5 minutes, scraping down the
sides while you do so. Add the buttermilk, 1 tablespoon at a time, until the icing
is smooth enough to drizzle. Beat in the vanilla and salt and mix until fully
combined.
3. Sprinkle a generous handful of flour over a work surface. Turn the
doughnut dough out of the bowl onto the surface and pat it out to a ½-inch
thickness. Using a 3-inch round biscuit or cookie cutter, cut the dough into
rounds. Using a 1-inch biscuit or cookie cutter, cut out the doughnut holes.
Gently gather the scraps, re-pat, and cut more doughnuts from the scraps. Re-pat
these scraps just one time, folks.
4. In a deep pot, heat 3 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry
thermometer. Meanwhile, set a wire rack on a baking sheet and place next to the
pot.
5. Add the doughnuts and doughnut holes to the hot oil, 2 or 3 at a time,
taking care not to crowd the pot. Fry until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes each
side for the doughnuts and about 1 minute per side for the doughnut holes.
Transfer the doughnuts to the rack to cool completely before drizzling all over
with the icing.
TOUGH STUFF
Try your best to cut out as many doughnut rings as possible with each patting of
the dough. But don’t pat it out past the two times called for in the recipe, because
the more you work the dough, the tougher it will be.
JELLY DOUGHNUTS
My Michael just has to have his jelly doughnuts. And if you have never watched
a grown man with a snow-white beard eating a homemade jelly doughnut, well,
let me tell you, it is one of life’s greatest pleasures. Bless him.
MAKES ABOUT 12 DOUGHNUTS
½ cup lukewarm (100° to 110°F) whole milk
1 envelope (¼ ounce) active dry yeast
1 tablespoon honey
About 2 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
¼ cup sugar, plus extra for coating doughnuts
1 large egg
1 teaspoon salt
5 tablespoons butter, at room temperature, cut into tablespoons
About 4 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
¾cup jelly or preserves (your favorite)
1. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, whisk together the milk, yeast, and honey at medium-low speed.
Cover with plastic wrap and let sit in a warm, draft-free place until bubbly, about
10 minutes.
2. Add 2 cups flour, ¼ cup sugar, the egg, and the salt to the yeast mixture
and, using the dough hook attachment at low speed or kneading by hand, mix
until the ingredients come together. Add the butter, 1 tablespoon at a time,
beating until incorporated. Increase the speed to medium and mix the dough
until smooth and elastic, about 5 minutes. The dough should be soft, but not
sticky. If it is sticky, add more flour, 1 tablespoon at a time, until it’s soft and
silky. Grease a large bowl with oil or coat with cooking spray and turn the dough
into the prepared bowl. Cover with plastic wrap and let rise in a warm, draft-free
place until doubled in size, about 1 hour.
3. Sprinkle a generous handful of flour over a work surface. Sprinkle a small
handful of flour over a baking sheet. Turn the dough out onto the surface and pat
into a ½-inch-thick round. Using a 3-inch round biscuit or cookie cutter, cut the
dough into rounds. Gently gather the scraps, re-pat, and cut more doughnuts
from the scraps. Re-pat these scraps just one time, folks. Place the doughnuts on
the prepared baking sheet, cover with plastic wrap, and let rise until doubled in
size, 20 to 30 minutes.
4. In a deep pot, heat 3 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry
thermometer. Meanwhile, set a wire rack on a baking sheet and place next to the
pot. Set up a plate with sugar at the ready.
5. Add the doughnuts to the hot oil, 2 or 3 at a time, taking care not to crowd
the pot. Fry until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes each side. Transfer the doughnuts
to the rack to cool for 1 minute, then roll in granulated sugar to coat all sides.
Return to the rack.
6. Once all the doughnuts have cooled completely, cut a pocket in the side of
each doughnut. Using a spoon, stuff 1 tablespoon of jelly inside each doughnut.
Reroll in sugar if you think it needs more. I guarantee you these doughnuts are
worth the wait.
LIVING PROOF
When you set your dough aside to rise, it’s called proofing. It needs a nice,
warm, not-too-hot spot to do its best, or the yeast will die. If you’re having
trouble finding just the right spot in your house, here’s a neat tip: cover the bowl
(without touching the dough itself) with a towel that has just been through the
dryer, just like tucking it under a warm blanket. Now, doesn’t that sound cozy?
THE LADY & SONS HOECAKES
At the restaurant we serve hoecakes all day. Folks love to eat these little round
drop corn breads alongside their meal. Then for dessert, they’ll reach for the
cane syrup and have another hoecake drizzled in syrup. I’ve heard that the name
came about because farmers originally cooked these rustic little griddled breads
on the back of a flat planting hoe over a fire out in the field.
MAKES ABOUT 16 CAKES
1 cup self-rising flour
1 cup self-rising cornmeal (see box)
1 tablespoon sugar
¾ cup buttermilk
¼ cup vegetable oil or bacon fat
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
Oil or butter, for frying
1. In a large bowl, combine the flour, cornmeal, and sugar. Stir in the
buttermilk, oil or bacon fat, eggs, and ⅓ cup plus 1 tablespoon water.
2. In a large skillet, heat 1 inch of oil over medium heat. Drop the hoecake
batter into the hot oil, using about 2 tablespoons of batter per hoecake. Cook
until browned and crisp on one side, then turn and brown on the other side, about
5 minutes per side. Set on a paper towel–lined plate to drain. If you somehow
manage to have leftover batter, it will keep in the refrigerator for up to 2 days.
MIX BLESSING
If you’re having problems getting your hands on self-rising cornmeal, go ahead
and substitute the same amount of corn bread mix for the self-rising cornmeal.
That should do the trick.
LACE HOECAKES
My Grandmama Paul’s hoecake pan is one of the most treasured pieces in my
kitchen, and it allows me to fry up the hoecakes with crisp, lacy edges. Y’all can
order yourself a hoecake pan from my website to make this simple treat at home
or even take the pan along next time you go camping. Serve lace hoecakes hot
with butter and syrup for breakfast, have them alongside soups and chilis, or try
my okra lace cakes (see box) with fried chicken or ribs.
SERVES 8
2 cups cornmeal
1½ teaspoons salt
¼ cup vegetable oil
1. Heat a hoecake pan over medium-high heat until very hot.
2. Meanwhile, combine the cornmeal and salt in a bowl. Stir in 2½ to 3 cups
water until the mixture forms a thin batter about the consistency of heavy cream.
3. Reduce the heat under the hoecake pan to medium; add 1½ teaspoons of the
oil and pour ⅓ cup batter onto the center of the pan, allowing it to spread to the
sides. When the edges are golden and lacy, about 2 to 3 minutes, place a
heatproof plate over the pan. Flip the pan and hoecake onto the plate, then slide
the hoecake off of the plate and back into the pan so that the opposite side is now
on the bottom of the pan. Cook until the underside is golden brown. Repeat with
the remaining oil and batter. Keep an eye on your batter as it sits, since it has a
tendency to thicken up. If it thickens, add more water to keep the proper
consistency.
OKRA LACE CAKES
One of my favorite ways to change up these hoecakes is to add some okra to
them. Simply stir ⅔ cup very thinly sliced okra (about ⅛ inch thick) into the
batter. Start with whole frozen okra for easiest slicing.
Pour the batter into a hoecake pan.
BUTTERMILK PANCAKES
The great big griddle on my stove means I can pour out pancakes for everyone
around my table, no matter how many we are. These are my go-to fluffy
pancakes, and I serve them hot-hot-hot with plenty of maple syrup and a little
more butter on the table.
MAKES 15 TO 18 (3-INCH) PANCAKES
2 cups all-purpose flour
¼ cup sugar
2 teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
1¾ cups buttermilk
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Maple syrup, for drizzling
1. Grease a griddle or large nonstick skillet with butter, oil, or cooking spray
and place over medium heat.
2. Meanwhile, as your griddle heats up, in a large bowl, whisk together the
flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. In a medium bowl, whisk
together the buttermilk, butter, eggs, and vanilla until combined. Using a rubber
spatula, fold the buttermilk mixture into the flour mixture just until combined. A
few lumps are just fine.
3. Pour out the batter in ⅓-cup rounds onto the hot griddle and cook until light
golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip the pancakes and cook until the undersides
are golden, another 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with the remaining batter, greasing
the griddle if it seems dry. Serve hot with (what else?) maple syrup for drizzling.
FLIP FLAP
Pancakes give you a real good cue when they’re ready to be flipped. Just look
for tiny bubbles to pop up all over the uncooked surface of the pancake and for
dryness all around the outer edge, and you’ll know it’s time to turn it over.
CORNMEAL BLUEBERRY PANCAKES
Somewhere between a hoecake and a blueberry pancake, this is what I came up
with when we were a little low on flour one morning. They are just the sunniest,
fruitiest, sweetest morning treat.
MAKES ABOUT 18 (4-INCH) PANCAKES
1 cup plus 2 tablespoons cornmeal
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon baking soda
1 cup whole milk
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
1 large egg
¼ cup honey
2 cups blueberries, fresh or thawed frozen
Confectioners’sugar, for dusting (optional)
1. Grease a griddle or large nonstick skillet with butter, oil, or cooking spray
and place over medium heat.
2. Meanwhile, as your griddle heats up, in a large bowl, whisk together the
cornmeal, flour, baking powder, salt, and baking soda. In a medium bowl, whisk
together the milk, melted butter, egg, and honey until combined. Using a rubber
spatula, fold the milk mixture into the cornmeal mixture just until combined. A
few lumps are just fine. Let the batter stand at room temperature for 15 minutes
to thicken up.
3. Pour out the batter in ⅓-cup rounds onto the hot griddle, sprinkle with
blueberries, and cook until light golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip the pancakes
and cook until the undersides are golden, another 2 to 3 minutes. Repeat with the
remaining batter, greasing the griddle if it seems dry. Serve hot, dusting with
confectioners’sugar if you’d like.
A LITTLE SUNSHINE
Sometimes I like to grate a little lemon zest into my pancake batter, y’all. That
sunshiny lemony flavor really perks up the blueberries and livens up the
c
o
r
n
m
e
a
l. J
u
s
t
a
t
e
a
s
p
o
o
n
i
s
a
l
l
y
o
u
n
e
e
d.
WAFFLES WITH BLACKBERRY SYRUP
When I think back on picking blackberries as a child, I remember getting
scratched, worrying about snakes, and coming home with as many bug bites as
berries. Not that I ever minded at the time, but these days I am glad to have a bag
of sweet-tart blackberries right in my freezer. I simmer them into this special
syrup for our buttery, crispy waffles.
MAKES 7 TO 8 WAFFLES
Blackberry Syrup
1¾ cups (7 ounces) frozen blackberries
½ cup sugar
Juice of ½ lemon
Waffles
2⅔ cups all-purpose flour
2½ tablespoons sugar
1 tablespoon baking powder
1¼ teaspoons salt
2 cups whole milk
2¾ sticks butter, melted
4 large eggs
1. To make the blackberry syrup: In a medium saucepan, combine the
blackberries, sugar, and 2 tablespoons water. Bring to a boil over medium heat.
Reduce the heat to a simmer and cook for 15 minutes to reduce slightly. Add the
lemon juice. You can refrigerate the syrup, but warm before serving.
2. To make the waffles: In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar,
baking powder, and salt. In a medium bowl, whisk together the milk, melted
butter, and eggs until combined. Using a rubber spatula, fold the milk mixture
into the flour mixture just until combined.
3. Preheat a standard-size electric waffle iron according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. To make extra sure your waffles don’t stick, give it a spray with
cooking spray.
4. Pour a scant 1 cup of batter into the waffle iron; cook until golden brown
and crispy on both sides, 5 to 6 minutes. Serve hot, topped with warm blackberry
syrup.
PATIENCE IS A VIRTUE
Don’t open the waffle iron before the waffle is thoroughly cooked, or the waffle
may break apart. Some waffle irons have an indicator light that changes color
when the waffle is ready. If yours doesn’t have one, just look for the steam to
stop escaping from the sides of the waffle iron.
PINEAPPLE-PECAN FRENCH TOAST CASSEROLE
Make this fruit-filled, rich bread pudding for your next buffet brunch and stand
nearby so you can hear folks talking. The combination of cinnamon, pecans,
brown sugar, and pineapple will just bowl them over. This is a real fun recipe to
make and to eat, and you can assemble it the night before, so it’s very convenient
for entertaining.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Casserole
8 large eggs
2 cups whole milk
2 cups half-and-half
1½ cups granulated sugar
1 tablespoon ground cinnamon
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1 teaspoon salt
1 loaf French bread (1 pound), cut into 1-inch cubes
1 can (20 ounces) pineapple chunks, drained
Pecan Topping
1¼ cups pecan halves
⅓ cup packed light brown sugar
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
Pinch of salt
Confectioners’sugar, for serving
THE REAL DEAL
When shopping for vanilla, keep a lookout for pure vanilla extract as opposed to
bottles marked vanilla essence or imitation vanilla extract. Essence and imitation
vanilla are chemical formulations that taste like vanilla, whereas pure extract is
the real McCoy, actual vanilla suspended in a mix of alcohol and water.
1. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish (pretty enough to bring to the table) with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. To prepare the casserole: In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs, milk,
half-and-half, granulated sugar, cinnamon, vanilla, and salt.
Add the bread cubes and pineapple and give it a good mix so that the bread is
fully coated in the custard. Place in the prepared baking dish, cover with plastic
wrap, and refrigerate overnight.
3. The next day, when you are ready to bake the casserole, preheat the oven to
325°F.
4. To make the pecan topping: In a small bowl, combine the pecan halves,
brown sugar, cinnamon, and salt. Remove the plastic wrap from the casserole
and top with the pecan mixture. Bake until golden brown and a knife inserted
into the center comes out clean, 1 hour and 10 minutes to 1 hour and 20 minutes.
Dust with confectioners’sugar sifted through a fine-mesh sieve and serve warm.
CHERRY-ALMOND COFFEE CRUMB CAKE
I don’t bother with a crumb-topped coffee cake unless it has enough sweet,
buttery crumbs, and this one delivers with a real nice thick layer. The
combination of juicy cherries and crunchy sliced almonds is one of my favorites.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Topping
1½ cups all-purpose flour
1 cup packed light brown sugar
¼ cup granulated sugar
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon salt
¾cup sliced almonds
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, cut into small bits, at room temperature
Cake
1 cup whole milk
1 cup sour cream
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
2 large eggs
¾teaspoon almond extract
3 cups all-purpose flour
1⅔ cups packed light brown sugar
1½ teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
1¾ cups (11 ounces) frozen cherries, thawed, and halved
BERRY FRESH
If you can get some nice fresh berries—blueberries, blackberries, or raspberries
—you can use them here in place of the cherries. You can also use fresh cherries
if you don’t mind pitting them.
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. To prepare the topping: In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, both
sugars, cinnamon, and salt. Stir in the almonds. Cut in the butter with a pastry
blender, your hands, or two knives (see illustration, page 277) until the mixture
resembles coarse meal and large, walnut-size clumps are formed, then set aside.
3. To make the cake: In a medium bowl, whisk together the milk, sour cream,
melted butter, eggs, and almond extract. In another medium bowl, whisk
together the flour, brown sugar, baking powder, baking soda, and salt. Using a
rubber spatula, fold the sour cream mixture into the flour mixture just until
combined. Gently fold in the cherries and pour into the prepared baking dish.
4. Spread the topping over the cake and bake until a toothpick inserted into the
center comes out clean and the topping is nicely browned, about 50 minutes. Let
cool in the pan on a rack. Serve at room temperature.
ULTIMATE COFFEE CAKE
If you love coffee cake, keep a few cans of crescent rolls on hand and you’re
halfway there. This easy, wonderful coffee cake is just full of sweet cream
cheese, with a crisp sprinkle of sugar and pecans on top.
SERVES 12 TO 15
2 cans (8 ounces each) refrigerated crescent rolls
2 packages (8 ounces each) cream cheese, at room temperature
1 cup sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 large egg, separated
½ cup chopped pecans
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. Press the dough from 1 can of the crescent rolls into the bottom of a 13 by
9-inch baking dish. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, beat the cream cheese, ¾cup of the sugar, the vanilla, and the egg
yolk at medium speed until soft and lump-free, about 5 minutes, scraping down
the sides as you do so. Spread this mixture over the dough. Top with the second
can of crescent roll dough.
3. In a medium bowl, beat the egg white with a whisk just until frothy and
brush on top of the cake. Sprinkle the cake with the remaining ¼ cup sugar and
the pecans. Bake until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out clean and
the cake is nicely golden, 30 to 35 minutes. Let cool in the pan. Serve warm.
GLAZE OVER
The egg white brushed on top of the dough produces a beautiful shiny glaze and
helps the sugar and nuts stick. It’s that extra-special touch that really wows them.
GOOEY GORILLA BREAD
Now, biscuit dough is delicious in many forms, but when you roll balls of dough
in cinnamon sugar, brush them with butter and brown sugar, and tuck them all
next to each other in a pan, they puff together when they bake. You turn them out
onto a plate and pull the warm sticky buns apart and, y’all, they just taste like
heaven.
SERVES 6 TO 8
½ cup granulated sugar
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
3 cans (12 ounces each) refrigerated biscuit dough
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 cup packed light brown sugar
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 12-cup Bundt or tube pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the granulated sugar and cinnamon. Cut
each biscuit round into 4 wedges and dredge each wedge in the cinnamon sugar.
Layer the wedges in the prepared pan.
3. In a small saucepan, melt the butter over low heat. Add the brown sugar and
stir until melted. Pour over all the biscuit pieces. Bake until golden brown, 45 to
55 minutes. If you see the gorilla bread beginning to brown too quickly, loosely
cover it with some foil. Let the bread cool in the pan for 5 minutes, then invert
onto a plate. This is best served warm so that it’s nice and gooey.
Fill a greased Bundt pan with sugared biscuit pieces until the pan is full.
IN THE RING
The Bundt pan and the tube pan are both ring-shaped baking pans. Unlike the
tube pan, the Bundt pan is fluted, giving anything baked in it a pretty decorative
look.
APPLE FRITTERS
Grandmama Paul’s fruit fritters were so light and crisp, you wouldn’t believe it. I
use her technique, stirring my sour cream–rich batter as little as possible before
dipping apples in it and tossing them right into the fryer. Just warn greedy
fingers to be patient, since the fritters have to cool a bit before you bite in.
MAKES ABOUT 20 FRITTERS
½ cup whole milk
½ cup sour cream
1 large egg
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon granulated sugar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
3 apples, peeled, cored (see box), and sliced into ¼ -inch-thick rings
Confectioners’sugar, for dusting
1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the milk, sour cream, and egg. In a
separate medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, granulated
sugar, salt, and cinnamon. Add the milk mixture to the flour mixture and stir
gently with a whisk until smooth, getting out all the lumps but being careful not
to overmix.
2. Meanwhile, in a large, heavy-bottomed pot, heat 1½ inches of oil until it
reaches 375°F on a deep fry thermometer.
3. Working in batches of 4 or 5, dip the apple rings into the batter, shaking off
the excess. Add to the hot oil and fry until golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes per side.
Set on a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Dust the fritters with confectioners’
sugar sifted through a fine-mesh sieve to pretty them up.
THEM APPLES
Make your life easier, y’all, and get yourself an apple corer for these little
fritters. Without one, coring an apple for apple rings can be a bit treacherous and
time-consuming.

PEACH FRITTERS
There is just something about peach season that sends me to the store for a tub of
vanilla ice cream. Served à la mode, these fritters are just summer in a bowl—
even if you make them in February with a couple cans of peaches!
MAKES ABOUT 20 FRITTERS
½ cup whole milk
½ cup sour cream
1 large egg
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon granulated sugar
½ teaspoon salt
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
3 fresh peaches, peeled (see box, page 422), pitted, and cut into ½-inch
wedges
Confectioners’sugar, for dusting
Vanilla ice cream, for serving
1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the milk, sour cream, and egg. In a
separate medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, granulated
sugar, and salt. Add the sour cream mixture to the flour mixture and stir gently
with a whisk until smooth, getting out all the lumps but being careful not to
overmix.
2. Meanwhile, in a large, heavy-bottomed pot, heat 1½ inches of oil until it
reaches 375°F on a deep fry thermometer.
3. Working in three batches of 4 or 5 fritters, dip the peaches into the batter;
add to the hot oil and fry until golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Set on a
paper towel–lined plate to drain. Dust the fritters with confectioners’sugar sifted
through a fine-mesh sieve. Serve with a scoop of ice cream, because there’s
nothing quite like peaches and cream.
PEACHY KEEN
If you can’t find good fresh peaches, substitute two 20-ounce cans of sliced ones.
Be sure to drain and pat them dry before battering and frying them.

PINEAPPLE FRITTERS
We always keep canned pineapple on hand so I can fix up these wonderful
fritters at a moment’s notice. They fill the bill when we want something special
for dessert.
MAKES ABOUT 20 FRITTERS
½ cup whole milk
½ cup sour cream
1 large egg
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon granulated sugar
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
About 2 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
2 cans (20 ounces each) pineapple slices, drained
¼ cup dark rum
Confectioners’sugar, for dusting
1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the milk, sour cream, and egg. In a
separate medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, granulated
sugar, salt, and nutmeg. Add the sour cream mixture to the flour mixture and stir
gently with a whisk until smooth, getting out all the lumps but being careful not
to overmix.
2. Meanwhile, in a large, heavy-bottomed pot, heat 1½ inches of oil until it
reaches 375°F on a deep fry thermometer.
3. In a medium bowl, toss the pineapple and rum together; let stand for 10
minutes. Pat the fruit dry with paper towels. Working in batches of 4 or 5, dip the
pineapple into the batter; add to the hot oil and fry until golden brown, 1 to 2
minutes per side. Set on a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Dust the fritters with
confectioners’ sugar sifted through a fine-mesh sieve and serve up this tropical
treat.
OIL CHANGE
Don’t be too hasty in throwing out your frying oil, since it can often be used
more than once. Always let the oil cool down completely in the pan. If you think
you can use it again, strain it into a clean container. If you can’t use the oil, just
pour it into a sealable container and toss it in the garbage. Unless you’re
planning on having the plumber around for dinner, never pour the oil down the
drain.

Next time you’re in the home of a true Southern pie baker, you just poke around
in kitchen drawers and you’ll turn up the old tablecloth she rolls out her piecrusts
on. That cloth will keep your crust from sticking to the counter when you roll—
even when it’s hot and humid out, like it gets around here. And when you’re
done, you just take it outside, shake it, and fold it up again. Everyone should
have one.
To me, nothing is more comforting than a piece of pie—it knocks a piece of
cake in the dirt. Sadly, in today’s times, pies are an endangered dessert. Growing
up, we just always had pie: I remember as a teenager, we had a restaurant right
next to our house, and we’d just walk over and get us a piece of pie and a Coke.
It could be chocolate meringue, lemon meringue, or coconut cream—it always
hit the spot. Most pies now come from some industrial food purveyor, so when
you find a homemade one, savor it because it can be hard work. And when you
develop a craving, your best bet is to make your own.
I have perfected my piecrust over the years so it is just as flaky and buttery as
I like, with enough salt to make itself known. But whenever I decide to roll up
my sleeves and make piecrust, I have a hard time deciding what to fill it with.
My favorite would have to be my Dreamy Coconut Cream Pie (page 315). But
then there’s Banana Cream Pie (page 317), too. Oh, those custard-type pies with
a rich, creamy filling and a crunchy crust are just so insanely delicious! And of
course if there’s a bowl of fruit on the counter, I may just have to make an Apple
Pie (page 313), a Blueberry Crumb Pie (page 332), a Peaches and Cream Pie
(page 333), or even a Green Tomato Pie (page 330)—y’all, don’t knock it till
you’ve tried it; tomatoes are a fruit and I’m real proud of how tasty that one
turns out. From Down-Home Grits Pie (page 327) to Butterscotch Pretzel Pie
(page 318) to Kentucky Walnut Pie (page 323), I’ve dedicated a pie to just about
every delicious ingredient I could. You can make pie with almost nothing, like
my Vanilla Buttermilk Pie (page 329), which is so simple and refreshing. Or you
can throw in the kitchen sink: try out a Sweet Potato Praline Crunch Pie (page
321) on your family next Thanksgiving and watch how fast folks forget about
plain old pumpkin.
Of course, pies can be a production, and you don’t just need a little time and
space to roll out your crust, you also need folks around to eat it up. On those
occasions when I’m tight on time, I love to make a cobbler. My cobbler recipe
never fails me—I don’t even measure; I just mix it up and have it in the oven in
no time. Oh, and then there’s hand pies. My Grandmama Paul always fried these
little half-moon pies instead of baking a full one. Crisp, flaky, and rich outside,
with sweet, juicy fruit on the inside, those fried pies were such a treat that I’ve
continued the tradition. I find myself making little Fried Peach Pies (page 334)
an awful lot these days.
That’s the thing about pie. Eating one is such a beautiful, pure tradition, it just
takes you right back to all the delicious-smelling kitchens you’ve been in and all
the delicious moments in life.
APPLE PIE
Some occasions call for a perfect apple pie: flaky crust and tender, sweet-tart
slices of apples spiced with cinnamon, nutmeg, and ginger. I use brown sugar
and vanilla to give the filling more richness, and I sprinkle the top crust with
cinnamon sugar, which gives the pie such a pretty glitter—and a preview of the
delicious filling. Serve à la mode with big scoops of vanilla ice cream!
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
2 batches Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 341), or two 9-inch
unbaked prepared piecrusts
6 apples (about 3 pounds), peeled, cored, and thinly sliced
¾ cup packed light brown sugar
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
2 teaspoons grated nutmeg
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1 teaspoon ground ginger
Pinch of salt
2 tablespoons cold butter, cut into small bits
Whole milk, for brushing
Cinnamon sugar, for sprinkling
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll each disk of dough
into a 12-inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using prepared crusts).
Use 1 round to line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes
or up to overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2
hours). Place the other on a baking sheet, cover with plastic wrap, and chill until
you need it.
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough in the pie pan with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie
weights. Bake for 20 minutes.
3. While the piecrust is in the oven, prepare the filling: In a large bowl, mix
together the apples, brown sugar, 3 tablespoons flour, the cinnamon, nutmeg,
vanilla, ginger, and salt. Go on ahead and use your hands to make sure those
apples are well coated with the other ingredients.
A IS FOR APPLE
Y’all, I like to put together a mix of tart and sweet apples to give my apple pie a
nice complexity. And I always look for apples that won’t break down too much
when you cook them. My favorites? That would have to be a mix of Golden
Delicious with Granny Smith.
4. Take the crust out of the oven, but leave the oven on. Remove the beans or
pie weights and paper or foil from the crust and fill with the apple mixture. Dot
the apple mixture with the butter pieces. Cut the reserved round of dough into ½-
inch-wide strips and use to make a lattice crust on top of the pie (see
illustration). Brush the lattice top with the milk and sprinkle with cinnamon
sugar. Bake until the juices are bubbling and the crust is golden brown, 45 to 50
minutes. Place the pie on a wire rack to cool for 30 minutes before serving.
Using a pastry cutter, cut an even number of ½-inch strips of the piecrust
dough. Place half the strips on top of the filled pie. Weave in the remaining
strips by folding every other strip back onto itself and laying another strip
perpendicular to it, to create a crisscross pattern. Fold the strips back across
and repeat until completed.
DREAMY COCONUT CREAM PIE
There are few things I enjoy more than a slice of good coconut cream pie. The
creamy, sweet filling, full of shredded coconut with a hint of nutmeg, is pure
pleasure any time of year. A cloud of whipped cream with nutty, golden toasted
coconut sprinkled on top and a crunchy, slightly salty crust underneath just puts
this combination over the edge.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
Pie
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
1½ cups whole milk
½ cup heavy cream
½ cup shredded sweetened coconut
Pinch of salt
3 large eggs
⅔ cup sugar
2 tablespoons dark rum (optional)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
Topping
1 cup cold heavy cream
3 tablespoons sugar
Shredded sweetened coconut, toasted
1. To prepare the pie: Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll
the dough into a 12-inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a
prepared crust). Use it to line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for
30 minutes or up to overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for
more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the beans or pie weights and paper or foil.
3. While the piecrust is in the oven, in a medium saucepan, combine the milk,
cream, coconut, and salt. Bring just to a boil over low heat, stirring constantly.
Remove from the heat and let sit for 30 minutes for the flavors to develop (see
box, page 316).
4. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, sugar, rum (if using), vanilla,
and nutmeg. Whisking constantly, slowly pour the warm milk mixture into the
eggs. Pour the warm filling into the warm piecrust. Bake until the filling is set
and jiggles like jelly, about 25 minutes. Let cool completely at room temperature
before refrigerating, then chill thoroughly.
5. Shortly before serving, prepare the topping: In the bowl of an electric mixer
fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, whip the cream and
sugar at medium-high speed until medium-firm peaks form. Spread the whipped
cream over the pie and sprinkle all over with the toasted coconut.
SEE WHAT DEVELOPS
You want to get as much coconut flavor as you can into this dreamy pie. That’s
why I recommend steeping the milk with the coconut (step 3). By heating the
milk just to the boiling point and then letting it sit off the heat for about 30
minutes, the milk will take on a deep coconut flavor, making your custard taste
like it came straight out of the coconut shell.
After rolling out the piecrust, place it in the pan by rolling the dough around
a floured rolling pin, positioning the rolling pin over the pie pan, and
unfurling the dough into the pan.
BANANA CREAM PIE
Okay, well, this is another one of my all-time favorite pies and I have given great
thought to how to layer the custard and bananas for maximum pleasure. I cannot
get enough of the sweet banana flavor—don’t count on this pie feeding as many
people as you think it will.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 341) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
½ cup sugar
⅓ cup cornstarch
¼ teaspoon salt
2 cups heavy cream
1 cup whole milk
3 large egg yolks
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
4 bananas, sliced, plus sliced bananas for serving
Whipped cream, for serving
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the beans or pie weights and paper or foil.
3. While the piecrust is in the oven, prepare the filling: In a medium, heavybottomed saucepan, whisk together the sugar, cornstarch, and salt. Gradually
whisk in the cream and milk; then whisk in the egg yolks. Place over mediumhigh heat and whisk until the custard thickens and boils, about 6 minutes.
Remove from the heat and whisk in the butter and vanilla. Scrape the custard
into a large bowl and let cool completely, whisking occasionally. This should
take about 1 hour.
4. In the piecrust, alternate layers of banana slices and custard filling. Cover
and chill. To serve, top with whipped cream and decorate with some more sliced
bananas.
TRUE COLORS
If you slice your bananas way ahead of time, you’ll wind up with brown bananas
instead of the bright yellow you want for this pie. To keep them nice and yellow,
go ahead and squeeze some lemon juice on them after they’ve been sliced.
BUTTERSCOTCH PRETZEL PIE
I adore a nicely salted butterscotch, so I went ahead and combined bits of pretzel
in the graham cracker crust. If you’re like me and you can’t choose between your
salty tooth and your sweet tooth, this one’s for you.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
Crust
¾cup pretzel crumbs
¾cup graham cracker crumbs
2 tablespoons granulated sugar
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter, melted
Filling
¾cup packed dark brown sugar
¼ cup cornstarch
Pinch of salt
3 large egg yolks
2 cups whole milk
2 tablespoons cold butter, cut into small bits
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Topping
1 cup cold heavy cream
3 tablespoons granulated sugar
ALL SWEET
If you’re short on time, go ahead and use a ready-made graham cracker crust for
a more traditional butterscotch pie. Your pie won’t be salty, but sometimes it’s
nice to be all sweet.
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. To make the crust: In a medium bowl, combine the pretzel crumbs, graham
cracker crumbs, granulated sugar, and melted butter until they form an evenly
moist, crumbly mixture. Press the mixture evenly onto the bottom and up the
sides of a 9-inch pie plate. Bake until the crust is fragrant and firm, 8 to 10
minutes. Set aside to cool.
3. To make the filling: In a medium bowl, whisk together the brown sugar,
cornstarch, and salt. Add the egg yolks and ½ cup of the milk and whisk
thoroughly to combine.
4. In a large saucepan, bring the remaining 1½ cups milk to a boil over
medium-high heat. Remove from the heat. Whisking constantly, very slowly
pour the hot milk into the egg mixture. Keep whisking so that you don’t
scramble those eggs. Return the entire mixture to the pan. Cook over medium
heat, stirring constantly, until the mixture comes to a boil and thickens, 3 to 5
minutes. Remove from the heat and whisk in the butter and vanilla until smooth.
5. Pour the filling into the cooled piecrust and smooth the surface with a small
spatula. Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap to prevent a skin from
forming. Make sure the plastic wrap is right up against the filling.
6. Place the pie in the fridge until thoroughly cooled and set, at least 2 hours.
7. Just before serving, make the topping: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted
with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, whip the cream and
granulated sugar at medium-high speed to form soft peaks. Spread the whipped
cream over the pie and serve.
DECADENT DOUBLE-CHOCOLATE CREAM PIE
The only thing better than a chocolate cream pie is one in a wonderful chocolate
cookie crumb crust. If a person has a craving for chocolate, I don’t see the point
of going halfway, y’all.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
Crust
1⅔ cups chocolate wafer crumbs (from about 30 wafers, such as
Nabisco Famous Chocolate Wafers)
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter, melted
¼ cup sugar
Filling
⅓ cup sugar
2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon cornstarch
2 tablespoons unsweetened cocoa powder
½ teaspoon salt
1 large egg
2 large egg yolks
2 cups whole milk
7 ounces semisweet chocolate (61% cacao), finely chopped
3 tablespoons cold butter
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Topping and Garnish
1 cup heavy cream
3 tablespoons sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Chocolate curls (see box, page 320)
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. To make the crust: In a medium bowl, combine the cookie crumbs, melted
butter, and sugar until they form an evenly moist, crumbly mixture. Press the
mixture evenly onto the bottom and up the sides of a 9-inch pie plate. Bake until
the crust is fragrant and firm, 7 to 8 minutes. Set aside to cool.
3. To make the filling: In a medium bowl, whisk together the sugar,
cornstarch, cocoa, and salt. Whisk in the whole egg, egg yolks, and ½ cup of the
milk until thoroughly combined.
4. In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, bring the remaining 1½ cups milk to a
boil over medium-high heat. Remove from the heat. Whisking constantly, very
slowly pour the hot milk into the egg mixture. Keep whisking so that you don’t
scramble those eggs. Return the entire mixture to the pan. Cook over medium
heat, stirring constantly, until the mixture comes to a boil and thickens, 3 to 5
minutes. Remove from the heat, add the chocolate, and let sit for a minute. Add
the butter and vanilla and whisk until the chocolate is completely melted and
smooth.
5. Pour the filling into the cooled piecrust and smooth the surface with a small
spatula. Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap to prevent a skin from
forming. Make sure the plastic wrap is right up against the filling.
6. Place the pie in the fridge until thoroughly cooled and set, about 2 hours.
7. Just before serving, make the topping: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted
with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, whip the cream, sugar,
and vanilla at medium-high speed to form medium peaks. Spread the whipped
cream over the pie. Sprinkle all over with chocolate curls and serve.
Create chocolate curls by running a vegetable peeler along a slightly
softened block of chocolate as you would along a carrot or potato.
CURL UP
Chocolate curls are such a pretty and easy way to gussy up a pie or cake. To
make yours, hold a block of chocolate with a paper towel (so your hand doesn’t
melt the chocolate) and use a vegetable peeler to scrape along the edge to create
long, curly strips. Use a skewer to gently pick them up (the heat of your hand
could melt them) and place them on the pie.

SWEET POTATO PRALINE CRUNCH PIE
During the holidays, sweet potatoes, bourbon, cinnamon, ginger, brown sugar,
butter, and pecans just seem to get together in the kitchen. This pie was a real hit
at our family Thanksgiving and its smell while baking drove us all crazy.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
Pie
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 341) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
1¾ cups mashed cooked sweet potato
1 cup packed light brown sugar
½ cup sour cream
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
2 large eggs
2 tablespoons bourbon (optional)
1¾ teaspoons ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon ground ginger
½ teaspoon salt
Topping
1 cup pecan halves
2 tablespoons packed light brown sugar
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
1. To prepare the pie: Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll
the dough into a 12-inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a
prepared crust). Use it to line a 9-inch pie pan and chill in the refrigerator for 30
minutes or up to overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more
than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the beans or pie weights and paper or foil.
3. While the piecrust is in the oven, whisk together the sweet potato, brown
sugar, sour cream, melted butter, eggs, bourbon (if using), cinnamon, ginger, and
salt. Pour the filling into the piecrust.
4. To make the topping: In a small bowl, stir together the pecans, brown sugar,
and cinnamon. Sprinkle over the surface of the pie. Bake until the filling is set,
35 to 40 minutes. Let cool before slicing and serving up.
A STICKY SITUATION
If you’d rather avoid the flour and keep your work area neater, try rolling out
your dough between 2 pieces of waxed or parchment paper. You’ll have
beautiful nonsticking crusts ready in no time!
BOURBON PECAN PIE
My pecan pie has just enough goop to hold together all those good, sweet,
crunchy Georgia pe-cans. Whether you call them “pee-cans” or “pe-cahns,”
you’ll adore this rich, slightly sticky pie.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
¾ cup packed light brown sugar
¾ cup cane syrup or corn syrup
3 large eggs, lightly beaten
½ teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons bourbon
1½ cups pecan halves
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the beans or pie weights and paper or foil.
3. Reduce the oven temperature to 325°F.
4. While the piecrust is in the oven, in a small saucepan, melt the butter.
Whisk in the 1 tablespoon flour. Whisk in the brown sugar and cane syrup. Bring
to a simmer, then immediately remove from the heat and let cool for 10 minutes.
Beat in the eggs, salt, and bourbon. Stir in the pecans.
5. Pour the filling into the piecrust. Bake until the filling is set but still jiggles
slightly in the center, 45 to 50 minutes. Let cool completely on a wire rack
before slicing and serving up.
IN SHAPE
Now, I know you’re going to be excited to get down to making (and eating) this
pie, but I’d like to stress how very important that 30 minutes in the fridge is for
the pie dough. By getting the dough really cold before popping it into the oven,
you’ll help to ensure that the crust doesn’t lose its shape and shrink up on you.
KENTUCKY WALNUT PIE
The chocolate chip cookie of pies. I put these ingredients together when we had
a whole bunch of walnuts on hand, and we all went nuts for it, if you’ll pardon
the pun.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
½ cup all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
1 cup sugar
Pinch of salt
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
2 large eggs
2 tablespoons bourbon (optional)
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1½ cups chopped walnuts
½ cup semisweet chocolate chips
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 350°F.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the sugar, the ½ cup flour, and the salt.
In a small bowl, whisk together the melted butter, eggs, bourbon (if using), and
vanilla. Using a rubber spatula, fold the butter mixture into the sugar mixture
just until combined. Stir in the walnuts and chocolate chips. Spoon the filling
into the unbaked piecrust. Bake until the filling is firm to the touch, 40 to 45
minutes. Let cool to room temperature before serving.
COLD STORAGE
The first order of business with nuts is to store them properly. And that means
keeping them nice and cold. You see, all nuts contain oils that have a nasty habit
of going rancid if they are left in the cupboard too long. So, I like to keep my
nuts in the fridge or freezer. Wrap them up tightly and you can store them in the
f
r
i
d
g
e
f
o
r
a
s
l
o
n
g
a
s
4
t
o
5
m
o
n
t
h
s. I
n
t
h
e
f
r
e
e
z
e
r
t
h
e
y
s
h
o
u
l
d
k
e
e
p
f
o
r
a
b
o
u
t
1
0
m
o
n
t
h
s.
LEMONY CHESS PIE
Chess pie is such an old-timey, homey dessert. You can make it any time of year
with ingredients you have on hand: eggs, cornmeal, flour, butter, and sugar. I’ve
heard theories that it was originally called chess pie because folks thought the
pie contained a plain white cheese. And the filling is a bit like sweet ricotta,
since it has a little texture from the cornmeal. I like mine nice and lemony. This
is one of those pies I’ll keep out on the counter nibbling at all day. You know, to
even out the edges.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
1 cup sugar 1 tablespoon cornmeal
Pinch of salt
3 large eggs
Grated zest of 1 lemon
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
⅓ cup fresh lemon juice (about 2 lemons)
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the beans or pie weights and paper or foil.
3. While the piecrust is in the oven, whisk together the sugar, cornmeal, the 1
tablespoon flour, and the salt. Whisk in the eggs and lemon zest until thoroughly
combined. Slowly whisk in the melted butter, lemon juice, and vanilla.
4. Pour the filling into the piecrust. Bake until the filling is set and jiggles like
jelly, 30 to 35 minutes. Let this pie cool right through before serving.
THE BEST ZEST
My favorite tool for zesting citrus is my handy Microplane. But whatever tool
you use to zest your citrus fruit, be sure not to press down too hard on the peel:
you want to make sure you get only the thin colored layer on the outside, not the
spongy white part underneath.
Roll the dough from the center out to the edges in all directions.
KEY LIME DIVINITY PIE
When it comes to Key lime pie, the tarter the filling, the happier I am. Those
little green limes sure pack a lot of puckery flavor. And that fluffy divinity
topping just makes it out of this world!
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
Filling
1¼ cups sugar
⅓ cup cornstarch
Pinch of salt
½ cup fresh Key lime or regular lime juice (9 Key limes or 3 regular
limes)
4 large egg yolks
4 tablespoons (½ stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
Meringue Topping
4 large egg whites
¼ teaspoon cream of tartar
Pinch of salt
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
KEY TO SUCCESS
The secret to the best Key lime pie is really no secret at all! All you have to do is
make sure you use those tart Key limes. You can distinguish them from regular
limes by their lighter color and smaller and rounder shape, as well as their
thinner rind. If you can’t find fresh Key limes, you can also buy their juice
bottled. Regular limes will work, too, in a pinch. It just won’t be quite as special.
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the paper or foil and beans or pie weights, return
to the oven, and bake until golden, 10 to 15 minutes longer.
3. Meanwhile, make the filling: In a large saucepan, whisk together the sugar,
cornstarch, and salt. Slowly whisk in 1½ cups water, the lime juice, and the egg
yolks. Place the saucepan over medium heat and bring to a boil, stirring
constantly. Let the mixture boil for 1 minute, then whisk in the butter. Pour the
hot filling into the baked piecrust.
4. While the filling is still hot, make the meringue topping: Bring a medium
saucepan of water to a bare simmer on the stove. In the bowl of an electric mixer
fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, whisk together the
egg whites, cream of tartar, salt, and vanilla at medium speed. Place the mixer
bowl over the pan of simmering water. By hand, whisk the mixture constantly
until it registers 140°F on an instant-read thermometer. Remove from the heat
and return to the mixer. Whip at high speed until soft peaks form. Spread the
meringue over the surface of the pie filling, being sure to spread the meringue to
the edges of the crust to anchor it. Refrigerate the pie for at least 3 hours to set it
before serving with a good old Southern smile.
DOWN-HOME GRITS PIE
When I was working on The Lady & Sons Just Desserts, I took a look at my
container of grits and said to myself, “Why not?” So I went ahead and started
playing around with grits and came up with this very special pie. Just after I
made it, I recall, a friend stopped in, so I served him up a slice. He couldn’t
guess what he was eating, but he just loved it, so I knew I had a hit on my hands.
SERVES 8
¼ cup quick-cooking grits (not instant grits)
⅛ teaspoon salt
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
¾ cup sugar
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour
3 large eggs, lightly beaten
¼ cup buttermilk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
Sweetened whipped cream and strawberries, for garnish (optional)
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F.
2. In a small saucepan, bring ¾cup water to a boil. Slowly whisk in the grits
and salt. Cook for 20 minutes, whisking constantly. Add the butter and cook for
an extra minute. Set aside to cool slightly.
3. In a small bowl, stir together the sugar, flour, eggs, buttermilk, and vanilla.
Stir into the cooked grits. Pour the grits mixture into the unbaked piecrust and
bake until set, 35 to 40 minutes. Serve warm or cold with whipped cream and
strawberries piled on top, if desired.
EGGS, LIGHTLY BEATEN
By lightly beating the egg with a fork before adding it to the bowl, you ensure
that the white and the yolk are evenly distributed with the rest of the ingredients.
This is especially important when you’re mixing by hand. It’s just another little
step that will help to make your baked goods the best they can possibly be.
ELVIS PIE
The King loved his bananas and peanut butter, and I don’t suppose he was
opposed to cream cheese, either, so I make this fun, satisfying pie sprinkled with
chopped peanuts in his honor.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
Filling
1 cup creamy peanut butter
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
⅓ cup sugar
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
1 cup cold heavy cream
One 9-inch prepared graham cracker piecrust
2 large bananas, cut into ¼ -inch-thick slices
Topping
1 cup cold heavy cream
¼ cup sugar
Chopped roasted peanuts, for garnish
1. To make the filling: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, cream together the peanut butter, cream
cheese, sugar, and vanilla at medium speed. In a separate bowl, whip the cream
until soft peaks form. You can do this by hand with a whisk or in the bowl of an
electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. Using a rubber spatula, fold the
cream into the peanut butter mixture until completely combined. Make sure you
fold, not stir, as stirring will only deflate all the air you’ve just whipped into the
cream. Scrape half the filling into the piecrust and smooth with a spatula. Layer
the sliced bananas on top of the filling, then spread the remaining filling over the
bananas. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate until set, at least 1 hour.
2. To make the topping: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, whip the cream and sugar together until
soft peaks form. Spread over the surface of the pie. Sprinkle the chopped peanuts
all over the top and serve to all your Elvis lovers out there.
WHIP IT UP
Homemade whipped cream is like a taste of heaven on just about anything. To
make it easier and faster, be sure to chill your whisk, cream, and bowl in the
fridge for about 15 minutes before you start whipping. Whip either by hand or
with an electric mixer until the mixture thickens and forms soft peaks.
VANILLA BUTTERMILK PIE
Sometimes we forget the simple old-time foods like this sweet, homey pie. Put
this one on your to-do list because it is a tangy, refreshing change of pace from
richer pies, and if you’ve never had it, y’all, I know you’ll just love it.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
¼ cup all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
1¼ cups sugar
⅛ teaspoon salt
4 large eggs, lightly beaten
1½ cups buttermilk
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, melted
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F. Line the
dough with parchment paper or foil and fill with dried beans or pie weights.
Bake for 20 minutes. Remove the beans or pie weights and paper or foil.
Blind bake the piecrust by covering it with parchment paper or foil. Fill
with dried beans, pie weights, or uncooked rice, then bake to set the dough.
Remove the paper or foil and the beans, weights, or rice. Bake again for a
few minutes to brown, then add the filling.
3. Reduce the oven temperature to 350°F.
4. While the piecrust is in the oven, whisk together the sugar, the ¼ cup flour,
and the salt. Add the eggs and whisk thoroughly to combine. Whisking
constantly, slowly pour in the buttermilk, whisking out any lumps. Whisk in the
melted butter and the vanilla.
5. Pour the filling into the piecrust. Bake until the filling is set and jiggles like
jelly, about 40 minutes. Let the pie cool right through before serving.
ADD SOME ZEST
While I just adore this pie as is, if I’ve got lemons around, sometimes I grate zest
into my custard to add a little zing. The lemon-vanilla flavor is just so delicate,
and the little flecks of lemon-yellow in the custard look so pretty.
GREEN TOMATO PIE
Tomatoes are a fruit, and green tomatoes are so tart and crunchy, they’re just
perfect cooked and sweetened like I do here. If you grow your own, or if you
find green tomatoes at the market in late summer and early fall, do give this
wonderful pie a try.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
All-purpose flour for dusting
1 double batch Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or two 9-inch
unbaked prepared piecrusts
1¼ cups sugar, plus extra for sprinkling
2 tablespoons tapioca flour
1 teaspoon grated orange zest
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
5 green tomatoes, or enough to fill the piecrust, thinly sliced
1 large egg white, lightly beaten
1. Dust a work surfce with a small handful of flour. Roll each disk of pie
dough into a 12-inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using prepared
crusts). Use one to line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30
minutes or up to overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more
than 2 hours). Place the other on a baking sheet, cover with plastic wrap, and
chill until you need it.
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 425°F.
3. In a large bowl, whisk together the 1¼ cups sugar, the tapioca flour, orange
zest, cinnamon, and nutmeg. Lay the tomato slices in the unbaked piecrust until
you fill the dish. (Overlapping will occur, but tomatoes will shrink in size when
baked.) Sprinkle the sugar mixture over the tomatoes. Gently place the reserved
round of dough over the pie, folding the extra dough under around the edges.
Press the bottom and top crusts together by pinching (or pressing with the tines
of a fork) to seal the edges. Using a knife, make several 2-inch slits in the top
crust to allow steam to escape. Brush the crust with the egg white and sprinkle
with sugar.
4. Place the pie in the oven and bake for 25 minutes. Reduce the oven
temperature to 350°F and continue to bake until the crust is golden brown, about
20 minutes longer. Let cool on a wire rack before serving this little piece of
Southern hospitality.
ANY WAY YOU SLICE IT
Unless you’ve got a very sharp slicing knife, I’d say go with a serrated knife to
get a nice clean cut on your tomatoes before they go in the pie. While green
tomatoes are generally easier to slice than ripe tomatoes, you still want to make
sure you get as clean a cut as possible without bruising these little gems.
Trim the edges of the piecrust and crimp by pressing all around the top rim
of the pie plate with the tines of a fork or the dull side of a knife.
Alternatively, press the thumb and forefinger of one hand, held about 1 inch
apart, along the inside rim of the crust while pushing into the space between
these fingers along the outside rim with the forefinger of the other hand.
BLUEBERRY CRUMB PIE
I adore the way that sweet-tart purple blueberry juices bubble up here and there
through the crumb topping on this pie. Try it slightly warm with a scoop of ice
cream for a real treat.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked prepared
piecrust
Crumb Topping
¾cup all-purpose flour
¼ cup packed light brown sugar
¼ cup granulated sugar
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon salt
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, melted
Filling
¾cup granulated sugar
¼ cup cornstarch
¼ teaspoon salt
5 cups blueberries
Grated zest and juice of 1 lemon
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 375°F.
3. To make the crumb topping: In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour,
both sugars, the cinnamon, and the salt. Add the melted butter and stir until
evenly moistened. Using your hands, roll the topping into balls the size of
walnuts.
4. To make the filling: In a large saucepan, stir together the granulated sugar,
cornstarch, and salt. Add the blueberries and toss to coat. Set the pan over
medium-high heat and bring to a boil, stirring often. Remove from the heat and
stir in the lemon juice and zest.
5. Spoon the blueberries and all the juices into the unbaked piecrust. Cover the
surface with the crumb topping. Bake until the filling is bubbling and the topping
is golden brown, 50 minutes to 1 hour. Let cool thoroughly before serving.
MIDWINTER BLUEBERRY PIE
It’s the middle of winter and fresh blueberries cost an arm and a leg. There’s
nothing to worry about, folks. Simply substitute frozen blueberries for the fresh
ones.
PEACHES AND CREAM PIE
I like my peach pie as juicy and full of fruit as can be, and I mellow out the
filling with cream and stabilize it with a little tapioca, which gives it a real
comforting feeling.
MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
3 cups peeled (see box, page 422), pitted, and sliced peaches
½ cup sugar
3 tablespoons instant tapioca
Pinch of salt
1 cup heavy cream
2 large eggs
2 large egg yolks
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1. Dust a work surface with a small handful of flour. Roll the dough into a 12-
inch round about ¼ inch thick (skip this step if using a prepared crust). Use it to
line a 9-inch pie plate and chill in the refrigerator for 30 minutes or up to
overnight (cover lightly with plastic wrap if chilling for more than 2 hours).
2. When you are ready to bake the pie, preheat the oven to 400°F.
3. In a medium bowl, toss together the peaches, sugar, tapioca, and salt. In a
small bowl, whisk together the cream, whole eggs, egg yolks, and vanilla. Place
the peach mixture on the bottom of the piecrust. Pour the cream mixture evenly
over the peaches, pushing down on the peaches to submerge them in the liquid.
4. Bake for 20 minutes, then reduce the oven temperature to 350°F. Bake until
the center of the pie is set and the top is lightly browned, 25 to 30 minutes. Let
this pie cool thoroughly before you serve it.
SHINING STAR
Instant tapioca is a starch thickener. It’s the perfect choice for pies because it
gives a glossy sheen to whatever it’s tossed with. It also thickens quickly at a
low temperature. Most important, though, it imparts no flavor to your pie,
leaving the peaches and cream the real stars of this little beauty.
FRIED PEACH PIES
My Grandmama Paul always made her fried pies with dried fruit that she’d
simmer in syrup. The fruit plumps up beautifully and has an especially intense
flavor. I will never forget how she would just roll her dough, cut it out, fill it,
fold it, and crimp it with a fork in no time, sliding a pie into the oil with one
hand while she started on the next one with her other.
MAKES 5 HAND PIES
1 cup dried peaches
2½ tablespoons sugar
1 tablespoon butter
½ teaspoon ground cinnamon
About 4 quarts vegetable oil, for deep-frying
All-purpose flour, for dusting
Paula’s Flaky Piecrust Dough (page 339) or one 9-inch unbaked
prepared piecrust
1 egg, lightly beaten, for brushing
1. In a small saucepan, combine the dried peaches and ½ cup water. Bring to a
simmer over medium heat and cook until the fruit is softened, about 10 minutes.
Let cool slightly, then stir in the sugar, butter, and cinnamon. Let cool
completely.
2. In a deep pot, heat 3 inches of oil until it reaches 350°F on a deep fry
thermometer, about 15 to 20 minutes.
3. Sprinkle a small handful of flour over a work surface. Roll the pie dough
into a 13-inch round. Using a 4½- to 5-inch round cookie cutter, cut out rounds
of dough.
4. Divide the peach filling evenly among the dough rounds. Brush the edges
of one half of each dough round with the egg. Fold the rounds over the filling to
make half-moons. Crimp the edges of the dough with the tines of a fork to seal
and decorate.
5. Working in batches of 2 at a time, add the pies to the hot oil and fry until
golden and crisp, 2 to 3 minutes. Set on a paper towel–lined plate to drain. Serve
while these little pies are still warm.
STUCK ON YOU
Oh, I just love these cute little pies! To make sure they fry up as neatly as
possible, I give them a good brushing with the egg wash. You see, that’s the glue
that holds these little guys together. The egg wash, together with a firm
crimping, should ensure that they don’t bust open on you when you drop them
into the oil.
PEACH BISCUIT COBBLER
A biscuit-topped cobbler is homey and satisfying like nothing else, and it works
so well with real juicy fruit like ripe summer peaches. Bring this along to a
picnic or potluck, or serve it at your next barbecue and celebrate summer.
MAKES 6 TO 8 SERVINGS
Peach Filling
3 pounds peaches, peeled (see box, page 422), pitted, and sliced ¼ inch
thick
⅔ cup packed light brown sugar
¼ cup instant tapioca
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
⅛ teaspoon salt
Biscuit Topping
1⅔ cups all-purpose flour, plus more for dusting
¼ cup granulated sugar
1½ tablespoons baking powder
⅛ teaspoon salt
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
⅔ cup heavy cream, plus extra for brushing
Coarse sugar, for sprinkling (optional)
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a shallow 2½-quart baking dish with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. To prepare the peach filling: In a medium bowl, stir together all the
ingredients. Pour the filling into the prepared dish.
3. To make the biscuit topping: In a food processor or large bowl, pulse or
whisk together the flour, granulated sugar, baking powder, and salt. Pulse or cut
in the butter just until the mixture resembles coarse meal.
Slowly add the ⅔ cup cream, mixing until the dough just comes together. It
will look scraggly and messy.
4. Sprinkle a small handful of flour over a work surface. Place the dough on
the surface and pat together. Pull off 2-inch pieces of dough and roll into balls.
Flatten them with the palm of your hand and evenly arrange the dough rounds on
top of the filling. Brush with cream and sprinkle with coarse sugar, if desired.
Bake until the cobbler topping is golden and the filling is bubbling, about 1 hour.
Serve warm.
A DIFFERENT KIND OF COBBLER
Now, I usually go in for cobblers that have a cakelike consistency like my
blueberry and blackberry cobblers. But sometimes I like to change things up and
make a cobbler like this one. The biscuit topping is such a nice crunchy, toasty
complement to the soft and silky peaches on the inside. I tell you, there just
seems to be no end to the ways you can put biscuits to use!
BLUEBERRY COBBLER
This one-bowl cobbler comes together in a minute and feeds a crowd. Keep a
few cans of blueberry filling in your pantry and you can put it together at the
drop of a hat. I just love how the lemon zest complements the sweet berries.
SERVES 8 TO 10
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 cup sugar
¾cup self-rising flour
Grated zest of 1 lemon
Pinch of salt
¾cup whole milk
2 cans (14 ounces each) blueberry pie filling
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. Put the butter in an 11 by 7-inch baking dish and place in the oven to melt.
Tilt the pan and swirl the butter around to coat all sides.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the sugar, flour, lemon zest, and salt.
Whisk in the milk slowly, to prevent clumping. Pour the batter evenly over the
melted butter in the baking dish, but do not stir. Spoon the pie filling evenly over
the batter. The batter will rise to the top during baking.
4. Bake until the cobbler is lightly browned and firm to the touch, 40 to 50
minutes. I like to serve this cobbler while it’s still warm, but room temperature is
perfectly fine, too.
CHERRY PICKING
This cobbler is just as nice with cherry pie filling in place of the blueberry pie
filling. It all depends on what you’re in the mood for.
BLACKBERRY COBBLER
Blackberries cook up to such a beautiful and dramatic deep black-purple, you
could serve this at a fancy dinner party—or enjoy it on a picnic blanket.
SERVES 8 TO 10
4 cups blackberries
2 cups sugar
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1½ cups all-purpose flour
2¼ teaspoons baking powder
¾teaspoon salt
1½ cups whole milk
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. In a medium saucepan, combine the blackberries and 1 cup of the sugar and
mix well. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat and simmer for 10 minutes.
Remove from the heat.
3. Put the butter in a 13 by 9-inch baking dish and place in the oven to melt.
Tilt the pan and swirl the butter around to coat all sides.
4. In a large bowl, whisk together the remaining 1 cup sugar, the flour, baking
powder, and salt. Whisk in the milk slowly, to prevent clumping. Pour the batter
evenly over the melted butter in the baking dish, but do not stir. Spoon the fruit
on top, gently pouring in the syrup. The batter will rise to the top during baking.
5. Bake until the cobbler is lightly browned and firm to the touch, 30 to 40
minutes. I like to serve this cobbler while it’s still warm, but room temperature is
perfectly fine too.
OR TRY FROZEN
If blackberries aren’t around when you feel like making up this cobbler, go
ahead and substitute frozen blackberries. You won’t be disappointed!
PEAR CRISP
When I see a bowl of juicy pears on the counter, I think about having me a
snack, but I know that when Michael sees those pears, his mind turns
immediately to one of his all-time favorites—a nice, homey pear crisp. With
syrupy-sweet slices of pear underneath and plenty of that crunchy, buttery
topping, it’s a fine dessert. Just pull out some vanilla ice cream, and you got
yourself a real treat.
SERVES 8 TO 10
Filling
5 large pears (about 2¾ pounds), peeled, halved, cored, and cut into ½-
inch-thick slices
2 tablespoons sugar
¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon
Topping
⅔ cup sugar
⅔ cup all-purpose flour
¾ teaspoon ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon salt
8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
½ cup sliced almonds
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Grease a 9-inch square baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. To prepare the filling: In a medium bowl, toss together the pears, sugar, and
cinnamon. Place in the prepared baking dish.
3. To make the topping: In a medium bowl, whisk together the sugar, flour,
cinnamon, and salt. Cut in the butter with a pastry blender, your hands, or two
knives (see illustration, page 277) until the mixture resembles coarse meal. Add
the almonds and stir to combine.
4. Scatter the topping over the surface of the pears. Bake until light golden
brown and the pears have softened, 50 to 60 minutes. I like to serve a crisp just
like my cobblers, while it’s still warm, but room temperature is perfectly fine,
too.
PEAR PICKING
There are so many tasty types of pears to choose from. Whichever type you
choose for this lovely little crisp, make sure the pears are firm to the touch but
give slightly under gentle pressure. Definitely steer clear of mushy and bruised
pears. I love pears with cinnamon as I’ve flavored them in this crisp, but they’re
equally nice with ginger or nutmeg.
PAULA’S FLAKY PIECRUST DOUGH
I use chilled butter for flavor and chilled Crisco for texture in my pie dough, and
just enough icy-cold water to bring the ingredients together without making
things tough. Some pie doughs can get finicky on you, but this one always does
me proud. You can easily double this if you need enough for a double-crust pie.
MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH PIECRUST
1 cup all-purpose flour
¼ teaspoon salt
4 tablespoons (½ stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
¼ cup cold vegetable shortening
2 to 4 tablespoons ice-cold water
1. In a food processor, pulse together the flour and salt just until combined.
Add the butter and shortening and pulse just until the mixture resembles coarse
meal. Add the ice water, 1 tablespoon at a time, and pulse just until the dough
comes together, taking care not to overwork the dough. The dough should be
rough and not smooth.
2. Place the dough on a sheet of plastic wrap and press it into a flat disk. Wrap
well and refrigerate for at least 2 hours before rolling out.
DO AHEAD
This pie dough will keep in the fridge for 3 days or so, and in the freezer for a
good 3 months. Now, how convenient is that?

For many Southerners, cake is a way of life. And we don’t need to wait for
birthdays, weddings, or other special events to bake a big old layer cake, either
—we woke up and the sun came out and that’s all the occasion we need! We take
cake so seriously here that if you go to a Southern town, you’ll likely find one
woman who specializes in making the best of each of the three big cakes:
caramel, coconut, and chocolate layer.
Baking a great big cake can sure seem intimidating—but oftentimes it’s as
easy as stirrin’ up a batch of brownies. Some of my recipes, like the Coconut
Cake (page 363) I’ve been making for Jamie’s birthday since he was small,
begin with a mix, which, after all, is just your flour, leavening, and sugar all
combined and ready for you. But even without this shortcut, I can pull together a
recipe like Peachy Upside-Down Cake (page 359), one of my absolute favorites,
in about the time it takes to preheat the oven.
Cake played a big part in my childhood, too. Back then, I attended church
suppers and other buffets where all the best bakers in the community contributed
their prized cakes. And while I do believe I did my share to help with a slice or
two of the tall, fancy-looking layer cakes like Lady Baltimore Cake (page 381)
or General Robert E. Lee Cake (page 386), I seem to recall that nothing made
my eyes light up like the sight of a simple Texas Sheet Cake with Chocolate
Fudge Frosting (page 380). Watching my grandbaby Jack get into that good
fudgy frosting brings me right back.
Even to this day, I am a sucker for frosting. I frost my Nutty Fudge Brownies
(page 346), and I spread my creamy Pecan Praline Cheesecake (page 357) with a
fluffy sour cream topping. In my kitchen, dessert is absolutely the best place to
add a little more—a special flourish on top, an extra layer to turn a cake into a
real showstopper, a handful of chopped pecans or peanuts here, some chocolate
chips there. Could there be anything more fun than fixin’ the kind of dessert that
makes everyone feel special—special occasion or not?
CHOCOLATE PECAN BARS
You know I was born and raised in the pecan capital of the world, and I can
assure you that there is no better place for a pecan than right here, stirred into
these sweet, chocolate bar cookies. Pack a few of these in a lunch box and you
will make someone very popular.
MAKES 24 SQUARES
Crust
2 cups all-purpose flour
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
¾cup confectioners’sugar
½ cup granulated sugar
Pinch of salt
Filling
1½ sticks (6 ounces) butter
½ cup light corn syrup
½ cup heavy cream
½ cup packed light brown sugar
¼ cup honey
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
3½ cups coarsely chopped pecans
1½ cups mini chocolate chips
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Lightly grease a 13 by 9-inch baking pan with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. To make the crust: In a food processor, combine all the ingredients. Pulse
until a crumbly shortbread dough forms—it will be like wet sand. Press the
dough into the prepared pan and bake until the crust is golden around the edges,
about 20 minutes. (Leave the oven on.) 3. While the crust is baking, make the
filling: In a large saucepan, melt the butter over low heat. Add the corn syrup,
cream, brown sugar, and honey. Stir over low heat until well combined. Remove
from the heat and stir in the vanilla.
4. Once the crust is finished baking, add the pecans and chocolate chips to the
filling. Spread the filling mixture evenly over the crust. Return to the oven and
bake until the filling is set and the mixture is bubbling around the edges, about
35 minutes. Let cool completely in the pan before cutting into 24 cute little
squares.
NUTS ABOUT NUTS
If you just love your pecans and you don’t want anything getting in front of that
nutty flavor, go ahead and leave out the chocolate. You’ll wind up with a more
traditional pecan bar that is just as delicious as this tasty chocolate pecan bar.
NUTTY FUDGE BROWNIES
To me, a brownie ought to be frosted. Why hold back? I love mine with some
nuts and enough salt in the batter to balance some of that sweetness.
MAKES 24 BROWNIES
Brownies
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter
8 ounces semisweet chocolate, chopped
4 ounces unsweetened chocolate, chopped
2 cups granulated sugar
4 large eggs, lightly beaten
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1 cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon salt
1½ cups chopped pecans
Frosting
¾cup granulated sugar
⅓ cup unsweetened cocoa powder, sifted
⅓ cup whole milk
3 tablespoons butter, at room temperature
1½ tablespoons light corn syrup
3¼ cups confectioners’sugar, sifted
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. To make the brownies: In a large saucepan, melt the butter and both
chocolates over low heat, stirring constantly. Whisk in the granulated sugar.
Then whisk in the eggs and vanilla.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, salt, and pecans. Using a
rubber spatula, fold the chocolate mixture into the flour mixture just until
combined.
4. Pour the batter into the prepared baking pan and bake until firm and set, but
not dry, 25 to 30 minutes. Let cool completely in the pan.
5. To make the frosting: In a large saucepan, whisk together the granulated
sugar and cocoa powder. Whisk in the milk, butter, and corn syrup. Place the pan
over medium-high heat and bring to a boil, whisking constantly. Take the pan off
the heat and stir in the confectioners’ sugar and vanilla. Spread the frosting over
the surface of the cooled brownies, cut into 24 squares and enjoy!
KEEP IT SIMPLE
If you have a hankering for brownies but you don’t feel like making your own
frosting, feel free to substitute canned frosting for homemade. And choose
whatever flavor you like! Or if you’d like, keep it real simple and leave the
frosting out altogether.
BROWNIE PUDDING PUDDLES
This is a really cute little way to get a chocoholic his or her fix. I adore making
desserts in mini muffin tins, so they’re easy to serve and eat in one bite.
MAKES 24 BROWNIE BITES
Crust
¾cup chocolate wafer crumbs (from about 15 wafers such as Nabisco
Famous Chocolate Wafers)
2 tablespoons sugar
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, melted
Filling
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter
2 ounces unsweetened chocolate, finely chopped
¾cup sugar
2 large eggs
⅓ cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
½ cup semisweet chocolate chips
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Generously grease one 24-cup mini muffin tin or
two 12-cup mini muffin tins with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. To make the crust: In a small bowl, combine all the ingredients until they
form an evenly moist, crumbly mixture. Divide the mixture evenly among the
muffin cups (about 1½ teaspoons per cup) and, using the back of a spoon or a
shot glass, press the cookie crumb mixture firmly into each well. Bake until the
crust is set and fragrant, 5 minutes. Remove from the oven and set aside to cool.
3. To make the filling: In a medium saucepan, melt the butter and chocolate
over low heat, stirring constantly. In a medium bowl, whisk together the sugar
and eggs until smooth and combined. Add the chocolate-butter mixture to the
egg mixture and whisk to combine. Using a rubber spatula, gently fold in the
flour just until combined. Fold in the vanilla and chocolate chips.
4. Spoon about 1 heaping tablespoon of the batter into each muffin cup. Bake
until the brownies are set around the edges but nice and gooey in the center, 11
to 12 minutes. Let cool completely in the pan.
5. Using a small spatula or paring knife, carefully remove the brownies from
the pan and enjoy them with a tall glass of cold milk.
THE LIGHT
TOUCH Take care in removing the brownies from the pan. They can stick to the
sides and be a little tricky to dislodge, so be real gentle with them as you are
moving your spatula or paring knife around the edges to release them.
CHOCOLATE CHIP–PEANUT COOKIES
I always like to keep a container of salted roasted peanuts on hand for snacking,
so it’s no surprise that eventually they wound up in a batch of cookies I was
making. Chocolate and peanuts are always a winning combination in my book!
These cookies keep in an airtight container at room temperature for about 5 days.
I like that this makes a big batch. That way, I’ve always got something sweet to
put out when company comes round.
MAKES ABOUT 5 DOZEN COOKIES
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1⅔ cups packed light brown sugar
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2⅓ cups all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
1 cup semisweet chocolate chips
1 cup chopped salted roasted peanuts
1. Preheat the oven to 375°F. Lightly grease several baking sheets with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until creamy and smooth, 1 to 2
minutes. Add the sugar and beat the mixture until light and fluffy, about 5
minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl occasionally to
incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Beat in the eggs, one at a time, beating
well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine. Beat in the vanilla.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, baking soda,
and salt. Add the flour mixture to the butter mixture, beating just until combined.
Using a rubber spatula, fold in the chocolate chips and peanuts.
DON’T GET STUCK
Cookie batter tends to be a bit sticky, so I like to use two spoons to drop the
batter onto the cookie sheets. First, I spray them with a little cooking spray so
that the dough will slide off more easily. Then I scoop up my rounded spoonful
in one spoon and use the other spoon to push it off and onto the baking sheet.
Neat trick, don’t you think? (Of course you can also use a mini ice cream scoop
instead of spoons. Just be sure to coat it with cooking spray first.)
Portion out evenly sized cookie dough rounds by using a lightly greased
mini ice cream scoop.
4. Drop the batter by rounded tablespoonfuls (a mini ice cream scoop is great
for this) onto the prepared baking sheets and bake, one sheet at a time, until set
around the edges and light golden brown, 9 to 10 minutes. Let cool on wire
racks.
CRUNCHY OATMEAL-COCONUT-PECAN COOKIES
Michael is my Cookie Monster. He just has to have his cookies, and he likes his
cookies so crunchy, you gotta get out the Dustbuster after he eats one on the
couch. I made up these loaded oatmeal cookies with him in mind, and they are
crunchy enough that you’ll have to put your conversation on hold while you
enjoy one.
MAKES ABOUT 2½ DOZEN COOKIES
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, at room temperature
½ cup packed dark brown sugar
⅓ cup granulated sugar
1 large egg
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
¾cup all-purpose flour
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
½ teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon baking soda
1½ cups old-fashioned rolled oats
¾ cup chopped pecans
½ cup shredded sweetened coconut
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease 2 baking sheets with butter, oil, or
cooking spray.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until creamy and smooth, 1 to 2
minutes. Add both sugars and beat the mixture until light and fluffy, about 5
minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl occasionally to
incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the egg and beat well, then beat in
the vanilla.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, cinnamon, baking powder, salt,
and baking soda. Add the flour mixture to the butter mixture, beating just until
combined. Using a rubber spatula, fold in the oats, pecans, and coconut.
4. Drop the batter by rounded tablespoonfuls (a mini ice cream scoop is great
for this) onto the prepared baking sheets and bake, one sheet at a time, until set
around the edges and light golden brown, 10 to 12 minutes. Let cool on the pans
slightly, transfer to wire racks, and then watch these little beauties disappear.
ON A ROLL
You may see rolled oats labeled “old-fashioned” oats. If you can’t find rolled or
old-fashioned oats, you can substitute quick-cooking oats, but you won’t get the
same texture that the rolled oats will give you. Whatever you do, don’t substitute
instant oatmeal—that cooks up way too fast to be used in baking.
BENNE SEED WAFERS
Benne seeds, also known as sesame seeds, are big in the South Carolina Low
Country, and I just love to use them for these superthin wafers. These crispy,
buttery wafers are just the thing with a cup of tea.
MAKES ABOUT 7 DOZEN WAFERS
¾ cup benne seeds (sesame seeds)
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1⅓ cups packed light brown sugar
1 large egg
1 cup all-purpose flour
½ teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Line several baking sheets with parchment
paper.
2. Place the benne seeds on one of the prepared baking sheets and toast in the
oven until lightly browned and fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes. Place in a small bowl
and set aside to cool completely.
3. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F.
4. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the butter and sugar at medium speed until light and fluffy,
about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl occasionally to
incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the egg and beat well.
5. In a small bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt. Add the
flour mixture to the butter mixture, beating just until combined. Using a rubber
spatula, stir in the vanilla and cooled benne seeds.
6. Drop rounded ½ teaspoonfuls onto the prepared baking sheets. Make sure
they are at least 1 inch apart, as the wafers will spread during baking. Bake, one
sheet at a time, until golden brown but not burned at the edges, 14 to 15 minutes.
Let the wafers cool completely on the baking sheets before removing them from
the parchment paper.
SLEEP ON IT
For the crispest wafers, make the dough a day ahead and refrigerate right up
until you’re ready to bake.
FLORIDA LEMON BARS
Florida citrus comes to us so fresh and sweet here in Savannah, it just brightens
even the gloomiest midwinter days. I use a ton of citrus here—orange zest in the
crust, and lemon juice and zest in the filling—to give my buttery lemon bars a
genuine jolt of juicy, tangy flavor. They’ll wake up a tea party faster than
anything.
MAKES 24 SQUARES
Crust
3 cups all-purpose flour
½ cup granulated sugar
½ cup confectioners’sugar
1 teaspoon finely grated orange zest
¼ teaspoon salt
3 sticks (12 ounces) cold butter, cut into tablespoons
Filling
6 large eggs, lightly beaten
1½ cups granulated sugar
1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest
½ cup fresh lemon juice (3 to 4 lemons)
¼ cup all-purpose flour
Pinch of salt
Confectioners’sugar, for sprinkling
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Lightly grease a 13 by 9-inch baking pan with
butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. To make the crust: In a food processor, combine the flour, granulated sugar,
confectioners’ sugar, orange zest, and salt and pulse to combine. Add the butter
and pulse until a crumbly short-bread dough forms (it will resemble wet sand).
Press the dough onto the bottom of the prepared pan. Bake until the crust is
golden around the edges, about 45 minutes.
3. While the crust is baking, make the filling: In a large bowl, whisk together
all the ingredients.
4. When the crust is ready, take it out of the oven and increase the oven
temperature to 350°F. Carefully pour the filling onto the crust and return the pan
to the oven. Bake until the filling is just set, about 20 minutes. Let cool
thoroughly before cutting into 24 squares. Dust with confectioners’ sugar to
dress these pretty little bars up just before serving.
DIY SHAKER
Now, you can dust with confectioners’ sugar by using a small metal strainer and
shaking it over your dessert, but I always find that a bit of a mess. Instead, why
don’t you try this at home? Get yourself an empty spice container with a shaker
top (with small holes), clean it out thoroughly, and fill it with sifted
confectioners’ sugar. Keep it in the cupboard so that it’s always handy. Less
mess, less cleanup!
TEA CAKES
In Savannah, people still take tea like the British, and these buttery, tender little
cookies are a must-have on the tea table. Personally, I just love to enjoy my tea
cakes with a tall glass of icy-cold lemonade.
MAKES 6 TO 8 DOZEN TEA CAKES
4 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
1 teaspoon baking soda
2 teaspoons baking powder
2 cups sugar
2 large eggs
½ cup buttermilk
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1. In a large bowl, sift together the flour, baking soda, and baking powder. Stir
in the remaining ingredients with a spoon. The dough will be soft and wet.
2. Sprinkle a large handful of flour over a work surface. Turn the dough out
onto the surface and shape it into a disk. Wrap it in plastic and refrigerate for 1
hour.
3. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Lightly grease several baking sheets with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
4. Throw more flour onto the work surface and roll the dough out until about
¼ inch thick. Cut the dough with a cookie cutter into whatever shapes (about 2
inches) you like. Reroll the scraps (just once) and cut out more shapes. Bake,
one sheet at a time, until pale golden, 10 to 12 minutes. No matter where I am in
the world, these little cakes always bring me right on back to the South.
FOR A SPECIAL OCCASION
Tea cakes are an everyday affair here in the South. I like to have them on hand to
enjoy with an afternoon cup of coffee or tea. But if I know I’ve got company
coming round, I dress them up a bit by drizzling on a pretty frosting and shaking
a few sprinkles on top.
GOOEY BUTTER CAKE
My preference is for a moist cake. None of these dry egg white numbers for me.
Heck, I sometimes think that cake batter tastes better than the cake, so I bake
these gooey cakes so they’re still real moist in the center. Now, I like to make it
easy on everyone whenever I can, so this recipe, based on a box of cake mix and
filled with the best sweet vanilla-scented cream cheese you ever put in your
mouth, has been a standby in my kitchen forever.
SERVES 15 TO 20
Cake
1 box (18¼ ounces) yellow cake mix
1 large egg
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
Filling
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
1 box (16 ounces) confectioners’sugar
VARIATIONS ON A THEME
There are just so many ways to change this cake up. Try these ideas on for size:
• For the holidays, add a 15-ounce can of unsweetened pumpkin puree to
the filling along with ground cinnamon and nutmeg.
• Add a 20-ounce can of drained crushed pineapple to the filling for a
tropical flavor.
• Use a lemon cake mix instead of yellow cake mix and add lemon juice
and zest to the filling.
• Use a chocolate cake mix instead of yellow cake mix and sprinkle with
chocolate chips and nuts on top.
• Use a spiced carrot cake mix instead of yellow cake mix and add chopped
nuts and shredded carrots to the filling.
• Use mandarin oranges, bananas, blueberries, or strawberries in the filling
and coordinate your extract flavorings.
• Use a chocolate cake mix instead of yellow cake mix and add ¾ to 1 cup
peanut butter and nuts to the filling.
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. To make the cake: Place the cake mix, egg, and melted butter in a large
bowl and mix well, using a large spoon, until well combined. Scrape the batter
into the prepared pan and smooth out.
3. To make the filling: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the cream cheese at medium speed
until smooth. Add the eggs and vanilla and beat well. Add the melted butter and
beat until combined. Slowly add the confectioners’ sugar, ¼ cup at a time, and
beat well after each addition. Using a spatula, spread the filling over the cake
mixture and bake for 40 to 50 minutes. You want the center to be a little gooey,
so be careful not to overbake. Stick a toothpick into the center and you should
see a few wet crumbs stick to it.
GEORGIA POUND CAKE
There’s nothing better to have on hand or in your freezer than a big buttery
pound cake. I’ll tell you why: Y’all can just take it so many different ways. You
can fry it up in the skillet with butter for breakfast. Or turn it into strawberry
shortcake or peach shortcake with a little whipped cream and a sprig of mint. I
also like to make a pound cake into a trifle. This pound cake is not just rich and
moist and delicious, it’s also the key to turning out so many other desserts like
you just pulled a rabbit out of a hat. Folks will think you’re a magician.
SERVES 16 TO 20
3 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for dusting
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
3 cups sugar
6 large eggs
½ teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon salt
1 cup heavy cream
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1. Grease a 10-inch Bundt pan with butter, oil, or cooking spray. Flour
generously and shake out any excess.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the butter and sugar at medium speed until light and fluffy,
about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl occasionally to
incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the eggs, one at a time, beating well
after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
3. In a medium bowl, sift together the 3 cups flour, the baking powder, and
salt. Beat one-fourth of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in ⅓ cup of
the cream. Continue adding the flour mixture and the cream in this fashion,
alternating them and ending with the flour mixture. Mix just until incorporated
and scrape the sides of the bowl down occasionally. Using a rubber spatula, stir
in the vanilla.
4. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Place in a cold oven, set the oven
temperature at 325°F, and bake, without opening the oven door, until a toothpick
inserted into the center comes out dry, 1 hour and 15 minutes. Bake for an extra
15 minutes if you think it needs it. Let the cake cool in the pan for 15 minutes,
then invert it onto a cake plate. For a real treat, serve yourself a slice while it’s
still warm.
EXTRACT FLAVOR
While I absolutely love this traditional pound cake just the way it is, if I’m
feeling zesty, I switch out the vanilla extract for lemon extract. Or I go nuts and
switch out the vanilla for a teaspoon of almond extract.
PECAN PRALINE CHEESECAKE
If you ask me, cheesecake deserves a creative crust and an exciting topping. I
suppose you could say I’m not a purist in this department because I always enjoy
playing around with new combinations. Here I believe I have hit upon a
cheesecake trifecta: a crispy pecan-gingersnap crust; a smooth brown sugar and
cream cheese filling with bits of crunchy pecan praline right in it; and a tangy
sour cream and praline topping. Life is rich.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Praline
1¼ cups chopped pecans
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
1 cup packed light brown sugar
¼ teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Crust
1¼ cups finely crushed gingersnaps (about 24 cookies)
½ cup chopped pecans
3 tablespoons packed light brown sugar
6 tablespoons (¾ stick) butter, melted
Filling
3 packages (8 ounces each) cream cheese
¾cup granulated sugar
½ cup packed light brown sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
3 large eggs, lightly beaten
¾ cup heavy cream
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1 cup chopped praline (see above)
Topping
¾cup heavy cream
½ cup sour cream
2 tablespoons granulated sugar
½ cup chopped praline (see above)
1. To make the praline: Preheat the oven to 325°F. Spread the pecans on a
rimmed baking sheet and toast for 10 minutes. Grease another rimmed baking
sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray. In a large saucepan, melt the butter over
medium heat. Stir in the brown sugar and 1 tablespoon water. Increase the heat
to medium-high and cook at a rapid boil for 7 minutes. Add the baking soda and
warm pecans and swirl the pan to incorporate them (do not stir). Take care while
you’re swirling the pan, as the mixture will spatter a bit. When the bubbling has
subsided, swirl in the vanilla. Pour the mixture out onto the prepared baking
sheet and use a small buttered spatula (preferably offset) to spread the mixture in
as thin a layer as possible. Let cool before chopping.
2. Preheat the oven to 350°F. To make the crust: In a medium bowl, combine
all the ingredients until they form an evenly moist, crumbly mixture. Press the
mixture evenly onto the bottom and just slightly up the sides of a 9-inch
springform pan. Bake until the crust is fragrant and firm, 9 to 10 minutes. Set
aside to cool. (Leave the oven on but reduce the temperature to 325°F.) 3. To
make the filling: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the cream cheese at low speed until
smooth and creamy, 3 to 5 minutes. Gradually add both sugars and the salt and
continue beating until very smooth and no lumps remain, about 10 minutes. Be
sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl occasionally to incorporate all the
sugar into the butter.
4. In a small bowl, whisk together the eggs, cream, and vanilla. With the
mixer going, gradually stream the egg mixture into the cream cheese mixture,
beating well and scraping down the sides of the bowl until smooth and creamy, 2
to 3 minutes longer. Using a rubber spatula, fold in the 1 cup praline. Pour the
filling into the crust and smooth the top.
5. Bake until the edges of the cheesecake are set but the center still jiggles, 40
to 45 minutes. Let the cheesecake cool completely at room temperature before
covering with plastic wrap and refrigerating for at least 8 hours or overnight.
6. When you’re ready to serve the cheesecake, make the topping: In the bowl
of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer,
whip the heavy cream, sour cream, and granulated sugar at medium-high speed
until medium peaks form. Using a rubber spatula, fold in the ½ cup praline.
Spread over the surface of the cheesecake. Get yourself a hot, dry knife (heat
under hot running water, then wipe dry with a towel) and cut out wedges to serve
up.
PLENTY OF PRALINE
This recipe for praline will actually make more than the 1½ cups praline you’ll
need for the cheesecake and topping. This is a very good thing! The remaining
praline is great to eat on its own, chopped into bits sprinkled on a sundae, or
folded into cookie batter. The praline will keep in an airtight container in the
pantry for up to a month.
PEACHY UPSIDE-DOWN CAKE
I cannot play favorites when it comes to cakes, but let’s just say anything upsidedown is up there in my top ten. First of all, upside-down cakes are so pretty
when you turn them out, with the fruit slices nestled right into the buttery cake,
and you know they’re always so moist, with chewy, browned edges that I
absolutely adore.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Cake
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, at room temperature
¾ cup granulated sugar
2 large eggs
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
1½ cups all-purpose flour
2 teaspoons baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
1 can (15 ounces) peach halves in heavy syrup
6 to 8 dried cherries (depending on the number of peach halves)
Glaze
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter
¾ cup packed light brown sugar
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
HEAT UP
Because you make the glaze for this lovely cake over the stovetop burner, be
sure to use a metal pan. Also, if the cake sits in the pan too long after coming out
of the oven (which will cause it to stick to the bottom), just pop it back on the
stovetop to reheat the glaze for a minute. This will loosen it back up so that
you’ll be able to unmold it cleanly.
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.
2. To make the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter and granulated sugar at
medium speed until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the
sides of the bowl occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add
the eggs, one at a time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly
combine. Beat in the vanilla.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt.
Reserving ¼ cup of the syrup, drain the peaches. Stir ½ cup water into the
reserved peach syrup.
4. Beat one-third of the flour mixture into the butter mixture. Beat in half of
the peach liquid. Continue alternately adding the two mixtures, ending with the
flour mixture.
5. To make the glaze: Melt the butter in a 9-inch square metal baking pan on
the stovetop over medium-low heat. Add the brown sugar and lemon juice and
stir until the sugar has melted; remove from the heat. Arrange the cherries in the
pan and cover each with a peach half. Pour the batter over the peaches and bake
until a toothpick inserted into the center of the cake comes out clean, about 40
minutes.
6. Let cool on a wire rack for 5 minutes. No longer, now, or this cake will
stick! Run a knife along the edges of the pan and invert the cake onto a platter. I
like to serve this cake warm, but it’s just as delicious at room temperature.
BLACKBERRY JELLY ROLL
Jelly rolls made with homemade preserves such as this one are such an oldfashioned Southern dessert—the kind of thing a farm family would enjoy after a
long, hard day outdoors. I like to up the ante with a fluffy meringue frosting,
which makes this pretty little dessert special enough for any occasion.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Jelly
2 bags (10 ounces each) frozen blackberries
1 cup granulated sugar
3 tablespoons cornstarch
Cake
6 large eggs, at room temperature
1½ teaspoons vanilla extract
½ cup granulated sugar
½ cup cake flour, sifted
½ cup cornstarch, sifted
1¼ teaspoons baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
Frosting
1¼ cups granulated sugar
¼ teaspoon cream of tartar
2 large egg whites
1 tablespoon light corn syrup
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Confectioners’sugar, for sprinkling
DIFFERENT BERRIES MAKE THE (JELLY) ROLL
CALL
Blackberries are the traditional fruit for jelly rolls, but you can make this with
any berry that strikes your fancy. Raspberries, strawberries, mixed berries—it’s
all good for the roll!
1. To make the jelly: In a medium saucepan, combine the blackberries and
granulated sugar. Bring to a simmer over medium heat, and cook for 5 minutes.
Meanwhile, place the cornstarch in a small bowl. Spoon out ½ cup of the
blackberry juices and whisk into the cornstarch to make a slurry. Return the
cornstarch slurry to the pan and bring to a boil. Cook until the mixture has jelled
and thickened, 1 to 2 minutes. Let cool before using. Y’all can make this jelly 2
days in advance and keep it in the fridge.
2. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Grease a 17 by 11-inch jelly-roll pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray and line with parchment paper.
3. To make the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the eggs and vanilla at high speed
until pale yellow and fluffy, 2 to 3 minutes. With the mixer going, slowly add the
½ cup granulated sugar and beat at high speed for an extra 3 minutes.
4. In a small bowl, whisk together the flour, cornstarch, baking powder, and
salt. Using a rubber spatula, fold the flour mixture into the egg mixture just until
all the flour is moistened.
5. Using a small offset spatula, spread the batter in the prepared pan. Bake
until the cake is dry, firm to the touch, and light golden brown, 8 to 10 minutes.
Spread a clean dishtowel on a work surface and sprinkle with confectioners’
sugar. Flip the cake onto the towel so the pan is on top; lift off the pan and peel
off the parchment paper. Starting on a short side, roll up the cake and dishtowel
into a cylinder while it is still warm (the dishtowel will be rolled up with the
cake, which keeps the cake from sticking to itself). Leave the cake, seam side
down, on the work surface to cool completely.
6. When the cake is cool, gently unroll it and spread evenly with blackberry
jelly, leaving a ¾-inch border. Reroll the cake, then use the dishtowel on the
outside to secure the cake in a log shape. Secure with tape to help the cake
maintain its shape. Refrigerate for 1 hour before serving.
7. To make the frosting: Bring a medium saucepan of water to a bare simmer
on the stove. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or
using a handheld mixer, beat all the ingredients together with ¼ cup water at
medium speed, just until combined. Place the mixer bowl over the pan of
simmering water and, by hand, whisk until the sugar dissolves and the mixture is
hot, about 3 minutes. Set the bowl back on the mixer and beat at high speed for 3
minutes. Beat until stiff peaks form, 5 to 7 minutes.
8. Remove the parchment paper from the roll. Spread the frosting over the top
and sides of the cake, taking care not to let the filling show through the sides.
Dust with confectioners’sugar before serving.
To prevent cracking when rolling a jelly roll, turn the cake out onto a clean
dish towel that has been lightly sprinkled with confectioners’ sugar. Roll up
the cake in the dish towel and let cool. When cooled, unroll, fill, and roll
again.
COCONUT CAKE
This is one of the trinity of traditional, big fluffy Southern layer cakes, and it is
Jamie’s birthday cake every year.
SERVES 12 TO 16
Cake
1 box (18¼ ounces) yellow cake mix
Whole milk, as called for by cake mix
1 cup sour cream
1½ cups sugar
12 ounces canned or frozen shredded coconut
Frosting
2 large egg whites
1½ cups sugar
2 teaspoons light corn syrup, or ¼ teaspoon cream of tartar
Pinch of salt
1 teaspoon vanilla extract About
½ cup shredded sweetened coconut
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease three 9-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. To make the cake: Follow the directions on the cake mix
box, substituting milk for water. Divide the batter among the cake pans. Bake for
20 minutes. Remove from the oven and let cool in the pans for 5 minutes on a
wire rack, then remove the cakes from the pans to cool completely.
2. In a medium bowl, stir together the sour cream, sugar, and coconut. Spread
between the slightly warm cake layers, piercing each layer with a toothpick (see
box below) as you stack them (see box, page 370), but don’t pierce the top of the
top layer. Store the cake in a container in the refrigerator for 2 to 3 days to allow
the flavors to soak through.
3. On the day you are ready to serve the cake, make the frosting: In the top of
a double boiler, combine the egg whites, sugar, corn syrup or cream of tartar, and
salt. Do not place over the heat; instead, beat for 1 minute using a handheld
electric mixer. Then place over simmering water and cook, beating constantly,
until the frosting forms stiff peaks. This should take about 7 minutes. Remove
from the heat. Add the vanilla and beat until it reaches spreading consistency,
about 2 minutes. Frost the top and sides of the cake and sprinkle all over with
shredded coconut. Besides tasting great, y’all, this cake is just so pretty.
PIERCE THROUGH
You want this cake to soak in as much coconut moisture and flavor as possible.
By piercing the cake with a toothpick where the sour cream-coconut mixture will
be, you open up the window to let all that lovely flavor flow in.
RED VELVET CAKE WITH CREAM CHEESE–BOURBON
FROSTING
There is so much to love in a red velvet cake. First, since it is an oil-based cake,
it has a moist, even consistency. It is a sweet cake, no doubt, but a little
unsweetened cocoa and buttermilk go a long way to balancing that sweetness—
not to mention the tangy cream cheese frosting. My cousin Johnnie, who owns
Gabriel’s Restaurant & Bakery in Marietta, Georgia, makes the best red velvet
cakes, and I learned everything I know about them from her. I’m not certain
she’d approve of the splash of bourbon in this frosting, but this recipe is quite
traditional otherwise.
SERVES 8 TO 10
Cake
2 cups canola oil
2¼ cups granulated sugar
3 large eggs
6 tablespoons (3 ounces) red food coloring, or dissolve 1 teaspoon gel
food coloring in 6 tablespoons water
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
3½ cups cake flour
¼ cup unsweetened cocoa powder (not Dutch process), sifted
1½ teaspoons salt
1¼ cups buttermilk
2 teaspoons baking soda
2½ teaspoons distilled white vinegar
Frosting
12 ounces cream cheese, at room temperature
1½ sticks (6 ounces) butter, at room temperature
4 cups confectioners’sugar, sifted
4 teaspoons bourbon
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease three 9-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 9-inch rounds of parchment paper and line
the bottoms of the pans.
MELT FOR
YOU Here’s a neat trick I sometimes like to use when greasing my cake pans.
Place a teaspoon or so of butter in the pan. Place the pan in the preheating oven
for a few minutes, until the butter melts. Remove the pan from the oven and,
using a pastry brush, brush the interior bottom and sides of the pan with the
melted butter. This is an easy and absolutely mess-free way to grease your pans.
2. To make the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, combine the oil and granulated sugar and
beat at medium speed until well blended. Add the eggs, one at a time, beating
well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine. Turn the mixer to low speed
and very slowly add the red food coloring. Be careful! It may splash, so wear an
apron, y’all! Beat in the vanilla.
3. In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, cocoa powder, and salt. Beat onethird of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the buttermilk.
Continue adding the mixtures alternately, ending with the flour mixture. Scrape
down the bowl and beat just long enough to combine. Place the baking soda in a
small dish, and stir in the vinegar. With the mixer running, add the vinegar
mixture to the cake batter and mix for 10 seconds.
4. Divide the batter among the prepared pans and bake until a toothpick
inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean, 40 to 45 minutes. Let the
cakes cool in the pans or on wire racks for 20 minutes. Then invert the cakes
onto the racks, peel off the parchment paper, and let them cool completely before
frosting.
5. While the cake layers are cooling, make the frosting: In the bowl of an
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a handheld mixer,
combine the cream cheese and butter and beat at medium speed until light and
fluffy, about 2 minutes. With the mixer at low speed, beat in the confectioners’
sugar, ½ cup at a time. Add the bourbon once all the sugar has been mixed in. If
you find the frosting is too soft, just chill it for 10 minutes in the fridge before
using.
6. To assemble the cake, place 1 cake layer on a serving plate, with the flat
bottom side facing down. (See box, page 370.) Spread about 1 cup of frosting
over the surface of the cake. Top with another cake layer, inverted, so the bottom
of the cake is facing up. Spread about 1 cup of frosting over this cake layer.
Place the remaining cake layer, also inverted, on top. Spread the remaining
frosting over the top and sides of the cake.
Frost cakes quickly and neatly using an offset spatula.
AMBROSIA CARROT CAKE WITH FLUFFY COCONUT
FROSTING
Real, old-fashioned ambrosia is based on the divine combination of coconut and
orange, and one day I figured out that those flavors would be so good with a
regular old Southern layered carrot cake. I’m glad I went right into the kitchen
and gave it a try before anyone could convince me not to.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Cake
2½ cups all-purpose flour
3 teaspoons ground cinnamon
2 teaspoons baking powder
2 teaspoons baking soda
2 teaspoons salt
1 cup finely chopped walnuts
2 cups granulated sugar
1 cup vegetable oil
6 large eggs
2 cups finely grated carrots (3 to 4 large carrots)
1 cup shredded sweetened coconut
Frosting
3 packages (8 ounces each) cream cheese, at room temperature
3 sticks (12 ounces) butter, at room temperature
5½ cups confectioners’sugar, sifted
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Pinch of salt
1 can (11 ounces) mandarin orange segments in light syrup, drained
3 cups flaked sweetened coconut
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease three 9-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 9-inch rounds of parchment paper and line
the bottoms of the pans.
2. To prepare the cake: In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, cinnamon,
baking powder, baking soda, salt, and walnuts. In a medium bowl, whisk
together the granulated sugar, oil, and eggs. Using a rubber spatula, fold the
carrots and coconut into the egg mixture. Fold the carrot mixture into the flour
mixture just until combined.
3. Divide the batter evenly among the prepared pans and bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean and the cakes are
firm to the touch and light golden brown, about 25 minutes. Let the cakes cool in
the pans on wire racks for 10 minutes. Then invert the cakes onto the racks, peel
off the parchment paper, and let them cool completely before frosting.
4. While the cake layers are cooling, make the frosting: In the bowl of an
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat
the cream cheese and butter at medium speed until smooth and creamy, scraping
the sides of the bowl often. Once the mixture is smooth, add the confectioners’
sugar and beat until smooth. Beat in the vanilla and salt.
5. To assemble the cake, place one cake layer on a serving plate with the flat
bottom side facing down. Spread 1 cup of frosting over the surface of the cake.
Place half the mandarin oranges over the frosting. Top with another cake layer,
inverted, so the bottom of the cake is facing up. Spread 1 cup of frosting over the
cake layer and repeat with the remaining mandarin oranges. Place the remaining
cake layer, also inverted, on top. Add 1 cup of the coconut to the remaining
frosting and, using a rubber spatula, fold in to combine. Spread the remaining
frosting over the top and sides of the cake. Sprinkle the remaining 2 cups
coconut over the top and sides of the frosted cake, pressing gently to make sure
the coconut stays put.
GRATE EXPECTATIONS
Grating carrots by hand can take a while, so try expediting the process in a food
processor. You’ll have a pile of grated carrots in as little time as it takes to say,
“One, two, three!”
MISSISSIPPI MUD CAKE
This is a perfect cake to bring along to a potluck or bake sale, since you can
carry and slice it right in the baking pan. Melting marshmallows on top of the
just-baked cake is so fun that even when my grandbaby Jack isn’t around, I find
myself shouting “Yay!” as those marshmallows melt into a beautiful glaze.
SERVES 8 TO 10
Cake
1½ cups all-purpose flour
1½ cups sugar
¾cup unsweetened cocoa powder, sifted
1½ teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup whole milk
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, melted
2 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
3 cups mini marshmallows
Glaze and Topping
1 cup pecan halves
¼ cup heavy cream
¼ cup light corn syrup
½ cup chopped semisweet chocolate
½ cup shredded sweetened coconut
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. To prepare the cake: In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, sugar, cocoa
powder, baking powder, and salt. In a medium bowl, whisk together the milk,
melted butter, eggs, and vanilla. Using a rubber spatula, fold the milk mixture
into the flour mixture just until combined. Pour the batter into the prepared pan.
Bake until a toothpick inserted into the center of the cake comes out clean and
the cake is firm to the touch, 30 to 40 minutes.
3. Take the cake out of the oven and scatter the marshmallows evenly over the
top. Return the cake to the oven for 5 minutes to melt the marshmallows.
4. To make the glaze: Reduce the oven temperature to 325°F. Spread the
pecans on a baking sheet and bake until fragrant, about 10 minutes. When cool
enough to handle, coarsely chop the pecans.
5. In a medium saucepan, combine the cream, corn syrup, and chocolate. Stir
over medium-low heat until the chocolate is melted. Pour the chocolate mixture
over the top of the cake. Top with the pecans and coconut. Let cool completely
before serving a slice of pure decadence.
TAKING THE
TEMPERATURE Ovens really do have a tendency to fluctuate 5 to 10 degrees
hot or cold and that can be a big problem when you’re baking. I recommend
investing in an oven thermometer that hangs from the rack in the oven. That
way, you’ll never have to guess what the temperature really is.
NEW JAPANESE FRUITCAKE
This is one for the history books, and as far as I can tell, it’s been a Southern
tradition for over a hundred years despite the fact that it has nothing to do with
Japan. The basic formula looks something like this: a plain cake, a layer of
spices, and a filling that includes coconut. I like versions with pineapple and
cherries, like this one, though I use dried tart cherries in place of maraschino
because I find they have more flavor. It leaves regular fruitcake in the dust.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Cake
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
2 cups sugar
4 large eggs
3 cups all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
1¼ cups whole milk
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Spice Layer
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
¼ teaspoon ground cloves
¼ teaspoon ground allspice
⅓ cup finely chopped crystallized ginger
Filling
1 cup sugar
2 tablespoons cornstarch
1 can (20 ounces) crushed pineapple, drained
1 cup shredded sweetened coconut
Pinch of salt
⅔ cup dried tart cherries
Frosting
½ teaspoon cream of tartar
2½ cups sugar
4 large egg whites
2 tablespoons light corn syrup
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease three 9-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 9-inch rounds of parchment paper and line
the bottoms of the pans.
2. To prepare the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until
creamy and smooth, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the sugar and beat the mixture until
light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl
occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the eggs, one at a
time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt. In a
small bowl, whisk together the milk and vanilla. Beat one-third of the flour
mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the milk mixture. Continue beating in
the two mixtures, alternating them and ending with the flour mixture. Mix just
until incorporated and scrape the sides of the bowl down occasionally.
To determine soft peaks or firm peaks for whipped cream or whipped egg
whites, turn the whisk upside down. If peaks are just starting to stand but
quickly fall back on themselves, they are soft peaks. If peaks hold and
ridges are more defined, with only the tips falling back on themselves, they
are firm peaks.
4. Measure out one-third of the batter and place in a bowl. Stir in the
cinnamon, cloves, allspice, and crystallized ginger. Spoon this spice-layer batter
into one of the prepared pans and smooth the top. Divide the remaining batter
between the two remaining pans and smooth the tops. Bake until a toothpick
inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean, 23 to 25 minutes. Let the
cakes cool in the pans for 10 minutes on wire racks. Then invert the cakes onto
the racks, peel off the parchment paper, and let them cool completely before
filling and frosting.
5. While the cake layers are baking, make the filling: In a large saucepan,
whisk together the sugar and cornstarch. Whisk in 1 cup water. Add the
pineapple, coconut, and salt. Bring to a boil over medium heat. Cook, stirring
constantly, until the mixture thickens and jells, about 5 minutes. Stir in the dried
cherries and let the mixture cool.
6. Once the cake layers and filling are cool, stack the cake layers, one on top
of the other with the spice layer of cake in the middle, spreading each layer
evenly with filling as you stack. (See the box for a guide to stacking.) Set aside
while making the frosting.
7. To make the frosting: Bring a medium saucepan of water to a bare simmer
on the stove. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or
using a handheld mixer, beat together all ingredients with ½ cup water just until
combined. Place the bowl over the pan of simmering water and whisk by hand
until the sugar dissolves and the mixture is hot, about 3 minutes. Set the bowl
back on the mixer and beat at high speed for 3 minutes. Beat until stiff peaks
form, 5 to 7 minutes more.
8. Spread the frosting over the top and sides of the cake, taking care not to let
the filling show through the sides.
STACK IT UP
Here’s a handy guide for stacking three layers of a cake so that they are as stable
and even as possible. Place the bottom layer on the serving platter with the flat
bottom side down for stability. Top with another cake layer, inverted, so the
bottom of the cake is facing up. If it’s a little unstable because the cake top
domed a bit, you can slice off the mound to create a level base or just fill in with
frosting or filling. Place the remaining cake layer, also inverted (i.e., bottom side
up), on top. Push down on the layers gently with the palm of your hand just to
make sure they are level. If they are not, use a serrated knife to shave the uneven
parts to even them out.
OLD-TIME SPONGE CAKE
I seem to recall that my mama made her cakes this way and called them hot milk
cakes. It’s the sort of recipe you can put together in the afternoon and surprise
everyone with a few hours later. Feel free to use this simple cake recipe as a
starting point for your own creations by slicing it and filling it with any fruit or
frosting you like, or icing or glazing it.
SERVES 8
2 large eggs
1 large egg white
1¼ cups granulated sugar
6 tablespoons whole milk
1¼ cups all-purpose flour
1¼ teaspoons baking powder
½ teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, melted
Confectioners’sugar, for dusting
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 9-inch round cake pan with butter, oil,
or cooking spray. Line the bottom of the pan with a round of parchment paper.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the whole eggs and egg white at high speed until frothy.
With the mixer running, gradually stream in the granulated sugar and beat at
high speed until the mixture has thickened and lightened to a pretty lemon
yellow color.
3. In a small saucepan, warm the milk to 200°F over medium heat.
4. In a small bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt and,
using a rubber spatula, fold into the egg mixture. Working quickly and gently,
fold in the milk, vanilla, and melted butter until completely combined.
A YELLOW RIBBON
Be sure to beat your eggs and granulated sugar for at least 5 minutes or so, so
that they reach what’s called the ribbon stage. That’s when the mixture is thick
enough that when you raise the beater, the batter falls back on itself in a
ribbonlike swirl. If the ribbon trail sits on the surface for a few seconds before
soaking back into the batter, you’ll know you’ve whipped to the right
consistency.
5. Gently spoon the batter into the prepared pan and bake until golden brown
and firm to the touch, 30 to 35 minutes. Let the cake cool in the pan for 10
minutes on a rack. Then invert it onto a wire rack and peel off the parchment
paper. Invert the cake again so the flat bottom is down and let it cool completely.
Before serving, dust the cake with confectioners’sugar.
To dust a cake with confectioners’ sugar or cocoa powder, place a few
tablespoons of sugar or cocoa into a fine mesh strainer and tap lightly on
the outside of the strainer as you move around the cake.
TENNESSEE WHISKEY BUNDT CAKE
I just love a beautiful Bundt cake, with its ridges dripping with glaze. This one is
a boozy, buttery bad boy that’ll make you want to sass your mama!
SERVES 12
Cake
½ cup raisins
⅓ cup whiskey
2½ sticks (10 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1¾ cups packed light brown sugar
Grated zest of 1 lemon
5 large eggs
3¼ cups all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup whole milk
Glaze
½ cup granulated sugar
2 tablespoons whiskey
Juice of ½ lemon
1. To make the cake: In a small bowl, stir together the raisins and whiskey. Let
sit for at least 1 hour or overnight.
2. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease a 12-cup Bundt pan with butter, oil, or
cooking spray.
3. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until creamy and smooth, 1 to 2
minutes. Add the brown sugar and lemon zest and beat the mixture until light
and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl
occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the eggs, one at a
time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
4. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt. Beat
one-third of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the milk.
Continue adding the flour mixture and milk alternately, ending with the flour
mixture. Mix just until incorporated, scraping the sides of the bowl down
occasionally. Using a rubber spatula, fold in the raisins and whiskey.
5. Spoon the batter into the prepared pan, smoothing the top. Bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of the cake comes out clean, 1 hour to 1 hour
and 5 minutes. Let the cake cool in the pan for 10 minutes on a wire rack before
unmolding and letting the cake cool on the rack completely.
6. Once the cake is cool, make the glaze: In a small saucepan, whisk together
the granulated sugar, whiskey, and lemon juice. Stir constantly over low heat
until the sugar is dissolved.
7. Set the cake on the wire rack over a baking sheet or a piece of waxed paper.
Brush the glaze evenly all over the cake. This one packs a punch!
SEE WHAT DEVELOPS
Be sure your raisins get a good soak in that whiskey! That process is called
maceration, and what it does is soften up your raisins and gives them time to
soak in the deliciously boozy flavor.
CINNAMON-GLAZED SOUR CREAM APPLE BUNDT CAKE
There’s just something about apples, cinnamon, and sour cream that is so
satisfying, especially in the fall when you want your house to smell like sweet
spices.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Cake
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature 1¾ cups granulated
sugar
4 large eggs
2½ cups all-purpose flour
2 teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup sour cream
2½ teaspoons vanilla extract
¼ teaspoon almond extract
2 medium Granny Smith apples, peeled, cored, and finely chopped
Glaze
1 cup confectioners’sugar, sifted
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
2 to 3 tablespoons whole milk
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease a 12-cup Bundt pan with butter, oil, or
cooking spray. Flour the pan generously, shaking out the excess.
2. To make the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until
creamy and smooth, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the granulated sugar and beat the
mixture until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides
of the bowl occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the
eggs, one at a time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, baking soda,
and salt. In a small bowl, whisk together the sour cream, vanilla, and almond
extract. Beat one-third of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the
sour cream mixture. Continue adding the mixtures alternately, ending with the
flour mixture. Mix just until incorporated, scraping the sides of the bowl down
occasionally. Using a rubber spatula, fold in the apples.
4. Spoon the batter into the prepared pan, smoothing the top. Bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of the cake comes out clean, 1 hour to 1 hour
and 5 minutes. Let the cake cool in the pan for 10 minutes on a wire rack before
inverting and letting the cake cool on the rack completely.
5. Once the cake is cool, make the glaze: In a small bowl, whisk together the
confectioners’ sugar and cinnamon. Whisk in the milk, 1 tablespoon at a time,
until the glaze is thick but pourable. Set the cake on the wire rack over a baking
sheet or a piece of waxed paper. Spoon the glaze evenly over the cake.
GRATE IDEA
Make quick work of bringing cold butter to room temperature by grating it on
the coarse side of a cheese grater. Or slice it thinly and place it in a bowl set over
another bowl that is filled with a little warm water. Just be sure not to melt the
butter in the process!
FROSTED BUTTERMILK FIG CAKE
Right after I met Michael I noticed this huge fig tree in his yard, and when I
asked him about it, he said, to my surprise, “Oh, we don’t use ’em—the birds
just eat ’em. So if you would like to come over and get you some figs, you’re
welcome to ’em anytime.” Well, I went and dragged up a tall ladder and climbed
up to get those figs. And his children were in the house, and some of their
friends were over, and one of their friends said, “There’s some old lady in one of
y’all’s trees. You know who she is?” Well, love conquers all, as they say, and we
just laughed about that one. Then I made Michael the first fig preserves he ever
had and he just loved it (see Fig Jam, page 421). I fold them into a cake
whenever I get the itch.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Cake
3 cups cake flour
2 teaspoons baking powder
¾ teaspoon grated nutmeg
¾ teaspoon salt
1 cup chopped pecans
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, melted
1 cup granulated sugar
1 cup packed dark brown sugar
3 large eggs, lightly beaten
1 cup Fig Jam (page 421) or fig preserves, chopped
½ cup boiling water
1½ teaspoons baking soda
Frosting
4 sticks (1 pound) butter, at room temperature
10 cups confectioners’sugar, sifted ⅔ to
¾ cup buttermilk
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
⅛ teaspoon salt
BAKING BASICS
Half the job in baking is being prepared. First, be sure all your fridge and freezer
items are at room temperature before you start. When you’re ready to bake,
preheat your oven and make sure you’ve got all your equipment (pans, bowls,
measuring cups, utensils) on hand and prepped. Measure dry ingredients by
spooning the contents into your measuring cup and then leveling the tops with a
knife or small spatula for exact amounts.
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease three 8-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Line the bottoms with rounds of parchment paper.
2. To make the cake: In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder,
nutmeg, salt, and pecans. In a medium bowl, whisk together the butter, both
sugars, and the eggs. Fold the fig preserves into the egg mixture. In a small
bowl, whisk together the boiling water and baking soda, then whisk this into the
egg mixture. Using a rubber spatula, fold the egg mixture into the flour mixture
until combined.
3. Divide the batter evenly among the prepared pans. Bake until a toothpick
inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean and the cakes are firm to
the touch and golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes. Let the cakes cool in the pans for
10 minutes on wire racks. Invert the cakes onto the racks, peel off the parchment
paper, and let them cool completely before frosting.
4. While the cake layers are cooling, make the frosting: In the bowl of an
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat
the butter at medium speed until smooth and creamy, scraping the sides of the
bowl often. Once the mixture is smooth, add the confectioners’ sugar, 1 cup at a
time, to incorporate and beat until smooth. Beat in ⅔ cup buttermilk, the vanilla,
and salt. Add extra buttermilk if needed, 1 tablespoon at a time, until the frosting
is thick but spreadable.
4. To assemble the cake, place 1 cake layer on a serving plate, with the flat
bottom side facing down. Spread a generous cup of frosting over the surface of
the cake. Top with another cake layer, inverted, so the bottom of the cake is
facing up. Spread 1 cup of frosting over this cake layer. Place the remaining cake
layer, also inverted, on top. Spread the remaining frosting over the top and sides
of the cake. For a decorative touch, create pretty swirls in the frosting by sliding
your spatula around in little S shapes.
PECAN SPICE LAYER CAKE WITH CARAMEL FROSTING
I’ve always been a quick cook, so I never make burnt sugar caramel to flavor my
caramel frosting. Instead, I have found that using brown and confectioners’
sugars gives you a quick, easy frosting with the deep, dark caramel flavor. It’s a
natural partner for the pecans and spice in this cake, which is one of the most
handsome cakes you could hope for.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Cake
1¼ cups chopped pecans
1½ sticks (6 ounces) butter, at room temperature
¾ cup granulated sugar
¾ cup packed light brown sugar
3 large eggs
2½ cups cake flour, sifted
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon
2 teaspoons baking powder
¾ teaspoon baking soda
¾ teaspoon salt
1¼ cups buttermilk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Frosting
3 sticks (12 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1 cup packed light brown sugar
1 cup packed dark brown sugar
½ cup whole milk
4¼ cups confectioners’sugar, sifted
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease three 8-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 8-inch rounds of parchment paper and line
the bottoms of the pans.
2. To make the cake: Place the pecans on a baking sheet and bake until
fragrant, about 10 minutes. Leave the oven on but increase the temperature to
350°F.
3. Meanwhile, in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until
creamy and smooth, 1 to 2 minutes. Add both sugars and beat the mixture until
light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl
occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the eggs, one at a
time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
4. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, cinnamon, baking powder,
baking soda, and salt. In a small bowl, whisk together the buttermilk and vanilla.
Beat one-third of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the
buttermilk mixture. Continue beating in the mixtures, alternating them and
ending with the flour mixture. Mix just until incorporated, scraping the sides of
the bowl down occasionally. Using a rubber spatula, fold in the pecans.
5. Divide the batter among the prepared pans, smoothing the tops. Bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean, 23 to 25
minutes. Let the cakes cool in the pans on wire racks for 10 minutes. Then invert
the cakes out of the pans onto the racks, peel off the parchment paper, and let
them cool completely before frosting.
6. While the cake layers are cooling, make the frosting: In a medium
saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Stir in both brown sugars. Slowly
whisk in the milk. Place the mixture in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with
the paddle attachment or use a handheld mixer. Add the confectioners’ sugar, ½
cup at a time, and beat at medium-low speed until smooth. Beat in the vanilla.
7. To assemble the cake, place one cake layer on a pretty serving plate, with
the flat bottom side facing down. Spread just less than 1 cup of frosting over the
surface of the cake. Top with another cake layer, inverted, so the bottom of the
cake is facing up. Spread just less than 1 cup of frosting over this cake layer.
Place the remaining cake layer, also inverted, on top. Spread the remaining
frosting over the top and sides of the cake.
FLOUR AND FOLD
Here’s a neat little trick I like to use when I’m adding nuts or chopped dried fruit
to my batter. Toss them in some flour before folding them in. This will help them
to suspend better in the batter, evenly distributing them throughout your cake
and preventing them from dropping to the bottom.
To frost the cake, first let the cake cool completely. Brush away any stray
crumbs on the outside of the cake. Seal the cake by applying a very thin
coating of frosting, touching the unfrosted cake as little as possible to avoid
lifting crumbs into the frosting. Let it sit for about 15 minutes. Spoon a
generous amount of frosting on top of the cake and push it around with an
offset spatula,
TEXAS SHEET CAKE WITH CHOCOLATE FUDGE
FROSTING
Whatever you do with this recipe, try your best to bring the leftovers back home
with you in the pan. There is no better snack than a leftover piece of Texas sheet
cake. The frosting is so fudgy and chewy, and the cake is so moist and flavorful.
SERVES 8 TO 10
Cake
1 cup boiling water
⅓ cup unsweetened cocoa powder, sifted
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, melted
2 large eggs, lightly beaten
½ cup buttermilk
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 cups all-purpose flour
1 cup packed light brown sugar
1 cup granulated sugar
1 teaspoon baking soda
¾ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon baking powder
Frosting
1 cup granulated sugar
½ cup unsweetened cocoa powder, sifted
½ cup whole milk
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, cut into small bits
2 tablespoons light corn syrup
4 cups confectioners’sugar, sifted
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
LIVING LARGE
Don’t try to substitute another size egg for the large eggs called for in baking
recipes. It makes a big difference because large eggs are required to fall within a
specific weight range that works for standard baking recipes. Eggs that are larger
or smaller can throw off your recipe’s proportions and give you an unexpected
result.
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking pan with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. To make the cake: In a medium bowl, whisk together the boiling water and
cocoa powder. Stir in the melted butter. Whisk in the eggs, buttermilk, and
vanilla. In another medium bowl, whisk together the flour, both sugars, the
baking soda, salt, and baking powder. Fold the flour mixture into the chocolate
mixture until combined. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of the cake comes out clean, 30 to 35 minutes.
3. While the cake is baking, prepare the frosting: In a large saucepan, whisk
together the granulated sugar and cocoa powder. Whisk in the milk, then stir in
the butter and corn syrup. Place the pan over medium-high heat and bring to a
boil, whisking constantly. Off the heat, stir in the confectioners’ sugar and
vanilla.
4. Spread the frosting over the surface of the cake just as soon as it comes out
of the oven. Let the cake cool on a rack, then serve it up.
LADY BALTIMORE CAKE
Well, I leave it to the history buffs to debate whether or not this fine layer cake
originated in Charleston at the Lady Baltimore Tearoom. But I have never met a
Southerner who isn’t fond of this combination of white cake, dried fruit in the
filling, and fluffy white frosting.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Cake
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
1½ cups sugar
3 cups cake flour, sifted
1 tablespoon baking powder
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup whole milk, at room temperature
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
6 large egg whites
¼ teaspoon cream of tartar
Filling
¾ cup chopped pecans
¾ cup chopped dried figs
3 tablespoons ruby or tawny port
Frosting
½ teaspoon cream of tartar
½ cups sugar
4 large egg whites
2 tablespoons light corn syrup
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease three 9-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 9-inch rounds of parchment paper and line
the bottoms of the pans.
2. To prepare the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until
creamy and smooth, 1 to 2 minutes. Add 1 cup of the sugar and beat the mixture
until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the
bowl occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter.
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt. In a
small bowl, whisk together the milk and vanilla. Beat one-third of the flour
mixture into the butter mixture. Beat in half the milk mixture. Continue beating
in the mixtures, alternating them and ending with the flour mixture. Mix just
until incorporated, scraping the sides of the bowl down occasionally.
4. In another mixer bowl, using the whisk attachment, beat the egg whites and
cream of tartar at medium-high speed until frothy. With the mixer running,
slowly stream in the remaining ½ cup sugar and beat at medium-high speed until
stiff peaks form and appear glossy but not dry. Using a rubber spatula, gently
fold the egg whites into the cake batter.
5. Divide the batter among the prepared pans, smoothing the tops. Bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean, 25 to 30
minutes. (Leave the oven on for the pecans; see step 6.) Let the cakes cool in the
pans on wire racks for 10 minutes. Invert the cakes onto the racks, peel off the
parchment paper, and then let cool completely before frosting.
6. While the cake layers are cooling, prepare the filling: Spread the pecans on
a baking sheet and bake until fragrant, about 10 minutes.
7. In a medium bowl, stir together the figs, pecans, and port. Set aside.
8. Once the cake layers are cool, make the frosting: Bring a medium saucepan
of water to barely a simmer. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the
whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat together all the ingredients
with ½ cup water at medium speed just until combined. Place the bowl over the
pan of simmering water and whisk by hand until the sugar dissolves and the
mixture is hot, about 3 minutes. Set the bowl back on the mixer and beat at high
speed for 3 minutes. Beat until stiff peaks form, 5 to 7 minutes more. Measure
out 3 cups of the frosting and fold into the filling until thoroughly combined. Set
the remaining frosting aside.
9. To assemble the cake, place 1 cake layer on a serving plate, with the flat
bottom side facing down. Spread half of the filling over the surface of the cake.
Top with another cake layer, inverted, so the bottom of the cake is facing up.
Spread the remaining filling over this cake layer. Place the remaining cake layer,
also inverted, on top. Spread the frosting over the top and sides of the cake.
FINEST FLOUR
Cake flour has a lower protein content than all-purpose flour and a soft texture
that results in the lightest, fluffiest cakes. If you’re having trouble finding it, you
can use this substitution: for every 1 cup cake flour, use ¾ cup sifted bleached
all-purpose flour mixed with 2 tablespoons cornstarch.
Always fold in whipped egg whites or whipped cream by hand, preferably
with a rubber spatula, to avoid deflating the air in the whipped ingredient.
Add a third of the egg whites or cream to the bowl and place the spatula in
the center of the batter. Sweep the spatula up toward the side of the bowl to
scoop batter from the bottom of the bowl, then fold over. Give the bowl a
turn and repeat this motion. Add the remaining egg whites or cream in two
batches, and mix only until incorporated.
OOEY GOOEY BUTTER LAYER CAKE
Now, y’all, the folks over at Cooking with Paula Deen magazine like to take a
good idea and make it even better! We took my legendary gooey butter cakes
and turned them into a sheet pan cake, adding a sweet cream cheese frosting. All
these buttery, moist cake layers with the gooey orange filling all covered with
frosting—now that’s a real statement of pleasure, if you ask me.
SERVES 12 TO 16
Cake
3 sticks (12 ounces) butter, at room temperature
2¼ cups granulated sugar
5 large eggs
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
3½ cups all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon salt
1¼ cups buttermilk
1 cup sour cream
Butter Filling
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter
¾ cup granulated sugar
⅓ cup orange juice
3 large eggs
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, cubed, at room temperature
Frosting
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, at room temperature
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
6 cups confectioners’sugar
Trace the base of the cake pan on parchment paper (waxed paper works,
too). Cut out along the tracing and place inside the pan.
1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease three 9-inch round baking pans with
butter, oil, or cooking spray, then flour generously. Alternatively, you can cut out
wax or parchment paper circles to line the bottoms of your cake pans.
2. To make the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter and sugar together at
medium speed until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the
sides of the bowl occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add
the eggs, one at a time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly
combine. Beat in the vanilla.
3. In a medium bowl, combine the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt.
Beat one-third of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half of the
buttermilk. Continuing beating in the flour mixture and buttermilk, alternating
them and ending with the flour mixture. Mix just until incorporated, scraping the
sides of the bowl down occasionally. Using a rubber spatula, stir in the sour
cream.
4. Divide the batter among the prepared pans and smooth the tops. Bake until
a toothpick inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean, 24 to 30
minutes. Let the cakes cool in the pans on wire racks for 10 minutes. Invert the
cakes onto the racks, peel off the parchment paper, and let them cool completely
before frosting.
5. While the cake layers are baking, make the butter filling: In the top of a
double boiler or a bowl fitted snugly over a pan of simmering water, melt the
butter. Remove from the heat and whisk in the granulated sugar, orange juice,
and eggs until the mixture is smooth. Return the double boiler to the heat, and
cook, whisking constantly, until the mixture is very thick (see box), 15 to 20
minutes. Whisk in the cream cheese. Remove the double boiler top or the bowl
from the pan and let cool for 30 minutes.
6. Spoon the mixture into a bowl, cover with plastic wrap right up against the
surface of the filling to prevent a skin from forming, and chill for at least 4
hours.
7. To assemble the cake, place 1 cake layer on a serving plate, with the flat
bottom side facing down. Spread half of the butter filling over the surface of the
cake. Top with another cake layer, inverted, so the bottom of the cake is facing
up. Spread with the remaining butter filling. Place the remaining cake layer, also
inverted, on top. Cover and freeze for at least 1 hour.
8. While the cake is in the freezer, make the frosting: In the bowl of an electric
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the
cream cheese, butter, and vanilla together at medium speed until light and fluffy,
about 2 minutes. At low speed, beat in the confectioners’ sugar, ½ cup at a time.
If the frosting is too soft, chill it for 10 minutes before using.
9. Remove the cake from the freezer and spread the frosting over the top and
sides of the cake. Refrigerate the cake, covered, until your guests arrive.
WHISK AWAY
When you’re whisking your gooey butter filling and waitin’ on that filling to get
all nice and thick, just keep in mind that before it gets thick, it’ll thin out at first.
Don’t worry about that. This happens because the mixture is heatin’ up. But as
moisture starts to evaporate, this filling will thicken up. Just remember to keep
stirring and watch out for air bubbles—you don’t want to beat air into your
filling.
GENERAL ROBERT E. LEE CAKE
I just love this old-fashioned cake invented to honor General Lee. It’s a big, tall
layer cake full of bright lemon and orange flavors and frosted with a citrus
buttercream that is just so mouthwateringly delicious.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Lemon Curd Filling
2 large eggs
4 large egg yolks
1⅓ cups sugar
⅔ cup fresh lemon juice (2 to 3 large lemons)
Grated zest of 2 lemons
Grated zest of 2 oranges
1½ sticks (6 ounces) cold butter, cut into small bits
Cake
2 sticks (8 ounces) butter, at room temperature
2 cups sugar
Grated zest of 1 lemon
Grated zest of 1 orange
4 large eggs
3 cups cake flour, sifted
2½ teaspoons baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
1 cup buttermilk, at room temperature
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Buttercream Frosting
4 sticks (1 pound) butter, cut into small bits, at room temperature
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
2 tablespoons fresh orange juice, strained
4 large egg whites
1 cup sugar
⅛ teaspoon cream of tartar
Pinch of salt
1. To make the lemon curd filling: In a heavy-bottomed saucepan, whisk
together the whole eggs, egg yolks, sugar, lemon juice, lemon zest, and orange
zest. Place the pan over medium heat and stir constantly until the mixture
thickens enough to coat the back of a spoon, 10 to 15 minutes. Off the heat,
whisk in the cold butter. Strain through a fine-mesh sieve into a bowl. Cover the
surface directly with plastic wrap. Make sure that the plastic wrap is right up
against the lemon curd filling so that it doesn’t form a skin. Refrigerate until
thoroughly chilled, at least 2 hours.
2. When you’re ready to make the cake, preheat the oven to 350°F. Grease
three 9-inch round cake pans with butter, oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 9-
inch rounds of parchment paper and line the bottoms of the pans.
3. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until creamy and smooth, 1 to 2
minutes. Add the sugar, lemon zest, and orange zest and beat until light and
fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides of the bowl
occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the eggs, one at a
time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
4. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, baking powder, baking soda,
and salt. In a small bowl, whisk together the buttermilk and vanilla. Beat onethird of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the buttermilk
mixture. Continue beating in the mixtures, alternating them and ending with the
flour mixture. Mix just until incorporated, scraping the sides of the bowl down
occasionally.
5. Divide the batter among the prepared pans, smoothing the tops. Bake until a
toothpick inserted into the center of each cake comes out clean, 23 to 25
minutes. Let the cakes cool in the pans on wire racks for 10 minutes. Invert the
cakes onto the racks, peel off the parchment paper, and let them cool completely
before frosting.
6. While the cake layers are cooling, make the buttercream frosting: In the
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a handheld
mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until soft and creamy, 2 to 3 minutes.
Beat in the lemon juice and orange juice until combined, about 1 minute. Place
in a small bowl and set aside.
7. Bring a medium saucepan of water to barely a simmer. In the bowl of an
electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, whisk
together the egg whites, sugar, cream of tartar, and salt at medium speed. Set the
bowl over the pan of simmering water and whisk by hand constantly until the
mixture registers 140°F on a candy thermometer, about 10 minutes. Set the bowl
back on the mixer and beat at high speed until the mixture has cooled and soft
peaks form, 5 to 10 minutes. Add the creamed butter, ¼ cup at a time, beating
well after each addition until smooth.
8. Once the cake layers are cool, assemble the cake: Place 1 cake layer on a
serving plate, with the flat bottom side facing down. Spread half of the lemon
curd filling over the surface of the cake. Top with another cake layer, inverted,
so the bottom of the cake is facing up. Spread the remaining filling over this
cake layer. Place the remaining cake layer, also inverted, on top. Spread the
buttercream frosting over the top and sides of the cake. Then go on ahead and
invite the ladies over for some tea and cake!
DO AHEAD
Save yourself some steps on the day you are making this lovely cake by making
the lemon curd ahead of time. It can be made up to 2 days in advance and kept in
the fridge. Make sure you cover it well with plastic wrap right up against the
curd, so that it doesn’t form a skin.
STACK CAKE
Cross a stack of pancakes and a wonderful layer cake and you have a sense of
what stack cake is all about. Now, this cake is a real labor of love, since you will
end up baking 6 layers in two batches, but when it’s all stacked up and coated in
glaze, people will fight over it. The thin layers make the ratio of icing to cake so
fabulous, and it’s a real looker, to boot.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Cake
2½ sticks (10 ounces) butter, at room temperature
2½ cups granulated sugar
5 large eggs
2½ cups cake flour
2 cups all-purpose flour
2½ teaspoons baking powder
2 teaspoons baking soda
2 teaspoons salt
2 cups whole milk
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Glaze
4 cups granulated sugar
¾cup packed light brown sugar
½ cup unsweetened cocoa powder, sifted
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, cut into small bits
1 can (12 ounces) evaporated milk
¾ cup whole milk
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Pinch of salt
1. Preheat the oven to 400°F. Grease three 9-inch round cake pans with butter,
oil, or cooking spray. Cut out three 9-inch rounds of parchment paper and line
the bottom of the pans.
2. To make the cake: In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the butter at medium speed until
creamy and smooth, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the granulated sugar and beat the
mixture until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape down the sides
of the bowl occasionally to incorporate all the sugar into the butter. Add the
eggs, one at a time, beating well after each egg is added to thoroughly combine.
3. In a medium bowl, sift together both flours, the baking powder, baking
soda, and salt. In a small bowl, whisk together the milk and vanilla. Beat onethird of the flour mixture into the egg mixture. Beat in half the milk mixture.
Continue adding the mixtures, alternating them and ending with the flour
mixture. Mix just until incorporated, scraping the sides of the bowl down
occasionally.
4. Spread a scant 1 cup batter in each prepared pan. Bake until light golden
brown and firm to the touch, 9 to 10 minutes. While they’re still warm, invert the
cakes out of the pans onto wire racks. Peel off the parchment paper. Regrease
and reline the pans with new parchment paper rounds. Spread another scant 1
cup batter in each pan and bake again.
5. While the cakes are baking, make the glaze: In a large, heavy-bottomed
saucepan, whisk together both sugars and the cocoa powder. Add the butter and
both milks, place the pan over medium-high heat, and bring to a boil. Boil for 5
minutes, stirring constantly. Reduce the heat to a simmer and cook, stirring
often, until slightly thickened, 5 to 10 minutes. Whisk in the vanilla and salt.
6. While the cake layers are still warm, assemble the cake. Place a cake layer
on a large serving plate with the flat bottom side facing down. Pour ¼ cup of
glaze over the cake layer, using a small spatula to spread the glaze to the edges.
Repeat with the second batch of cakes as it comes out of the oven. Once all the
cake layers have been assembled and glazed, glaze the top and sides of the cake
with the remaining glaze. You will be able to see each cake layer right through
this beautiful glaze.
IN THE THICK
If you find the glaze to be a little thin, just give it a little time to cool down so
that it thickens up and really coats your layers when you pour it on.

To me, pudding is the epitome of a Southern dessert: simple, sweet, comforting,
and everyday delicious. A bowl of pudding just makes things right. I remember
when I was a kid, my brother and I would come home many a day and our mama
would have the most incredible casserole dish of warm banana pudding waitin’
on us for an after-school treat. Oh, my gosh, my brother and I would stand up
and eat almost the whole dish!
Later, when I was older and doing my Bag Lady lunches, I made Fridays
pudding days, and you know I just could not make enough of those—everyone
wanted some. It is a comfort food and a great way to use up what you’ve already
got in the kitchen. I think many puddings come from the Depression era, when
women were in their kitchens without much of anything, trying to come up with
something sweet to serve. And since a Southerner always has stale biscuits or
bread lying around, they found a way to take that and give their family a
wonderful dessert made with leftover products and few ingredients.
When I’m trying my hardest to rustle up something special from just about
nothing, I always think of making a Creamy Rice Pudding (page 395), Cream
Cheese–Chocolate Chip Bread Pudding (page 400), or even a Classic Trifle
(page 401). I always keep milk and cream in the fridge, condensed milk in the
pantry along with custard mix, and a plain ol’ pound cake in the freezer. And, of
course, my girls out in the chicken coop provide us eggs! With these basic
ingredients on hand, the desserts in this chapter are real quick favorite treats
around our house.
Another easy and delightful treat that we turn to a lot in our house is ice
cream. Ice creams are about as easy as freezing a simple custard or pudding now
that we have a countertop ice cream maker, and I am thankful for electricity
every time. Where I grew up, at my grandmama’s place in River Bend, Georgia,
we would sit out there on the porch taking turns churning that ice cream crank. It
was such a production, but of course we had plenty of incentive. If you haven’t
made yourself a batch of Real, Homemade Vanilla Ice Cream (page 403) on a
summer night, you better fix that.
For a while there, Michael and I got into a bit of a nightly ice cream habit,
mixing up little batches of ice cream flavored with whatever I could think of.
Sweet Potato Ice Cream (page 406) was probably our most surprising success.
Then we tried to lighten things up a bit, so I made up some real beautiful
sherbets, using frozen fruit and jam like I do for my Quick Raspberry Sherbet
recipe (page 407). Whatever you’ve got on hand can go into the ice cream
maker. When it’s watermelon season down here, we have so many we just have
to keep at ’em, and one evening I discovered that Watermelon Ice (page 408) is
just about the most refreshing thing a person can serve on a hot, humid night.
Just goes to show you that sometimes the most indulgent pleasures can be some
of the simplest and easiest ones to whip up.
CREAMY RICE PUDDING
I just love a real creamy rice pudding studded with plump, juicy raisins—it is
such a comforting treat. I like to serve this warm on a cold winter’s night, topped
with whipped cream and freshly grated nutmeg—it’s like eggnog in a bowl. It’s
also tasty chilled the next day.
SERVES 6
4 cups whole milk
1 cup long-grain white rice
½ cup sugar
1 cinnamon stick
Pinch of salt
½ cup raisins
½ cup heavy cream
2 large egg yolks
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Whipped cream and grated nutmeg, for serving
1. In a medium saucepan, combine 1 cup water, the milk, rice, sugar,
cinnamon stick, and salt. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce to a
simmer and cook, uncovered, until the rice is tender and the milk has been
absorbed, 40 to 45 minutes. In the last 5 minutes of cooking, stir in the raisins.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the cream, egg yolks, and vanilla. Remove
the saucepan from the heat and whisk the cream mixture into the rice. Serve with
whipped cream and freshly grated nutmeg.
NICE PUDDING
While rice pudding can be found in the cooking lore of just about every culture,
this recipe makes up a traditional American-style rice pudding. If you feel like
changing up the flavors a bit, try adding some ground allspice or cloves. Or grate
some lemon or orange zest into the mix. For even more flavor, the raisins can be
plumped in sherry or orange juice before you stir them in.
OLD-FASHIONED BAKED CHOCOLATE PUDDING
Don’t even think of baking yourself a chocolate pudding unless you’re planning
to serve it with a dollop of freshly whipped cream. It just goes so perfectly with
the silky chocolate pudding. Some things are just meant to be, y’all.
SERVES 6
½ cup sugar
¼ cup unsweetened cocoa powder, sifted
1½ cups whole milk
½ cup heavy cream
Pinch of salt
4 large egg yolks
4 ounces semisweet chocolate, finely chopped
Lightly sweetened whipped cream, for serving
1. Preheat the oven to 300°F. Have handy a large pot of boiling water. Place
six 6-or 8-ounce custard cups in a large roasting pan.
2. In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, whisk together the sugar and cocoa
powder. Whisk in the milk, cream, and salt. Bring to a simmer over mediumhigh heat.
3. Meanwhile, lightly whisk the egg yolks in a medium bowl. Whisking
constantly, gradually pour the hot milk mixture into the egg yolks. Pour the
mixture back into the saucepan and cook over medium-low heat, stirring
constantly with a heatproof spatula, until the custard thickens slightly, 2 to 3
minutes. Be sure to scrape the bottom and sides of the pan and don’t let the
custard come to a boil.
4. Place the chopped chocolate in a medium bowl. Remove the custard
mixture from the heat and strain through a fine-mesh sieve set over the bowl of
chocolate; whisk until the chocolate is melted and smooth.
A water bath provides moisture in the oven and protects delicate dishes
such as puddings and custards from strong direct heat. To create a water
bath, place a pan large enough to hold the custard cups on an oven rack. Fill
with enough hot water to reach halfway up the height of the cups.
5. Pour the custard into the custard cups. Pour enough boiling water into the
roasting pan to come halfway up the sides of the custard cups. Bake until the
custard is just set and jiggles like jelly, about 25 minutes (if using 8-ounce
custard cups, check on the custard after 20 minutes). Let cool to room
temperature before covering the surface of each pudding entirely with plastic
wrap and refrigerating until cold. Serve topped with a big dollop of whipped
cream. (To make whipped cream, add 2 tablespoons sugar to 2 cups cold heavy
cream and, using a whisk or a handheld electric mixer, whip until soft peaks
form.)
AVOID A SPILL
It can be tricky moving your roasting pan full of boiling water and custard cups
from the counter to the oven rack. For that reason, I recommend pouring the
water into the roasting pan while it’s sitting on the pulled-out oven rack. That
way, all you have to do is gently push the rack in and close the oven door.
NOT YO MAMA’S BANANA PUDDING
I like to use Chessmen cookies because they’re hearty and buttery and crunchy
all at once—and they’re a time-saver. But I do go to the trouble of making
homemade whipped cream (instead of using whipped topping) because it’s worth
the time. No matter where I am, someone will shout out “Not Yo Mama’s
Banana Pudding.” Make it and find out why it’s so famous.
SERVES 12
2 bags (7¼ ounces each) Pepperidge Farm Chessmen cookies
6 to 8 bananas, cut into ¼ -inch-thick slices
2 cups cold heavy cream 2 tablespoons sugar
2 cups whole milk
1 package (5 ounces) instant French vanilla pudding
1 can (14 ounces) sweetened condensed milk
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
1. Line the bottom of a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with 1 bag of cookies and
layer the bananas on top.
2. In a chilled bowl, using a whisk or a handheld electric mixer (or in a chilled
bowl of a stand mixer fitted with a whisk attachment) at medium-high speed,
whip the cream and the sugar until stiff peaks form.
3. In a medium bowl, combine the whole milk and pudding mix and blend
well using a handheld electric mixer. In another medium bowl, beat the
condensed milk and cream cheese together until smooth. Using a rubber spatula,
fold the whipped cream into the cream cheese mixture. Add the cream cheese
mixture to the pudding mixture and stir until well blended. Pour the mixture over
the cookies and bananas and top with the remaining bag of cookies. Cover with
plastic wrap and refrigerate for 3 hours.
NOT A COOKIE CUTTER
Sometimes I switch out the Chessmen cookies for chocolate cookies and add
some chocolate shavings on top. The combination is pure decadence.
CLASSIC BANANA PUDDING
This is a nostalgic traditional banana pudding that folks go crazy for every time,
and rightly so—there’s just nothing more comforting and delicious. Set it out at a
covered-dish buffet next to someone’s fancy little fruit tart, and you’ll see what I
mean.
SERVES 8 TO 12
Filling
¾ cup granulated sugar
½ cup packed light brown sugar
½ cup cornstarch
¼ teaspoon salt
6 large egg yolks
4 cups whole milk
8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold butter, cut into small bits
4 teaspoons vanilla extract
About 50 vanilla wafers (or half an 11-ounce box)
3 large or 4 medium bananas, cut into ¼ -inch-thick slices
Topping
2 cups heavy cream
3 tablespoons granulated sugar
1. To make the filling: In a medium bowl, whisk together both sugars, the
cornstarch, and the salt. Whisk in the egg yolks and ½ cup of the milk until
thoroughly combined.
2. In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, bring the remaining 3½ cups milk to a
boil over mediumhigh heat. Whisking constantly, gradually pour the hot milk
into the egg mixture. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and cook over
medium heat, stirring constantly with a heatproof spatula, until a few bubbles
rise to the surface and the mixture thickens, about 5 minutes. Remove from the
heat and whisk in the butter and vanilla.
3. Spread half the custard into a 13 by 9-inch baking dish and smooth the top.
Top the custard with the vanilla wafers in a single layer. Place all of the sliced
bananas on top of the wafers. Spread the remaining custard over the surface.
Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap to prevent a skin from forming.
Refrigerate until thoroughly cooled and set, at least 4 hours.
4. When ready to serve, prepare the topping: In the bowl of an electric mixer
fitted with the whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the cream and
granulated sugar at mediumhigh speed to medium peaks. Spread the whipped
cream over the surface of the custard and serve. Your mama will be so proud!
AN EGG-CELLENT IDEA
There are two ways I like to separate the egg yolk from the egg white.* Either
way, the first thing you want to do is set up a couple of bowls on your counter,
one for the yolks and one for the whites. If you’re being extra careful, set up a
bowl for each white and a separate bowl for the yolks. That way, if you make a
mistake on one egg, you don’t ruin all the work you’ve done on the previous
ones.
The first way to separate an egg is to crack it on the edge of a surface and
gently pry the egg open with your thumbs, leaving the shell intact on the
underside of the egg. Gently transfer the yolk back and forth between the shell
halves, letting the egg white drip into a bowl as you do so. When you’ve isolated
as much of the egg white as you can, drop the yolk into another bowl.
Alternatively, crack an egg on the edge of a surface and, with your hand
hovering over a bowl, let the entire egg plop into the palm of your hand. Hold
the yolk in your palm and let the white drip out of your hand and into the bowl.
When it has dripped out entirely, pop the yolk into another bowl. A little messier,
I suppose, but probably a little easier.
By the way, don’t just throw out all the egg whites you are not using in this
recipe. Place them in an airtight plastic bag, label the number of whites, and
store them in the freezer. They will keep for up to 3 months.
CREAM CHEESE–CHOCOLATE CHIP BREAD PUDDING
Bread pudding is such an old-fashioned way to revive every last bit of bread you
have lying around. One of my favorite ways to have bread pudding is full of
cream cheese and chocolate chips. It’s out-of-this-world delicious!
SERVES 8
1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, at room temperature
¾ cup plus ½ cup granulated sugar
1 teaspoon vanilla extract Salt
5 large eggs
2 cups half-and-half
1 cup whole milk
6 cups cubed day-old egg bread
1¼ cups semisweet chocolate chips
½ cup packed light brown sugar
1. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Grease a 13 by 9-inch baking dish with butter,
oil, or cooking spray.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat the cream cheese at low speed until smooth and creamy, 2
to 3 minutes. Add the ¾ cup granulated sugar, the vanilla, and a pinch of salt and
continue beating, occasionally scraping down the sides of the bowl to
incorporate the sugar into the cream cheese, until very smooth and no lumps
remain, about 5 minutes.
3. In a large bowl, whisk together the eggs and the ½ cup granulated sugar.
Whisk in the half-and-half, milk, and ¼ teaspoon salt. Add the bread cubes and,
using a rubber spatula, fold gently to moisten all the bread. Fold in the chocolate
chips. Pour the egg-bread mixture into the prepared baking dish. Drop the cream
cheese mixture by rounded spoonfuls evenly over the surface of the pudding.
Sprinkle the brown sugar over the top. Bake until the top is light golden brown
and a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 45 to 50 minutes. Dig in
while it’s still warm.
EGG BREADS
There are all types of egg-based breads out there that will work for this recipe.
Some options are challah, brioche, panettone, or any Easter breads.
CLASSIC TRIFLE
I keep the ingredients for trifle on hand whenever we’re going to be entertaining
a lot, because it is one of the easiest make-ahead desserts you can think of, and it
is just drop-dead gorgeous, to boot. Besides, all that leftover cake and pudding
and fruit make one of the most indulgent breakfasts you ever ate when no one
was looking.
SERVES 6 TO 8
Custard
2½ cups whole milk
¾cup sugar
2 large eggs
2 large egg yolks
Pinch of salt
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
Trifle Assembly
One 9-inch yellow cake, cut into ¾-inch cubes
¼ cup cream sherry
3 cups sliced strawberries
¾cup strawberry jam
1 cup heavy cream
¼ cup sugar
1. To make the custard: In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine the
milk and 6 tablespoons of the sugar. Bring to a simmer over medium heat.
Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, whisk together the remaining 6 tablespoons
sugar, the whole eggs, egg yolks, and salt. Whisking constantly, gradually pour
the hot milk into the egg mixture. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and
cook over medium-low heat, stirring constantly with a heatproof spatula, until
the custard is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 3 to 5 minutes. Be sure to
scrape the bottom and sides of the pan and don’t let it come to a boil. Remove
from the heat and whisk in the vanilla. Strain through a fine-mesh sieve into a
bowl. Cover with plastic wrap right up against the custard to prevent a skin from
forming, and refrigerate. Chill the custard thoroughly before using.
2. To assemble the trifle: Using half the cake, place a layer of cake cubes in
the bottom of a trifle bowl or 3-quart serving dish. Brush with some of the cream
sherry. Place half the strawberry slices over the cake. Using a small spatula,
spread half the jam over the strawberries. Pour half the custard over the jam.
Repeat the layering. Cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 4 hours
or up to overnight.
3. Just before serving, in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk
attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the cream with the sugar at mediumhigh speed until soft peaks form. Spread over the surface. Serve just as soon as
you can.
BEAUTY IN A BOWL
A trifle bowl is a tall cylindrical glass bowl that allows you to layer the trifle
ingredients and see them from the outside. Your layers, custard, and fruit will
look so pretty, it’ll be a real stunner of a dessert that your whole table will just
love.
COCONUT FLAN
You know I love Coco Lopez, the sweetened cream of coconut, because it makes
this rich, smooth, eggy dessert so delicious and luxurious. This flan is a perfect
way to show off that coconut flavor, which is just a little bit of the exotic, and
the familiar, creamy goodness of the best custard you ever ate.
SERVES 10 TO 12
Caramel
1¼ cups sugar
Pinch of cream of tartar
Custard
1 can (14 ounces) sweetened condensed milk
1 can (14 ounces) coconut milk 1
can (15 ounces) Coco Lopez
1 cup heavy cream
5 large eggs
2 large egg yolks
1. To make the caramel: First be sure to have on hand a 9-inch round cake
pan. In a small, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine ¼ cup water, the sugar, and
the cream of tartar. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce the heat to a
simmer and cook, without stirring, until the syrup begins to darken, 10 to 15
minutes. Swirl the pan until the syrup is dark amber in color. Immediately pour
the caramel into the cake pan, moving the pan to allow the caramel to evenly
cover the bottom of the pan. Set aside.
2. Preheat the oven to 325°F. In a large bowl, whisk together the condensed
milk, coconut milk, Coco Lopez, and cream until combined. In a small bowl,
whisk together the whole eggs and egg yolks. Whisk the eggs into the milk
mixture.
3. Pour the custard into the caramel-coated cake pan. Place the cake pan inside
a large roasting pan. Pour enough boiling water into the roasting pan to come
halfway up the sides of the cake pan. Bake until the custard is just set, jiggles
like jelly, and a knife inserted into the center comes out clean, 1 hour and 15
minutes to 1½ hours.
4. Let the flan cool to room temperature before covering the surface entirely
with plastic wrap to prevent a skin from forming. Refrigerate overnight.
AGAINST THE GRAIN
It’s important that y’all don’t stir your caramel once it has come to a boil.
Stirring will only cause the sugars to recrystallize, resulting in an undesirable
grainy texture. The cream of tartar will also help give the caramel a nice smooth
texture.
5. Just before serving, run a thin spatula around the sides of the flan to loosen
it. Place a large serving plate over the cake pan and invert. If the flan does not
readily release from the pan, place it right side up and place on the stove over
low heat to loosen the caramel, then invert again. Cut into thin wedges and serve
on pretty little cake plates.
REAL, HOMEMADE VANILLA ICE CREAM
Thank goodness for those countertop ice cream machines—they make ice cream
making a cinch! When I make my own ice cream, I usually start with this recipe.
You can throw in sweetened, sliced strawberries or peaches right before serving
if you like, or use as a topping, and be sure to have on hand plenty of good ol’
chocolate fudge sauce. But sometimes, a simple bowl of just plain vanilla ice
cream is really all you need in the world.
MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS
1½ cups whole milk
¾ cup sugar
⅛ teaspoon salt
6 large egg yolks
1½ cups cold heavy cream
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1. Have ready a 2-quart bowl placed inside a larger bowl that is filled with ice
and water.
2. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine the milk, sugar, and salt.
Bring to a simmer over medium heat.
3. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, gently whisk the egg yolks. Whisking
constantly, gradually whisk about 1 cup of the hot milk mixture into the egg
yolks. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and cook over low heat, stirring
constantly with a heatproof spatula, until the custard is thick enough to coat the
back of a spoon, 3 to 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape the bottom and sides of the
pan, and don’t let it come to a boil. Remove from the heat and strain through a
fine-mesh sieve into the bowl sitting in the ice bath. Stir in the cold cream and
vanilla. Continue stirring over ice until cooled to room temperature.
4. Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap right up against the custard to
prevent a skin from forming. Refrigerate the custard for at least 2 hours or
overnight, then freeze in an ice cream maker according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Serve soft and custardy right away, or place the ice cream in a
freezer container with a tight-fitting lid and freeze until firm, at least 4 hours.
BOILING OVER
Be sure to watch heating milk (or cream) very, very carefully! It has a tendency
to boil over in a lickety-split minute. As soon as it comes to a simmer, whisk it
off that heat.
PEACH ICE CREAM
When peach season hits in Georgia, you better be ready, because ripe, juicy
peaches are just everywhere, and they’re too good to pass up. I love to get my
fill of this gorgeous fruit and just adore makin’ ice cream with it.
MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS
1½ pounds peaches, peeled (see box, page 422), pitted, and finely
chopped
⅓ cup plus
¾ cup sugar
1 teaspoon almond extract
Few drops of fresh lemon juice
2 cups heavy cream
1 cup whole milk
¼ teaspoon salt
6 large egg yolks
1. In a small saucepan, combine the peaches and the ⅓ cup sugar. Bring to a
simmer over medium-low heat and cook until the sugar dissolves and the
peaches just begin to release their juices, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir in the almond
extract and lemon juice. Mash the peach mixture with a potato masher. Let cool
to room temperature, then cover with plastic wrap and chill for at least 2 hours or
overnight.
2. Have ready a 2-quart bowl placed inside a larger bowl that is filled with ice
and water.
3. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine the cream, milk, ½ cup of
the sugar, and the salt. Bring to a simmer over medium heat.
4. Meanwhile, in a large bowl, whisk together the egg yolks and remaining ¼
cup sugar. Whisking constantly, gradually whisk about 1 cup of the hot cream
mixture into the egg yolks. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and cook
over low heat, stirring constantly with a heatproof spatula, until the custard is
thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 3 to 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape the
bottom and sides of the pan, and don’t let it come to a boil. Remove from the
heat and strain through a fine-mesh sieve into the bowl sitting in the ice bath.
Continue stirring over ice until cooled to room temperature.
5. Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap right up against the custard to
prevent a skin from forming. Refrigerate the custard for at least 2 hours or
overnight, then freeze in an ice cream maker according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Pour in the chilled peach mixture for the last 10 minutes of
freezing. Serve soft and custardy right away, or place the ice cream in a freezer
container with a tight-fitting lid and freeze until firm, at least 4 hours. I tell you,
this is just about the only ice cream I make when Georgia peaches are in season.
PEACH PUREE
If you don’t have a potato masher, or if you want your peach mixture smoother,
you can place the just-simmered peaches in the blender and puree until they are
chunky-smooth.
BUTTERMILK ICE CREAM
I just adore tangy buttermilk, and it makes the most refreshing ice cream, y’all.
It’s just perfect on its own or—oh, my goodness—right on top of a slice of warm
apple pie.
MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS
2 cups heavy cream
1¼ cups sugar
¼ teaspoon salt
6 large egg yolks
1½ cups buttermilk
1. Have ready a 2-quart bowl placed inside a larger bowl that is filled with ice
and water.
2. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine the cream, 1 cup of the
sugar, and the salt. Bring to a simmer over medium heat.
3. Meanwhile, in a large bowl, whisk together the egg yolks and the remaining
¼ cup sugar. Whisking constantly, gradually whisk about 1 cup of the hot cream
mixture into the egg yolks. Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and cook
over medium-low heat, stirring constantly with a heat-proof spatula, until the
custard is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 3 to 5 minutes. Be sure to
scrape the bottom and sides of the pan, and don’t let it come to a boil. Remove
from the heat and strain through a fine-mesh sieve into the bowl sitting in the ice
bath. Stir in the buttermilk and continue stirring until cooled to room
temperature.
4. Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap right up against the custard to
prevent a skin from forming. Refrigerate the custard for at least 2 hours or
overnight, then freeze in an ice cream maker according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Serve soft and custardy right away, or place the ice cream in a
freezer container with a tight-fitting lid and freeze until firm, at least 4 hours.
Just wait until y’all see how the buttermilk in this custard gives this ice cream
the most beautiful velvety texture.
STRAIN AWAY
I like to strain my cooked custards as an extra bit of insurance that I don’t end up
with cooked eggy bits. You never know when you might miss a spot on the
bottom or sides of the pan that cooked just a little too fiercely. I always use a
fine-mesh strainer so that the egg can’t sneak through.
To test for the doneness of custard, dip a wooden spoon into the custard and
run a finger along the back of the spoon. If the custard leaves an even film
along the spoon and there is a distinct path where you ran your finger, the
custard is done.
SWEET POTATO ICE CREAM
Try this one around the holidays—your guests will eat it up in no time! And it
makes the best topping you’ve ever had on a piece of spiced gingerbread.
MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS
1 cup cooked, pureed, and chilled sweet potato (from 1 large sweet
potato)
¾ cup packed dark brown sugar
½ teaspoon ground ginger
¼ teaspoon grated nutmeg
Pinch of salt
1½ cups heavy cream
1½ cups whole milk
4 large egg yolks
¼ cup granulated sugar
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the sweet potato, brown sugar, ginger,
nutmeg, and salt.
2. In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine the cream and milk. Bring to
a simmer over medium heat.
3. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, whisk together the egg yolks and granulated
sugar. Whisking constantly, gradually add the hot milk mixture to the egg yolks.
Pour the mixture back into the saucepan and cook over medium-low heat,
stirring constantly, until the custard is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 3
to 5 minutes. Be sure to scrape the bottom and sides of the pan, and don’t let it
come to a boil. Remove from the heat, whisk in the vanilla, and strain through a
fine-mesh sieve into a bowl. Whisk in the sweet potato mixture.
4. Cover the surface entirely with plastic wrap right up against the custard to
prevent a skin from forming. Refrigerate the custard for at least 2 hours or
overnight, then freeze in an ice cream maker according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Serve soft and custardy right away, or place the ice cream in a
freezer container with a tight-fitting lid and freeze until firm, at least 4 hours.
SWEET SUBSTITUTION
Feel free to simplify this recipe by substituting canned sweet potato for fresh.
Just be sure that you don’t use canned candied sweets. That will result in just a
bit too much sweetness in this ice cream.
QUICK RASPBERRY SHERBET
This is a quick-fix recipe that needs nothing more than frozen fruit and a jar of
jam, and wouldn’t you know, it tastes just like a berry patch. If you prefer
another kind of berry, go ahead and use it.
MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS
1 jar (12 ounces) seedless raspberry jam
1 bag (10 ounces) frozen unsweetened raspberries
1 cup whole milk
½ cup superfine sugar
Juice of 1 lemon
1. In a food processor, combine all the ingredients and process until smooth.
Using a rubber spatula to give the mixture a gentle push, strain the mixture
through a fine-mesh sieve into a bowl to remove the raspberry seeds.
2. Refrigerate the mixture for at least 2 hours or overnight, then freeze in an
ice cream maker according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Place in a freezer
container with a tight-fitting lid and freeze until firm, at least 4 hours.
FINE TUNE
Because this sherbet base isn’t cooked, superfine sugar is best to ensure that the
end product is nice and smooth. It’s simply granulated sugar that has been
pulverized more finely, and because of that, it will dissolve more quickly. If you
can’t find superfine sugar, substitute granulated sugar and just give it a few
pulses in the food processor on its own before you add the other ingredients.
WATERMELON ICE
Juicy and refreshing, watermelon was the original Gatorade down South!
Watermelon got a lot of hardworking people through their summer days out in
the sun. You don’t need to add much to make a beautiful ice that’s just perfectly
sweet and delicious—and you don’t need an ice cream maker for this one, either.
MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS
⅔ cup sugar
6 cups seedless watermelon chunks
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
Fresh mint sprigs, for garnish
1. In a small saucepan, bring ⅓ cup water and the sugar to a simmer over
medium heat. Cook until the sugar completely dissolves. Pour the syrup into a
medium bowl and refrigerate until cold.
2. In a blender, puree the cold sugar syrup, watermelon, and lemon juice until
smooth.
3. Pour the mixture into a wide, shallow pan and freeze for 1 hour. Scrape the
mixture with a fork (be sure to give the whole mixture a good scrape, now) and
freeze for another hour. Scrape again and freeze for 1 more hour. Scrape into
cups and serve. I like to decorate these beautiful watermelon cups with pretty
little sprigs of mint.
QUICK FREEZE
The wider and shallower the pan that you use to freeze this watermelon ice, the
better. That will help speed up the freezing time. Also, be sure to place the pan
level in your freezer. That way, you won’t have uneven freezing due to deeper
areas in the pan.

I love how so many people are reviving the old-fashioned cooking that my
grandmama used to do, and the candy and preserves recipes in this chapter are a
perfect example. Down South, kitchen gardens grew so fast that cooks always
had to scramble to keep up, and preserving was the best solution to not wastin’
an ounce of that beautiful produce. A hot, sticky day or two of canning, and then
you could put your feet up and sip a glass of Southern wine (sweet iced tea, that
is) knowing your beautiful garden-fresh produce wouldn’t ruin, and you’d have
all your jams, jellies, and pickles to see you through the year.
I’ve been preserving since I was a little girl, and have fond memories of the
preserving I did in my grandmama’s kitchen. I love to revisit them by putting up
just a small batch of Strawberry Jam (page 424) or Blackberry Jelly (page 423)
whenever I can manage it. In smaller quantities, jelly making is not the big
production we all tend to imagine.
For old-fashioned, home-style recipes, nothing beats making your own
candies. When I was a child, and even when the boys were in school, to bring in
homemade divinity or fudge for a bake sale, or to give homemade candies to the
teacher at the end of the year, was such a point of pride. My mama’s Divinity
(page 414) always sold out at our school fund-raising events, and I’d walk with
my head held high that whole week.
Whether it’s eating a piece of homemade peanut brittle or spreading a hot
biscuit with Fig Jam (page 421) from your own backyard, it will just bring you
right back to an earlier era, when things were simpler and slower, and that’s
something we all seem to crave in these fast-moving times. When you’re making
your own Popcorn Balls (page 415) or peeling peaches for jam, you’re also
giving your mind a minute to slow down and enjoy the beautiful things that you
can make with your own hands. That’s why I love cooking, y’all, and I want to
share with everyone the great feeling that comes from making beautiful,
delicious things yourself.
THE ULTIMATE EASY CHOCOLATE-PEANUT FUDGE
Salted peanuts, sweetened condensed milk, and chocolate are hard to beat. You
won’t be able to stop yourself from poppin’ pieces of this delicious fudge into
your mouth!
MAKES 64 (1-INCH) PIECES
2 cups semisweet chocolate chips
1 can (14 ounces) sweetened condensed milk
2 tablespoons (¼ stick) butter, at room temperature
1 cup salted cocktail peanuts
1 teaspoon vanilla extract Pinch of salt
1. Grease an 8-inch square baking dish with butter, oil, or cooking spray. Line
with waxed paper, leaving the edges of the waxed paper to hang over all around
the edges of the dish.
2. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, melt the chocolate chips with the
milk over medium-low heat. Stir in the butter until completely melted. Stir in the
peanuts, vanilla, and salt. Using a rubber spatula, spread the mixture on the
bottom of the prepared dish, smoothing the top. Cover loosely with plastic wrap
and refrigerate until firm, at least 4 hours. Using a hot, dry knife, cut into cute
little 1-inch squares.
SMOOTH OPERATOR
The secret to perfectly smooth-edged squares of fudge is in the hot knife you use
to cut it. Make sure you warm that knife up real good in hot water and wipe it
fully dry before you slice into the fudge. First, score the top of the fudge lightly
as soon as it is set enough to do so (about an hour or so into the chilling time):
lightly slide the tip of a sharp knife over the surface of the fudge to mark where
you will cut it when it is fully set. Then when it’s set, you have guidelines for
cutting the fudge all the way through, with the hot, dry knife.
DIVINITY
My mama was the queen of divinity. I can still see that beautiful redheaded
woman standin’ up there at her counter with those two tablespoons, twirling the
most incredible, perfect mounds of divinity you ever put in your mouth. My
grandmama and my aunt Trina would try to make it and it would turn out to be a
disaster. They finally just threw up their hands and said, “Okay, Corrie, we have
given up. You are the divinity queen and we’ll eat divinity only when you make
it.” Mama made hers just like this, with pecans. Now that you have the recipe,
you can just go ahead and be a divinity queen yourself.
SERVES 8 TO 10
4 cups sugar
1 cup light corn syrup
3 large egg whites
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
2 to 2½ cups chopped pecans
1. Line a couple of wire racks with waxed paper.
2. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, stir together ¾ cup water, the
sugar, and the corn syrup. Place over medium heat and give it a good stir only
when the sugar has just dissolved; do not stir after this point. Cook the sugar
syrup until it reaches 250°F (hard-ball stage) on a candy thermometer.
3. While the syrup is cooking, in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the
whisk attachment, or using a handheld mixer, beat the egg whites at mediumhigh speed until stiff peaks form. Once the sugar syrup has reached 250°F, with
the mixer at high speed, carefully pour the hot syrup in a slow, steady stream into
the stiffly beaten egg whites, beating constantly. Add the vanilla and continue to
beat until the mixture holds its shape, about 5 minutes. Using a rubber spatula,
stir in the pecans.
4. Using two tablespoons, drop the divinity mixture onto the waxed paper–
lined rack, using one spoon to push the candy off the other. This may take a little
practice because the technique is to twirl the pushing spoon, making the candy
look like the top of a soft-serve ice cream. If the mixture becomes too stiff, add a
few drops of very hot water. Y’all are going to need to work fast when making
this candy! When you’ve used up all the mixture, let the candies cool
completely. You can store them in an airtight container for up to 2 weeks.
MAMA’S WAY
If you feel like trying something new, dried cherries make a nice substitute for
some or all of the pecans.
POPCORN BALLS
My grandmama used to make popcorn balls all the time. I especially love these
around holiday time, but they are a wonderful, simple treat whenever you get the
urge for them.
MAKES 14 BALLS
2 cups sugar
½ cup unsulfured molasses (not blackstrap)
1 teaspoon distilled white vinegar
½ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
18 cups popped corn
1. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine 1⅓ cups water, the sugar,
molasses, vinegar, and salt. Bring to a boil over high heat. Cook the sugar
mixture, without stirring, until it reaches 255°F (hard-ball stage) on a candy
thermometer. Swirl in the vanilla.
2. Place the popped corn in a large bowl and pour the sugar mixture over,
tossing gently to coat. When the mixture is cool enough to handle, with lightly
greased hands, press the popcorn into 3-inch balls. Let cool completely on
waxed paper before digging in.
CANDIED BACON
Sometimes I like to add ½ cup candied bacon, cut up real fine. To make candied
bacon, lay 3 slices of nice, thick-cut bacon on a foil-lined baking sheet and
sprinkle a teaspoon of light brown sugar on each slice. Bake at 325°F for 30
minutes, then check to see if the bacon is browned and crispy. If not, cook for
another 10 minutes or so and check again. Once done, place the bacon on a
paper towel–lined plate and let it cool—it’ll “crisp” up even more. Then chop it
up fine and add to your popcorn when mixing all the ingredients together.
CRUNCHY PRALINES
I started making pralines when I was a young housewife—and I mean young.
They’re really easy to make so long as you take care not to overcook them, and
there’s nothing better. I remember making a big old can of pralines to take to
Atlanta to my daddy when he was in the intensive care unit up there. Earl Hiers
was a beautiful man, forty years old, and he’d just had a stroke, but he couldn’t
stop eatin’ my pralines. Bless him!
MAKES ABOUT 2 DOZEN PRALINES
½ cup heavy cream
1 cup packed light brown sugar
1 cup granulated sugar
1½ cups coarsely chopped pecans
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, at room temperature
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
Pinch of salt
1. Grease a baking sheet and two tablespoons with butter, oil, or cooking
spray.
2. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, stir together the cream and both
sugars. Bring to a boil over high heat. Let the mixture cook, without stirring,
until fragrant and starting to caramelize, about 5 minutes. Add the pecans and
butter and swirl the pan to combine. Remove the pan from the heat and let cool
for 10 minutes. Add the vanilla and salt, and using as few strokes as possible, stir
vigorously to cool and thicken the sugar mixture.
3. Using the prepared spoons, drop by rounded tablespoonfuls onto the
prepared baking sheet, If the mixture firms up, stir in a few drops of very hot
water to loosen it. Let the candy cool before serving. Store any leftovers (if there
are any!) in an airtight container.
A SOUTHERN SWEETIE
Praline may have started out in Europe as a candy made with almonds. But we
here in the South have made it our own by cooking it up with our very favorite
nut: pecans.
SPICY CANDIED PECANS
Whether you’re drinking bourbon or lemonade, a spicy, salty-sweet candied
pecan is just the thing on the side. Well, maybe more than one.
MAKES ABOUT 5 CUPS
1 cup sugar
1 large egg white 1 pound pecan halves
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
⅛ teaspoon cayenne pepper
Pinch of ground cloves
1. Preheat the oven to 300°F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment
paper.
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the sugar and egg white. Add the pecans
and toss to combine. In a small bowl, stir together the salt, cinnamon, cayenne
pepper, and cloves. Sprinkle the spice mixture over the nuts and toss well.
3. Spread the nuts in a single layer on the prepared baking sheet. Bake, tossing
occasionally, until the nuts are fragrant and almost dry to the touch, about 30
minutes. Put these out in pretty bowls when company comes round.
A HOMEMADE GIFT
During the holiday season, I love packaging up these beautiful pecans in cute
little Mason jars. I pretty them up with ribbons and bows and bring them round
to all my friends. I reckon homemade gifts mean so much more than the storebought kind.
NUTTY BRITTLE
Down around Savannah, peanut brittle is big business. Folks just love that sweet,
salty, buttery crunch. I like to make my brittle with mixed nuts, which makes it
look pretty and taste pretty darn addictive, so don’t say I didn’t warn y’all. It
makes a great gift, too, if you’re looking to get it out of the house before you eat
the whole thing.
MAKES ABOUT 1½ POUNDS OF BRITTLE
2 cups sugar
½ cup light corn syrup
2 cups salted mixed nuts
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, at room temperature
1 tablespoon baking soda
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
¼ teaspoon salt
1. Grease a rimmed baking sheet with butter, oil, or cooking spray.
2. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine ½ cup water, the sugar,
and the corn syrup. Bring to a boil over high heat. Cook the sugar mixture,
without stirring, until it registers 260°F (hard-ball stage) on a candy
thermometer. Stir in the nuts and butter and continue cooking until the mixture
reaches 300°F (hard-crack stage). Stir in the baking soda, vanilla, and salt until
completely incorporated.
3. Pour the mixture onto the prepared baking sheet and, using an offset
spatula, spread it as thinly as possible. Let the candy cool before breaking it into
pieces and serving. Store any leftovers in an airtight container.
SUGAR STAGES
Back before candy thermometers were readily available, candy makers used to
test the stage of their cooked sugar using a bowl of cold water. That’s how we
got the terms “hard-ball stage” and “hard-crack stage.” So, for instance, if you
dropped some of your cooking sugar at around 260°F into a bowl of cold water,
it would form a hard ball. At that point, you’ve made nougat. At around 300°F,
that same sugar placed in water would form brittle threads, just exactly what you
need for nutty brittle. And that’s some Candy Making 101, folks.

BUCKEYES
Jamie adores these peanut butter and chocolate balls, and I always used to make
them for the boys to give to their teachers as gifts. I remember how proud Jamie
was that his mama could make a fine homemade candy.
MAKES ABOUT 48 (1-INCH) BALLS
3 cups confectioners’sugar
1 cup creamy peanut butter
4 tablespoons (½ stick) butter, at room temperature
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
3 cups semisweet chocolate chips
1. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper.
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, or using a
handheld mixer, beat together the sugar, peanut butter, butter, and vanilla at
medium speed. The dough should end up slightly crumbly. Roll the dough into
1-inch balls. Place the balls on the prepared baking sheet and stick a toothpick
into each ball. Place in the freezer and chill for 1 hour.
3. In the top of a double boiler, or in a bowl snugly on top of a pan with a few
inches of simmering water, melt the chocolate chips, stirring until smooth.
Holding a ball by the toothpick and placing a fork under the ball to stabilize it,
dip it into the hot chocolate, leaving a small hole of the peanut butter dough
showing at the top of the ball as the “buckeye.” Let the excess chocolate drip
back into the pot. Return the buckeye to the baking sheet. Repeat with the
remaining balls.
4. Cover loosely with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 2 hours or
overnight. Remove the toothpicks before serving.
HOT AND COLD
The secret to getting a nice coating of chocolate on the buckeyes is to make sure
the chocolate is very hot and the buckeyes are very cold. I like to bring my
buckeyes out of the freezer in batches to make sure they don’t heat up while I’m
working.
CANNING BASICS
Canning sauces, jams, and relishes is fun, economical, and easy. To ensure their
freshness, all you need to know are some simple basics. First off, make sure your
jars, lids, and screw bands are completely clean. Then sterilize them in a large
pot of rapidly boiling water for a good 10 minutes, making sure that they are
fully submerged in the water. After they have thoroughly dried on paper towels,
fill them with whatever you are looking to preserve, leaving ½ inch of
headroom. Wipe the rims clean and screw the lids on tightly. Place the sealed
jars in a large pot of water on a rack of a folded-up kitchen towel, making sure
they are fully submerged. Bring to a boil, covered, and continue boiling for 5 to
10 minutes. You should hear a small pop when the vacuum is fully sealed. Let
them cool on a kitchen towel–lined counter for 24 hours and test that the lid is
fully sealed by pressing on the center. If the lid is concave, it is fully sealed.
FIG JAM
To me, there’s nothin’ better than pulling a whole soft preserved fig out of that
syrup. For some reason, no one else in the family seems to agree, which is just
fine by me—I don’t need help working my way through a batch of Fig Jam on
my own. Try it in my Frosted Buttermilk Fig Cake (page 377) if you like, or
spread it over toasted pound cake for dessert, and you’re in for a treat.
MAKES 6 HALF-PINTS
4 pounds fresh, ripe figs, stemmed
3 cups sugar
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon
¼ cup fresh lemon juice
1. In a large, wide, heavy-bottomed nonaluminum saucepan, toss the figs with
the sugar. Add the lemon zest and lemon juice and bring to a boil over mediumhigh heat, stirring until the sugar is dissolved. Reduce the heat to a simmer and
cook, stirring occasionally, until the fruit is glassy and the jam runs off a spoon
in thick, heavy drops, 20 to 25 minutes. The mixture should register around
220°F on a candy thermometer. Skim off any foam that rises to the surface of the
jam.
3. Spoon into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ½ inch of room at the top)
and process for 10 minutes. (See Canning Basics, opposite.)
PAN PRIMER
Nonreactive pans are key in jam making. Pans that are made from aluminum or
cast iron or copper can impart a metallic flavor to your jams because these
materials react with the acids in the fruit. So stick with nonreactive materials like
stainless steel or enamel. That way, nothing will get in the way of the fresh fruit
flavor of your jams.
PEACH JAM
When you are at a farm stand or market in the middle of peach season and you
see a crate of soft, juicy peaches buzzing with bees, you’ve hit peach jam pay
dirt: those ripe, sweet fruits are usually a real bargain, since they’re too soft to
eat out of hand, but they’re just perfect for a jam so full of summertime
goodness, it’ll knock your socks off every time you open a new jar.
MAKES 6 HALF-PINTS
4 pounds ripe peaches, peeled (see box), pitted, and cut into ½-inch
wedges
3½ cups sugar
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
1. In a large, wide, heavy-bottomed nonaluminum saucepan, toss the peaches
with the sugar and let stand off the heat, stirring occasionally, until the sugar is
mostly dissolved, about 1 hour. Mash lightly with a potato masher.
2. Add the lemon zest and lemon juice to the peaches and bring to a boil over
medium-high heat, stirring until the sugar is fully dissolved. Reduce the heat to a
simmer and cook, stirring occasionally, until the fruit is glassy and the jam runs
off a spoon in thick, heavy drops, 20 to 25 minutes. The mixture should register
around 220°F on a candy thermometer. Skim off any foam that rises to the
surface of the jam.
3. Spoon into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ½ inch of room at the top)
and process for 10 minutes. (See Canning Basics, page 420.)
PEACH A-PEEL
Peaches, just like tomatoes, can be easily peeled using a pot of boiling water and
a bowl of ice water. Clean the peaches well and, using a small knife, score a
shallow X at the blossom end of each peach. Then dunk the peaches in the
boiling water for about 40 seconds or so, depending on how ripe they are. Using
a slotted spoon, lift the peaches out and place them directly in the ice water. Let
them cool for a few seconds and peel away!
BLACKBERRY JELLY
Eating blackberry jelly on toast brings me back to my grandmama’s kitchen like
nothing else. This is a beautiful jelly, and you can make more to give away as
gifts if you do like my grandmama did and get someone else to pick a few flats
of blackberries.
MAKES 6 HALF-PINTS
4 pounds blackberries (about 3 quarts)
1 package (1¾ ounces) powdered pectin
4 cups sugar
1. Wash the berries and mash them with a potato masher or the back of a wide
spoon. Place them in cheesecloth and bundle up tightly, creating a knot on top of
the bundle. Place in a colander set over a large bowl and, with your hands,
squeeze the bundle to get the juices out. You want to extract about 3 cups of
juice.
2. In a medium, wide, heavy-bottomed nonaluminum saucepan, stir together
the blackberry juice, pectin, and sugar. Bring to a boil and cook for 1 minute.
Skim off any foam that rises to the surface of the jelly.
3. Ladle into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ½ inch of room at the top)
and process for 10 minutes. (See Canning Basics, page 420.)
PECTIN POWDER
Powdered pectin is readily available and is a great aid in jam and jelly making. A
little added pectin helps to set your jelly just right. It’s naturally occurring in
fruit, but more so when the fruit is unripe. So when you’re cooking up ripe fruit,
it helps to give it this little natural boost to set properly.
STRAWBERRY JAM
I make strawberry jam for my family because it tastes a thousand times more
wonderful than what you’d buy in the store; it’s full of lush strawberry flavor.
And I have never met a soul who could turn away a good strawberry jam on a
hot buttered biscuit.
MAKES 4 HALF-PINTS
3 pounds strawberries, hulled and halved
3 cups sugar
Finely grated zest of 1 lemon
⅓ cup fresh lemon juice
1. In a large, wide, heavy-bottomed nonaluminum saucepan, toss the
strawberries with the sugar and let stand off the heat, stirring occasionally, until
the sugar is mostly dissolved, about 1 hour. Mash lightly with a potato masher.
2. Add the lemon zest and juice to the strawberries and bring to a boil over
medium-high heat, stirring until the sugar is fully dissolved. Reduce the heat to a
simmer and cook, stirring occasionally, until the fruit is glassy and the jam runs
off a spoon in thick, heavy drops, 20 to 25 minutes. The mixture should register
around 220°F on a candy thermometer. Skim off any foam that rises to the
surface of the jam.
3. Spoon into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ½ inch of room at the top)
and process for 10 minutes. (See Canning Basics, page 420.)
SPREAD THE LOVE
You want to give your jams plenty of room to spread out in the pan so that they
reduce as quickly as possible. So I always recommend using a wide-bottomed
saucepan for making jam. Your jams will thicken up quicker, retaining the fresh,
just-picked fruit flavor that you want.
Hull a strawberry by inserting a small knife just to the side of the core on
the stem end. Angling the knife toward the core, carve a small circle and
pop out the core with the tip of the knife.
SOUTHERN-STYLE SWEET ICED TEA
Here in the South, we like our iced tea cold and sweet. We like to brew ours
fresh every day and serve it over plenty of ice. Not a summer’s day goes by that
I don’t reach for a tall glass of this reviving, refreshing drink.
MAKES 8 CUPS
6 to 7 black tea bags, such as Luzianne or Lipton
4 cups boiling water
1 cup sugar
1. Place the tea bags in a large heatproof bowl or pot and pour in the freshly
boiled water. Let steep for 5 minutes. Fill a large pitcher with 4 cups roomtemperature water. Strain the hot tea into the pitcher and stir to combine.
2. In a small, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine ½ cup cold water with the
sugar. Simmer until the sugar completely dissolves, about 5 minutes. Pour the
sugar syrup into the tea to taste. Refrigerate the tea until nice and cold. Serve
over plenty of ice.
A HINT OF MINT
Y’all try adding some fresh mint to your iced tea next time. Just muddle a few
leaves at the bottom of your glass using a wooden muddler or a knife handle, and
pour the iced tea over it—it’s out-of-this-world delicious.
Muddle mint to release its flavor by gently pressing down, never grinding,
with a wooden muddler or the handle of a dinner knife.

LEMONADE
When I want lemonade, I go into the kitchen and start squeezin’ me some
lemons. It’s a little bit of work for a whole lot of satisfaction. Sometimes it gets
so hot down South, there ain’t nothin’ that’ll refresh you better. Poured into a tall
glass and garnished with a sprig of mint, I’m tellin’ ya, it’s as welcome as a cool
breeze.
MAKES ABOUT 16 CUPS
2 cups sugar
2 cups fresh lemon juice (about 8 large lemons)
1. In a medium, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine 2 cups water and the
sugar. Cook over medium heat until the sugar fully dissolves. Remove from the
heat and let cool to room temperature. Chill the syrup for at least 1 hour.
2. Before serving, fill a pitcher with 14 cups cold water. Stir in the lemon juice
and chilled sugar syrup. Serve in tall glasses filled with ice.
LEMONADE WITH SPIRIT
Here in the South we love our lemonade and we love our iced tea. When we
can’t decide which to sip on, we just mix ourselves up an Arnold Palmer, a drink
that is equal parts of each. If a cooling cocktail is what you’re after, add a splash
of vodka to the mix, or even a splash of bourbon for a Lynchburg Lemonade.
Get the most juice possible out of a lemon by gently rolling the whole
lemon under your palm along the countertop. This will break down some of
the lemon membranes and make the juice flow more easily.
SPARKLING BERRY PUNCH
Mix up a pitcher of this beautiful and festive libation whenever you feel like
celebratin’—it goes over just as well at a Mother’s Day brunch as at a kid’s
birthday party (if you make the sparkling cider variation below).
SERVES 12 TO 16
2 bottles (750ml) cold champagne
4 cups cold lemonade
1 cup cold cranberry juice
2 pints fresh mixed berries, such as blueberries, raspberries,
blackberries, and sliced strawberries
In a large pitcher, combine the champagne, lemonade, and cranberry juice.
Stir in the berries and serve. Be sure to have lots of ice on hand!
Create an ice mold by placing sliced fruit in a ring mold, then filling with
water. Freeze until set and float in a punch bowl.
VIRGIN VARIATION
To make an alcohol-free version of this cocktail, substitute sparkling cider for
the champagne.
CHEATER’S BLACKBERRY WINE
Real blackberry wine was something I remember folks putting up along with
their preserves, but of course it took months and months to be ready. I’d been
missing the wonderful flavor, so I came up with this shortcut to get to the good
stuff right away and wanted to share it with y’all. I don’t know anyone who
makes his own fruit wines anymore, but this one you can stir together just a day
ahead.
MAKES ABOUT 1 QUART
1 cup fresh or frozen blackberries
⅓ cup sugar
1 bottle (750ml) white wine 1 lemon
1. In a small, heavy-bottomed nonaluminum saucepan, simmer the
blackberries and sugar over medium heat until syrupy, about 5 minutes. Let the
mixture cool completely. Pour the wine into a large bowl and stir in the
blackberry syrup. Place in an airtight container and refrigerate overnight.
2. Using a vegetable peeler, peel ½-inch-wide strips of zest from the lemon
(reserve the lemon in the fridge for another use). Pour the blackberry wine into
chilled glasses. Before serving, twist a strip of zest over each glass and drop it in.
Now, aren’t you the cocktail maestro!
GLASS GARNISHES
Before twisting the zest, go on ahead and rub the rim of the serving glasses with
the zest to give the drinks a lemony flavor when sipped. Or coat the rims with a
little confectioners’sugar for a sweeter sip.

JEZEBEL SAUCE
Serve over cream cheese with crackers. Or use as a glaze or condiment for meat
or poultry. It can also perk up a turkey sandwich like nobody’s business.
MAKES 2½ CUPS
1 cup pineapple preserves
1 cup apple jelly
½ cup prepared horseradish
2 tablespoons mustard powder
1 teaspoon black pepper
In a medium bowl, combine all the ingredients and stir well. The sauce will
keep in an airtight container for several weeks in the fridge.
ONION RELISH
For your next weenie roast! This relish is tangy and sweet with a bit of crunch.
MAKES 2 CUPS
3 cups chopped yellow onion
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
2 tablespoons sugar
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 tablespoon olive oil
½ teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
Salt and black pepper
In a medium saucepan, stir together 1½ cups water, the onion, vinegar, sugar,
tomato paste, oil, and Worcestershire sauce. Bring to a boil over medium-high
heat. Reduce the heat to a simmer and cook, stirring occasionally, until there is
just enough liquid to cover the bottom of the pan, about 20 minutes. Season to
taste with salt and black pepper. Store in an airtight container in the refrigerator
for up to 3 weeks.
CHOWCHOW
Similar to another great relish: piccalilli. Try it on hot dogs or hamburgers for a
real treat.
MAKES 6 HALF-PINTS
4 cups coarsely chopped green tomato
4 cups coarsely chopped green cabbage
2 cups coarsely chopped yellow onion
2 cups coarsely chopped red bell pepper
2 tablespoons seeded and finely chopped jalapeño pepper, or more if
more heat is desired
¼ cup salt
1½ cups apple cider vinegar
1½ cups distilled white vinegar
1 cup sugar
2 tablespoons pickling spice, tied in cheesecloth
1 tablespoon mustard seeds
1 tablespoon celery seeds
2 teaspoons ground turmeric
1. In a large nonaluminum bowl (like glass or stainless steel), combine the
tomato, cabbage, onion, bell pepper, and jalapeño. Toss with the salt, cover, and
let stand in a cool spot for 12 hours. Place in a colander to drain, rinse with
water, and drain again.
2. In a large nonaluminum saucepan, combine the drained vegetables with 1½
cups water, both vinegars, the sugar, pickling spice, mustard seeds, celery seeds,
and turmeric. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce the heat to a lively
simmer and cook for 30 minutes. Discard the cheesecloth-wrapped pickling
spice.
3. Spoon into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ½ inch of room at the top)
and process for 10 minutes. (See Canning Basics, page 420.)
SOUTH CAROLINA MUSTARD SAUCE
So zesty but with a sweet edge. Use as a marinade or finishing sauce. Or put
some in a squirt bottle on the table. I feel a pig pickin’ coming on.
MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP
½ cup yellow mustard
⅓ cup packed light brown sugar
¼ cup apple cider vinegar
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce
1 teaspoon onion powder
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
¼ teaspoon salt
In a medium bowl, combine all the ingredients and stir well. Store in the
refrigerator for up to 1 month.
GREEN TOMATO CHUTNEY
Here in the South, we just can’t get enough of those green tomatoes. We fry ’em,
and that’s what made ’em famous, but we also make this tasty chutney. It’ll
make you lick your fingers.
MAKES 6 HALF-PINTS
1 pound green tomatoes, coarsely chopped
1 pound Granny Smith apples, peeled, cored, and coarsely chopped
1 yellow onion, finely chopped
1 orange, unpeeled, thinly sliced and seeded
1 small clove garlic, finely chopped
¼ cup golden raisins
¼ cup dried cranberries
2 teaspoons mustard seeds
½ teaspoon black pepper
1½ teaspoons ground ginger
¼ teaspoon ground allspice
1 cup apple cider vinegar
1⅔ cups packed light brown sugar
1. In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, combine all the ingredients. Bring to
a boil over medium-high heat, stirring frequently. Reduce the heat to a simmer
and cook, stirring occasionally, until thickened, 30 to 45 minutes.
2. Spoon into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ½ inch of room at the top)
and process for 10 minutes. (See Canning Basics, page 420.)
PEPPER JELLY
If you don’t like your jelly too spicy, substitute some bell pepper for the
jalapeño. On the other hand, if you like even more heat, try adding some of the
jalapeño seeds to the mix.
MAKES 5 HALF-PINTS
1 cup chopped green bell pepper
½ cup seeded and chopped jalapeño pepper
5 cups sugar
1½ cups apple cider vinegar
3 ounces liquid pectin or 1 packet Certo
4 drops green food coloring
1. In a food processor, puree the bell pepper and jalapeño pepper with ¼ cup
water.
2. In a medium saucepan, combine the pepper mixture, sugar, and vinegar.
Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, and boil vigorously for 5 minutes,
stirring frequently (and watch out for it bubbling over).
3. Add the pectin and boil, stirring, for 1 minute longer. Remove from the
heat, skim the foam if necessary, and stir in the food coloring.
4. Spoon into hot, sterilized half-pint jars (leaving ¼ inch of room at the top)
and process for 5 minutes. (See Canning Basics, page 420.)
BOILED DRESSING
Great on any kind of vegetable salad—cabbage, potato, green bean, beet—
anything, including meat and poultry salads. It was created when vegetable oils
were nearly impossible to come by in the South. Take that, mayonnaise!
MAKES 1 CUP
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour
1 tablespoon sugar
1 teaspoon mustard powder
1 teaspoon salt
½ cup apple cider vinegar
2 large egg yolks
¼ cup heavy cream
1. In a medium saucepan or in the top of a double boiler, whisk together the
flour, sugar, mustard powder, and salt.
2. In a small bowl, whisk together ½ cup water, the vinegar, the egg yolks, and
2 tablespoons of the cream. Whisk the vinegar mixture into the flour mixture.
Cook over low heat, stirring constantly, until thickened, about 10 minutes.
Remove from the heat and whisk in the remaining 2 tablespoons cream.
Refrigerate until cool. Store in the refrigerator for up to a week.
PAULA DEEN’S HOUSE SEASONING
Y’all, this is a wonderful all-around seasoning to have on hand. It’s out of this
world on anything from fish to poultry to meat. And the garlic powder makes it
so much more interesting than just salt and pepper alone. I’m never without it.
MAKES 1½ CUPS
1 cup salt
¼ cup freshly ground black pepper
¼ cup garlic powder
Combine all the ingredients in a bowl. Store in an airtight container for up to 6
months.
Acknowledgments
This book has been a real labor of love, and it would not have come together so
beautifully without all the amazing people who helped make it happen.
My deepest thanks go out to my manager, Barry Weiner, who goes beyond his
role and looks after me like after his own child. Huge heartfelt thanks to my
literary agent, Janis Donnaud, who continues to be the best literary agent I could
have ever asked for.
Big thanks go out to Jonathan Karp, as well as to all those at Simon &
Schuster who have made this book a reality. Thanks to my meticulous editors,
Priscilla Painton and Michael Szczerban, who are as dedicated as they are
thorough. Huge thanks to Sybil Pincus, senior production editor; Kate Slate, the
copy editor; Nancy Singer, director of interior design, for the beautiful interior of
the book; Jackie Seow, executive art director, for a stunning jacket; Richard
Rhorer, associate publisher; Brian Ulicky, publicity manager; Nina Pajak,
marketing manager; Irene Kheradi, executive managing editor; and Gina
DiMascia, managing editorial assistant. Thanks to photographer Ben Fink and
his team, who made every dish look mouthwateringly delicious. Thanks to
illustrator Jason Snyder for his clear drawings.
Many thanks to my coauthor, Melissa Clark, who helped shape this book into
a comprehensive compendium of Southern food, and to her intrepid team: Sarah
Huck, Olga Massov, Jaimee Young, Zoe Singer, Rebecca Klus, and Nancy
Duran.
I don’t know where I’d be without Nancy Assuncao, my tireless and
enthusiastic publicist, who possesses unparalleled dedication. Thanks to Phyllis
Hoffman and her amazing staff, who publish my beautiful magazine, Cooking
with Paula Deen. Thanks to all my friends at the Food Network, and to Gordon
Elliot, the executive producer of my show Paula’s Best Dishes. Thanks to my
hairstylist, Jamie Cribbs, and makeup artist, Courtney Fix, who always make me
look and feel pretty. A mountain of thanks to my Deen Team, who can be
counted on day and night, rain or shine, and who keep my schedule in
impeccable order: Brandon Branch, Theresa Feuger, Holis Johnson, and Sarah
Meighen.
Huge thanks to my ever-reliable staff at The Lady & Sons, particularly Dora
Charles, Rance Jackson, Dustin Walls, and Scott Hopke. Also, big thanks to
everyone at Uncle Bubba’s Oyster House.
And to my amazing family: my darling husband, Michael; my two boys,
Jamie and Bobby; my beautiful daughter-in-law, Brooke; and to all my
grandsons, Jack, Matthew, and Henry; the Groover kids, Anthony and Michelle;
and Michelle’s husband, Daniel Reed. Thanks to my baby brother, Bubba; my
niece, Corrie, and her husband, Brian Rooks. Also huge thanks to Michael’s
brothers, Father Hank and Nick; and his cousins, aunts, and uncles; and my
darlin’ aunt Peggy Ort. Y’all are my most precious gift—thank you for being
there.
And last but not least, a big-thank you to all my fans: I hope y’all find this
book to be your own Southern cooking bible.
