The Fascinating Histories Behind 9 of Your Favorite Foods

Buffalo wings await contestants during Wing Bowl 16 at the Wachovia Center Feb . 1 , 2008 in Philadelphia William Thomas Cain—Getty Images
BY TIME STAFF JULY 21 , 2015 7 : 00 AM EDT
Food is one of the most basic necessities of life , but just because it ’ s basic doesn ’ t mean it ’ s simple .  ( Yes , even pie .  ) 

Over the years , TIME has occasionally hosted a regular “ brief history of ” feature , and it often took a look at some of the facts that lie behind what ’ s on our plates . From the disputed Buffalo wing creation myth to peanut-butter-based health trends of the 19th century , those stories add the flavor of history to items that are already pretty flavorful on their own . 

Here are some of our favorites : 

More Must-Read Stories From TIME
Meet the Foreign Volunteers Risking Their Lives to Defend Ukraine—and Europe
Researchers Are Getting Closer to Understanding Long COVID . But Treatments Are Still Likely a Ways Off
How Volodymyr Zelensky Defended Ukraine and United the World
The Families of George Floyd and Rodney King Didn ' t Ask to Be Part of History—But They Know They Are
Introducing TIME ' s Women of the Year 2022
The New Batman Is Deeply Unsettling . The Director Says That ' s the Point
Why Most Crypto Backers Are Thrilled That the Biden Administration Is Wading Into Digital Currency
How South Korea ' s Yoon Suk-yeol Capitalized on Anti-Feminist Backlash to Win the Presidency
Contact us at letters @ time . com . 

Pie
Apple pie a la mode
The “ pye ” —as it used to be spelled—is a venerable dish , which can be traced all the way back to ancient Greece and Rome . But those pastry-based dishes weren ’ t the desserts we tend to think of today . Instead , they were overwhelmingly savory dishes . And for good reason : the crusts could help the contents of the pie ( meat , typically ) last a little longer than they would otherwise . 

Even apple pies didn ’ t used to look the way they do now : 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Pie

Advertisement
Eggnog
Eggnog
Eggnog is centuries old , it turns out : 

But it wasn ’ t always associated with the end-of-year holiday season . That happened when the drink came to the Americas ; even George Washington had his own signature recipe for eggnog , which by his time had begun to be made with rum . 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Eggnog

Waffles
Hot Breakfast
This peculiarly patterned breakfast staple has a surprisingly long and illustrious history . The ancient Greeks used a tool kind of like a waffle iron to make cakes , and the treat came to the New World with some of its earliest European settlers : 

But it wasn ’ t until the 1930s that a California family combined instant waffle mix , electricity and ingenuity to come up with a way to mass-produce waffles . The eventual result , if you haven ’ t already guessed , was Eggos . 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Waffles

Advertisement
Peanut Butter
Oh ! Boy Homogenized Peanut Butter
Peanut butter ’ s origins are a bit mysterious . Contrary to the popular myth that George Washington Carter came up with the idea , there ’ s evidence that some version of peanut butter was being made at least a couple decades before he published his 1916 text How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing it For Human Consumption : 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Peanut Butter

Advertisement
Buffalo Wings
Football Fans And Competitive Eaters Attend Annual Wing Bowl
Unlike peanut butter , Buffalo wings have a an easily identified origin : Buffalo , N . Y . But what exactly happened to spark its birth is a little blurrier : 

In one version of the story , the dish was invented merely to get rid of a surplus of chicken wings ; in another version , Bellissimo ’ s son specifically asked for wings . 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Buffalo Wings

Advertisement
Maple Syrup
Children Tapping Maple Trees
The American maple-syrup industry can be traced back to the 17th century , when farmers began to tap the trees on their properties for a sweetener that was , at the time , cheaper than sugar : 

The old system of making maple syrup—leaving buckets under taps , collecting sap , hauling the buckets to the sugar house to be heated—was eventually widely replaced by a method that used tubes and vacuums rather than buckets and gravity . 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Maple Syrup

Advertisement
Salt
A Dash Of Seasoning
Salt isn ’ t technically a food in itself , but it makes so many foods taste so much better that we couldn ’ t leave it off the list . Plus , its history is one of the longest , most interesting food stories out there , dating all the way back to the days when , as TIME put it in 1982 ,  “ animals wore paths to salt licks [ and ] men followed .  ” Salt was , eventually , one of the pillars of civilization : 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Salt

Advertisement
Barbecue
The American Barbecue In Rowley
Though the word “ barbecue ” is misapplied to all manner of grilled meats , it actually refers to a specific process ( indirect heat , slow cooking ) and comes from a specific tradition : 

Eventually , barbecue separated into several regional styles with their own preferences for meats and flavors . 

Read the full story here : A Brief History of Barbecue

Advertisement
Leftovers
LEFTOVERS FREEZER
So , you run out and make or buy all these foods , now that they ’ re on your mind , but there ’ s no way you can eat them all right away . Which brings us to leftovers . It ’ s not as if someone had to “ invent ” the idea of saving what remains at the end of a meal—after all , in the pre-modern feast-and-famine cycle , saving the fruit of the harvest was a matter of life and death . 