Top 10 Traditional Ancient Chinese Foods
Last updated : June 4 , 2019 by Saugat Adhikari
The history of Chinese food dates back to about 5000 BC . Over this vast period of time , Chinese people have developed their own unique way of preparing food . Their ways of identifying ingredients to make perfect combinations , their multi-phased cooking techniques , and their administering of multi-phased flavoring have all been developed gradually . The ancient Chinese had a very healthy diet , and from historical evidence , we can see that farming in China seems to have started approximately 5 , 000 years ago . 

Chinese cuisine is marked by both variety and change . Since ancient times , food has been at the center of social interaction , and many present-day dishes with their varieties of aroma and taste can be traced back to ancient Chinese food traditions . The Chinese have always considered food an art , placing the emphasis on the preparation of food as well as how it is served . 
This article has put together 10 of the most popular traditional foods of ancient China . Let ’ s explore these foods one by one : 

Contents show 
10 . Vegetables ( Soybeans and Cucumber ) 
Vegetables in ancient China

There were not many varieties of vegetables in ancient China , but nonetheless , vegetables were an essential part of people ’ s diets . When they could afford it , they ate vegetables with their food staple , rice . 

The major vegetables during that period were soybeans and cucumbers , and the consumption of soybeans can be traced back to 1000 BC when the soybean became the staple grain in ancient China . The character shu , meaning soybean , started appearing on bronze vessels from the early Zhou period . Soybeans were also mentioned in the fifth century BC in the Analects of Confucius or the Lunyu . 



9 . Wine ( Rice and Millet ) 
Pictorial brick depicting winemaking in ancient China

China is regarded as one of the first countries in the world to have made wine . Since its introduction , wine was not just a drink but was also endowed with a spiritual and cultural significance , reflecting social and political life and aesthetic ideas , and cropping up in contemporary literature as well . During the Shang dynasty ( 16th to 11th century BC )  , people began to drink wine and used it to worship the gods ; yellow rice wine is considered the first of this kind . All other varieties of wine are supposed to have been developed after the Han ( 206 BC–220 BC ) and Tang ( 618 BC –907 BC ) dynasties . Years later , millet wine was introduced and it was a big hit , even more popular than tea . 

8 . Sorghum
Sorghum ( also known as milo ) is known as “ the camel of crops ” because it doesn ’ t need much water and grows in soil where other grains won ’ t . The seed and fertilizer costs for sorghum are also lower than for other grains . The use of sorghum dates back to the Neolithic period . A large amount of carbonized sorghum was discovered from the Warring State Period ( 475 BC–221 BC ) in Shijiazhuang . According to the Genetic Resources Center ,  “ China is the oldest and the largest center for the origin of sorghum .  ” 



7 . Meat ( Pork , Beef , and Chicken ) 
Meat in ancient China

Pork is the most commonly consumed meat in China , among other kinds such as beef , mutton , chicken , duck , pigeon , etc . The Chinese people were eating pork , which was native to China , from 4000 or 3000 BC , but sheep and cattle were not native and reached China from West Asia soon after . As meat was so expensive and because Buddhists don ’ t eat meat , many people used tofu , or bean curd , in their diet as a source of protein instead . 

6 . Tea
Tea cultivation in ancient China

The history of Chinese tea can be traced back over 4 , 000 years . The Chinese consider the drinking of tea as an exquisite artform with many customs and rituals attached to it . Tea is the national drink of China at the present time and one of the three most popular soft drinks in the world along with coffee and cocoa . China proudly regards itself as the birthplace of tea as China was the first country to introduce its planting techniques , processing , and drinking methods to the rest of the world . 

See also : 
Top 18 Ancient Chinese Inventions and Discoveries

5 . Tofu
Tofu , ancient China



Tofu , or bean curd , is also of Chinese origin and is made from soya milk , water , and a curdling agent . Being rich in nutrients , low in fat , and high in protein , calcium , and iron , it has been a staple food in Chinese and Asian cuisine since ancient times . 

Chinese doctors discovered that meat was an essential food because it was a rich source of protein , but only the wealthy could afford to eat it . To fix this , a law was made that every week , every person living in China would get a free cup of tofu , which was a mixture of soybean and other things like rice to give them the same amount of nutritions as meat would . In China at that time it was difficult to cook on a large scale , so people would break their food into small pieces to cook it . Tofu has also become a popular ingredient in Western vegetarian dishes as well . 

4 . Noodles
Noodle shop in ancient China

Noodles are also an ancient Chinese food . The history of noodles goes back to as early as the Eastern Han Dynasty ( 206 BC–220 BC )  , when noodles became an essential staple ingredient in Chinese cuisine . In ancient times , noodles were made from wheat dough . During the Song dynasty ( 960–1279 AD ) noodles were so popular that noodle shops remained open all night . In the year 2002 , an earthenware bowl containing the world ’ s oldest noodles was found at the Lajia archaeological site in China . 



3 . Wheat
Wheat farmer in China

By around 2500 BC , people in China started growing and eating wheat , having previously relied on imports from West Asia , and wheat quickly became the main source of carbohydrate . Ancient Chinese people ate porridge but they didn ’ t make wheat into bread . The major reason behind this was that the charcoal they used as fuel was too expensive to bake the bread . 

2 . Millet
Millet , ancient China

Wheat was not native to China and it took longer to become the main source of food , but people have been farming millet in northern China ( where the cold , dry conditions are ideal ) since about 4500 BC . Millet grew wild in China and was used as a major source of food even before it was farmed . During the Han dynasty , millet was also used for making wine and later on , millet porridge became a popular foodstuff in northern China . 

1 . Rice
Like millet , wheat , and other grains , rice is also a rich source of carbohydrate . The history of rice in China dates back to the late Stone Age ( about 3000 BC )  . The farming of rice is considered to have started in Thailand but it was probably Chinese farmers who invented the rice paddy . Rice paddies are the system of growing rice in muddy , artificial ponds . 



Since ancient times , rice has been used as a staple in China , and when you think of Chinese food , most likely the first thing that you think of is rice . Even though rice has been grown in China for a long time , in northern China , it was too cold to farm rice so they farmed millet and sorghum instead . People usually cooked rice by boiling or steaming it to make it soft , and rice was also used for making a type of wine called rice wine , which still is drunk in China today . 

Conclusion
We can see that China has been rich in food culture ever since ancient times . We can also note that there is a diversity between farming and food production in the south of China and the north , which gives rise to the regional differences in cuisines . Agriculture seems to have played an important role in China ’ s history , and the agricultural practices of the ancient times played a central role in the political , economic , social and ideological advances of China . 

Related posts : 

Top 18 Ancient Chinese Inventions and Discoveries
Top 10 Ancient Roman Foods and Drinks
Top 10 Most Popular Ancient Egyptian Foods
Top 10 Marvelous Types of Ancient Chinese Art
2 thoughts on “ Top 10 Traditional Ancient Chinese Foods ” 
History
June 3 , 2019 at 9 : 21 am
This isn ’ t accurate . The most important grains in ancient China were millet , barley , and wheat . Rice didn ’ t become a top grain until the middle ages . 

Reply
Lily
August 22 , 2021 at 9 : 27 am
This IS accurate . Even the official China . org sites list it as being a staple of ancient china for over 4 , 000 years , having been planted for other means at least 9 , 000 years ago . This data comes directly from archaeological research obtained through multi-national investigation . Please , don ’ t spam educational resources with false information . 

Reply