How to watch Biden ' s State of the Union address
Kate Sullivan byline
By Kate Sullivan , CNN

Updated 1005 GMT ( 1805 HKT ) March 1 , 2022
President Joe Biden speaks in the South Court Auditorium in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building on the White House complex on Tuesday , February 22 , 2022 , in Washington . 
President Joe Biden speaks in the South Court Auditorium in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building on the White House complex on Tuesday , February 22 , 2022 , in Washington .  
( CNN ) President Joe Biden is scheduled to deliver his first State of the Union address Tuesday night at the US Capitol . 

The speech comes amid the biggest military crisis in Europe since the Cold War as Russia continues its assault on Ukraine after launching an unprovoked attack on the nation . It also comes amid record inflation and spiking consumer prices , and as many Americans feel fatigued during a pandemic that has stretched into its third year . 
Biden ' s remarks will provide an opportunity to tout his achievements from the first year of his administration -- including the national vaccination program , the Covid-19 relief law and the bipartisan infrastructure law -- while also addressing the challenges the nation is facing and lay out what comes next . The President is facing some of the lowest approval ratings of his presidency just months before midterm elections that will decide which party controls Congress . The speech could help give the President and Democrats a boost and provide some momentum heading into campaign season . 
The address to Congress comes days after the President put forward his first Supreme Court nominee . If confirmed by the Senate , Ketanji Brown Jackson would make history as the first Black woman to sit on the nation ' s highest court . 
This will be Biden ' s first State of the Union address -- last year he delivered his first joint address to Congress a few months after being sworn in as president , but it wasn ' t considered a State of the Union address . 
Here ' s what you need to know about how to watch the President ' s speech . 
What time is the President ' s speech ? 
Biden will deliver his remarks at 9 p . m . ET . 
Where can I watch it ? 
CNN ' s coverage of the State of the Union Address and Republican Response will stream live , without requiring a cable log-in , on CNN . com ' s homepage and across mobile devices via CNN ' s apps for iOS and Android on Tuesday , 8 p . m . -12 a . m . ET . It can also be viewed on CNNgo ( at CNN . com / go on your desktop , smartphone , and iPad , and via CNNgo apps for Apple TV , Amazon Fire , Android TV , Chromecast and Roku )  . 
Who is delivering the Republican response ? 
Iowa Gov . Kim Reynolds will deliver the Republicans ' response to Biden ' s speech . Reynolds will deliver her address to the nation from Des Moines , Iowa , after the conclusion of Biden ' s speech . 
Reynolds has drawn national attention and sparked controversy for her handling of the Covid-19 pandemic . Some of those moves include signing legislation into law that blocks mask mandates from being implemented in K-12 schools and prohibits cities and counties from requiring facial coverings in businesses . The governor also signed a bill into law last year that grants unemployment benefits to those who lose their jobs because they refuse to get vaccinated against Covid-19 . 
Will members of Congress be able to attend the speech ? 
Yes . All members of Congress have been invited to attend the State of the Union , which is a change from last year when only a limited number of lawmakers were allowed in the House chamber because of the pandemic . 
Masks will also be optional for lawmakers . The US Capitol ' s attending physician said Sunday that masks would be optional on Capitol Hill starting Monday . 