Texas begins 2022 US election season with congressional primaries
Primary contests in Republican-dominated Texas may test whether winning depends on support from former President Donald Trump . 

A former Navy SEAL , Representative Dan Crenshaw wears a black eye patch after losing an eye to an IED in Afghanistan . 
A former United States Navy SEAL , Representative Dan Crenshaw is being challenged for re-election in a redrawn Texas district with more conservative and more pro-Trump voters than before [ File : Chip Somodevilla / Pool via Reuters ] 
By William Roberts
Published On 1 Mar 2022
1 Mar 2022
The battle between Republicans and Democrats in the United States for control of Congress officially begins March 1 , as Texas holds the first primary elections of the year to determine candidates for Congress in November . 

Most of the real political competition in Republican-dominated Texas this year will be contests among members of the same party decided by primary voters in March or in runoffs in May , not the general electorate in November . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Biden will struggle to steer US agenda in 2022 : Analysts
list 2 of 4
A European take on US politics
list 3 of 4
Biden , who called for unity , still faces divisions in US politics
list 4 of 4
Is US politics more toxic today than it was 50 years ago ? 
end of list 
 “ The Republicans ’ job now is not to beat the Democrats . Their job is to find the nuances in their brand of Republicanism that are going to be able to appeal to voters ,  ” said Zoe Nemerever , an assistant professor of politics at Texas Tech University . 

Texas , the second-largest US state , gained two new seats in the US House of Representatives after the 2020 census recorded population growth . Republicans , who control the state legislature , drew new congressional voting maps , adding one new Republican district and one new Democratic district while reducing competitive districts elsewhere . 
 
 
 “ A lot of this will come down to Trump Republicans versus non-Trump Republicans . That is the major fissure in the party ,  ” Nemerever said , referencing former President Donald Trump ’ s continuing hold over Republicans at the grassroots level . 

Democrats in Texas are likewise battling along ideological lines between moderates and progressives within their own party , said Brandon Rottinghaus , a professor of politics at the University of Houston .  
 
 “ The ways that the parties have developed and the ways that the candidates are now attracting the more polarised voters , is to push themselves to the ideological extremes ,  ” Rottinghaus told Al Jazeera . 

Here are five Texas primary contests to watch : 
Democrat challenged by AOC-backed progressive
In the 28th Texas Congressional District in Laredo and San Antonio , US Representative Henry Cuellar faces a challenge from Jessica Cisneros , a Latina immigration lawyer who has been endorsed by New York progressive Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and the group Justice Democrats .  
 
 “ Henry Cuellar is one of the few remaining moderate Democrats in the national party . She is really going after him , saying that he needs to be more liberal , move his policy positions to the left ,  ” Nemerever said . 

Representative Henry Cuellar , D-Texas , with Sen . Lindsey Graham , R-S . C .  , speaks about the United States-Mexico border during a news conference . Representative Henry Cuellar , a Democrat , is facing a challenge from the progressive left in Texas ’ s March 1 primary election [ Manuel Balce Ceneta / AP Photo ] 
Cuellar , 66 , is a target for liberals because he is anti-abortion rights , siding with Republicans over his own party on the abortion issue . 

The FBI raided Cuellar ’ s home in January , reportedly in connection with a US investigation involving Azerbaijan . Cisneros has been using that to advertise herself on television as a better choice for South Texas . 

But with the Rio Grande Valley trending more Republican , the district could be competitive for Republicans in the general election if the left-leaning Cisneros wins the primary . A career politician who has served in the US House since 2005 , Cuellar appears to have the upper hand . He beat back a challenge from Cisneros two years ago . 

Cisneros , 28 , has been mobilising new voters and could pull off a surprise upset .  
 
 “ She ’ s young . Even if she doesn ’ t win this time , I bet she makes it to Congress in the next decade ,  ” Nemerever said . 

Republican challenged from the right
In the newly redrawn 2nd Texas Congressional District , incumbent Republican Dan Crenshaw may be in trouble . His district contains more pro-Trump voters than before the redrawing . 

The former Navy SEAL , who lost an eye in Afghanistan , has taken a middle line among Republicans in Washington , calling House Republican firebrand Marjorie Taylor Greene an “ idiot ” who is “ running a scam ”  , and calling Freedom Caucus members “ grifters ”  .  
 
 “ Nobody would confuse Dan Crenshaw with a moderate ,  ” said James Henson , a professor of politics at the University of Texas .  “ He started out with a brand that was conservative , but independent-minded . That strategy has been more difficult to maintain in a Republican Party where there ’ s a very high purity threshold .  ” 

Rep . Mario Diaz-Balart , R-Fla .  , left , points to the crowd as Rep . Dan Crenshaw , R-Texas , speaks during a protest of the Cuban government , Monday , July 26 , 2021 , at Lafayette Park near the White House . Republican Representative Dan Crenshaw , who has been dismissive of former President Donald Trump ’ s claims about the 2020 election , faces a primary challenge from Republicans claiming to be closer to Trump [ Jacquelyn Martin / AP Photo ] 
Crenshaw faces three Republican challengers who all claim to be more conservative and closer to Trump than Crenshaw , who needs 50 percent of the primary vote to avoid a runoff . In August , Crenshaw got heckled by a pro-Trump crowd at a town hall meeting after he said the 2020 election was not stolen . 

Crenshaw has a considerable financial advantage , with more than $3m cash on hand , 100 times more than his closest competitor . 

Democratic retirement opens door
In the 30th Texas Congressional District in Dallas , Representative Eddie Bernice Johnson ’ s retirement announcement after she served nearly three decades in Congress was a political earthquake . Johnson , 85 , is the longest-serving member from Texas and one of the most senior members of Congress . She has recruited Jasmine Crockett , a young , dynamic Black woman who is a member of the Texas State Legislature , to run in her stead . 

Texas House Representative Jasmine Crockett holds her purse during a news conference with Texas Democratic state lawmakers to discuss voting rights , on Capitol Hill . Texas House Representative Jasmine Crockett holds her purse during a news conference with fellow Texas Democratic state legislators standing in opposition to a Republican plan to limit voting rights in Texas [ Gabrielle / Reuters ] 
Crockett , who is more liberal than the outgoing Johnson , faces competition for the nomination from a new generation of young , progressive Democrats .  
 
 “ Crockett has raised a lot of money on her own , but she ’ s getting a lot of help from outside groups , partly because she ’ s the chosen candidate from Johnson who ’ s definitely the queenmaker there ,  ” said Rottinghaus .  
 
 “ I ’ d say Crockett wins without a runoff , or is very close to winning outright .  ” 

Black Republican has Ted Cruz ’ s backing
In newly created 38th Texas Congressional District , Republican Wesley Hunt , an African American former Army combat veteran , is leading a pack of Republican contenders .  
 
 “ He ’ s the kind of Republican , frankly , that the Republican Party wants front and centre ; Somebody who ’ s smart , dedicated , he ’ s Black and he ’ s got a military background . It is the kind of diversity the party wants to display ,  ” Rottinghaus said .  



Texas Senator Ted Cruz and other members of a Republican delegation attend a press conference after a tour around a section of the U . S . -Mexico border on a Texas Highway Patrol vessel in Mission , Texas . US Senator Ted Cruz has emerged as a political kingmaker in the 2022 Texas primary elections as Republicans take a tougher stance on immigration , crime , and voting restrictions [ File : Go Nakamura / Reuters ] 
Hunt got a boost from Senator Ted Cruz , who endorsed him early in the campaign . Hunt received Trump ’ s backing too . If Hunt wins the primary contest on March 1 , he will likely win the general election in November . Trump won in this area – including parts of Houston and its suburbs – by 18 percentage points over Democrat Joe Biden in 2020 . 

Right and left in the Latino vote
The 35th Texas Congressional District in state capital Austin was redesigned by Republicans to pit the incumbent Democrat Lloyd Doggett , a white male , against Latinos , according to Henson . 

Doggett switched to the newly created 37th Democratic district in Austin , clearing the way for two Latino Democrats , Eddie Rodriguez and Greg Casar , to battle for the 35th . Rodriguez is a state legislator and established Democratic party official . The up-and-coming Casar is an Austin City Council member , a pro-labour progressive and a self-described socialist .  
 
 “ Rodriguez is much more of an institutional player . Casar is seen as a progressive , maverick-style troublemaker ,  ” Henson said . 