5 things to watch in the Texas primary election
Eric BradnerGreg Krieg
By Eric Bradner and Gregory Krieg , CNN

Updated 1239 GMT ( 2039 HKT ) March 1 , 2022
﻿Latinas are pushing for a Republican revolution in South Texas


﻿Latinas are pushing for a Republican revolution in South Texas 04 : 17
Houston ( CNN ) Texas kicks off the 2022 midterm elections Tuesday with the nation ' s first primaries . 

Two big-name Republicans , Gov . Greg Abbott and Attorney General Ken Paxton , will seek to beat back challenges from the right . In South Texas , the most conservative Democrat in the US House , Rep . Henry Cuellar , is attempting to survive a rematch against Jessica Cisneros , the progressive who nearly ousted him in the primary two years ago . 
The contests will be the first test of how the restrictive new voting law enacted by Texas Republicans last year will reshape the electorate . 
One important wrinkle in Texas : To win the primary , candidates don ' t just have to beat their rivals but must win more than 50% of the vote . Otherwise , the top two finishers advance to a head-to-head runoff election on May 24 . That threshold could play an important role in several House primaries . 
Here are five things to watch in Tuesday ' s primaries in Texas : 
First test of restrictive voting law
Texas is among the slew of Republican-dominated states that , amid former President Donald Trump ' s lies about widespread voter fraud , enacted a new law that makes voting by mail more difficult and outlaws some options -- such as drive-through and 24-hour early voting -- that large Texas counties had used in 2020 . 
Tuesday ' s primary will be the first election to take place under the restrictive new law . And operatives and activists across the nation will be watching closely to see how the law affects primary turnout . 
Already , there are signs that many more votes than usual will be turned away . Large Texas counties reported unusually large numbers of rejected mail-in ballots due to confusion over the state ' s new identification requirements for those ballots . 
Though other states with new voting laws , including Arizona , Florida and Georgia , have implemented different restrictions , many are similar to what Texas enacted , turning Tuesday into a first run that could offer a preview of what ' s to come in those states ' primaries , as well . 
Can progressives change the narrative in South Texas ? 
Jessica Cisneros , a 28-year-old immigration attorney , came within a few points of ousting Democratic Rep . Henry Cuellar in their 2020 primary . 
Now , with Cuellar under investigation by the FBI , progressive groups like Justice Democrats , which recruited Cisneros to run , are increasingly optimistic about their chances to defeat the long-time incumbent and lone remaining House Democrat to consistently vote against abortion rights bills . 
Progressive heavyweights Sen . Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Rep . Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York have both endorsed Cisneros , but recent ads from her campaign and its allies have focused on Cuellar ' s potential legal issues . One TV spot from Cisneros splices together news reports about the FBI probe . Cuellar , meanwhile , ran an ad titled ,  " Don ' t believe her lies ,  " which attacked Cisneros as insufficiently supportive of border security . 
Victory for Cisneros , in a district that covers a long stretch of the southern border but also extends as far north as San Antonio , would be a massive one for progressives , who were put on the back foot when Republicans , including Trump , outperformed expectations in South Texas in 2020 . 
Big GOP race might not be settled on Tuesday
Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton , a two-term incumbent , could be forced into a GOP primary runoff If he doesn ' t win a clear majority on Tuesday night . 
And with recent polling showing him falling short of that threshold , the big question in this very expensive race is which of the three challengers is most likely to advance to a potential one-on-one contest . 
Paxton , Trump ' s endorsed candidate , is running under a cloud of ethics concerns , including an unresolved 2015 indictment for securities fraud and more recent allegations , lodged by a group of his own ( now former ) top aides , that he abused his office . Paxton has denied any wrongdoing , but his primary opponents have sought to use his existing legal troubles -- and the possibility of more to come -- to undermine his bid for a third term . 
If he doesn ' t win the nomination outright , Paxton will face either Land Commissioner George P . Bush , former state Supreme Court Justice Eva Guzman or US Rep . Louie Gohmert -- all three of whom are well-funded with strong political brands across the state
Heavyweight governor ' s race to be teed up
Republican Gov . Greg Abbott is seeking a third term . And though he faces primary challengers -- including Don Huffines , a former state senator , and Allen West , a former Florida congressman and former chairman of the Texas Republican Party -- he is the heavy favorite to secure the GOP nomination . 
Abbott is on a collision course with Beto O ' Rourke , the former Texas congressman whose near-miss in the 2018 Senate race rocketed him to Democratic stardom , but who fell back to earth after a failed 2020 presidential primary run . 
Texas is a Republican-leaning state and economic and historical factors suggest 2022 will be a favorable year for the GOP . O ' Rourke , though , argues that Abbott ' s management is to blame for the widespread power outages during the 2021 winter storm in Texas and for the GOP ' s focus in the state on cultural issues -- including passing a law that effectively outlaws abortions after about six weeks of pregnancy
House races to watch
When Texas lawmakers redrew the state ' s congressional districts last year , they effectively turned swing districts into a thing of the past . Battlegrounds were turned into safe seats , some for Republicans and some for Democrats . 
Critics say this tactic could weaken your vote in 2022

Critics say this tactic could weaken your vote in 2022 02 : 16
That ' s made the primaries the most intense competition for seats in the US House . 
Republicans Reps . Dan Crenshaw , of Texas ' 2nd District , and Van Taylor , of the 3rd District , face challengers who argue they are insufficiently conservative and haven ' t been supportive enough of Trump . 
In the 8th District , where GOP Rep . Kevin Brady is retiring , establishment favorite Morgan Luttrell , a former Navy SEAL backed by House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy and the Congressional Leadership Fund super PAC , faces far-right opponent Christian Collins , who ' s been supported by Georgia Rep . Marjorie Taylor Greene and North Carolina Rep . Madison Cawthorn . 
In two open-seat races that favor Democrats , two leading contenders -- former Austin City Councilman Greg Casar in the 35th District , who , like Cisneros , has been endorsed by Ocasio-Cortez and Sanders , and state Rep . Jasmine Crockett in the 30th District -- are all but certain to lead the pack , but the key question is whether they will cross the 50% threshold to avoid a runoff . 