Mr . Earnest : Good afternoon , everybody . 
Happy New Year . 
Hope you all got some quality time with your
families over the last couple of weeks . 
I know the President did while he was in Hawaii , 
and I hope you were able to do the same thing . 
Before we get started , I actually wanted to mark a
little -- a memory with all of you . 
Today actually reflects the 9th anniversary of the
President ' s victory in the Iowa caucuses . 
And I was fortunate enough to have worked on his Iowa
caucus campaign , and so this is a day that I know
that many of my colleagues at the time will mark
in their own way . 
I thought I would actually do it by reading just a
couple of short excerpts from the speech that he
delivered that night . 
This was the President speaking to a group of
very excited supporters . 
There are some famous lines in this speech , but
my attention , as I was reading this last night
actually was attracted to a couple of different
paragraphs -- and let me read them to you now .  
 " Years from now , you ' ll look back and you ' ll say
that this was the moment , this was the place where
America remembered what it means to hope . 
For months , we ' ve been teased , even derided for
talking about hope . 
We always knew that hope is not blind optimism . 
It ' s not ignoring the enormity of the tasks
ahead or the roadblocks that stand in our path . 
It ' s not sitting on the
sidelines , or shrinking from a fight . 
Hope is that thing inside us that insists , despite
all the evidence to the contrary , that something
better awaits us if we have the courage to reach
for it and to work for it and to fight for it .  " 
He went on to say that " Hope is the bedrock of
this nation ; the belief that our destiny will not
be written for us but by us , by all those men and
women who are not content to settle for the world as
it is , but who have the courage to remake the
world as it should be .  " 
I didn ' t deliver that speech nearly as well
as he did that night . 
And I certainly --
The Press : It was a dramatic read . 
Mr . Earnest : I tried . I tried .  
( Laughter .  ) 
I gave it the old college try . 
And I certainly can ' t take credit for having written
this powerful speech . 
But I think it is an apt illustration of how
remarkably committed President Obama has been
over the course of his presidential career to a
core set of principles that aspire to something
great ; that put their hope in the American people to
build the kind of country that we all believe in , 
where we all have an opportunity to succeed
regardless of what we look
like or where we come from . 
And there ' s a reference in this to " those men and
women who are not content to settle for the world as
it is , but who have the courage to remake the
world as it should be .  " 
The President was talking about all Americans who
are committed to investing in this country . 
But I have very vivid memories of the young men
and women who signed up to work on President Obama ' s
campaign back in 2007 for the 2008 caucuses . 
And I say young men and women because even back at
the time , nine years ago , when I was at the ripe old
age of 32 , I was the old guy , and that our campaign
was populated by young people -- not young people
in their 20s and 30s , but young people in their 20s . 
And I have a vivid memory of one fall afternoon --
it was in the middle of the week . 
The Winneshiek County Democrats in Northeastern
Iowa were hosting their fall dinner , and there
were two Obama campaign organizers who were eager
to have somebody from the campaign come and speak at
the fall gathering for all the Democrats . 
This was a prime opportunity to recruit
supporters and other influential people in the
community , particularly
Democrats , to win over their support . 
And the campaign , unfortunately , was not
able to find anyone for them , so I went up there .  
( Laughter .  ) 
And so I made the more than four-hour
drive from Des Moines , Iowa , to Decorah , Iowa --
Winneshiek County is in the northeastern
part of the state . 
And what I found there were two Obama campaign
organizers , two young people who were utterly
committed to the task . 
It was this young woman from Tennessee and a young
African American man . 
And I point that out because I don ' t think
there are too many other people in Winneshiek
County that either had a southern accent like that
young lady did , or were African American
like that young man . 
But what I found in the few hours that I was in
town with them is they knew everybody . 
When I got there , I pulled into their office and they
said , well , you must be
thirsty after your long drive . 
They said , let ' s go down to the grocery store and
we ' ll get you something to drink . 
And they were walking through the grocery store
aisles greeting people by name , and greeting the
clerk who was checking us out by name . 
And we went to the county dinner , and it was a small
affair at an outdoor shelter at a park in
Winneshiek County , and they were greeting
everybody by name . 
And I remember that night after the dinner I took
them out for a couple of drinks at a local bar , and
they ' re greeting the bartender and other people
at the bar by name . 
It was an indication of how these two people were
so committed to the cause and so passionate that
they mustered the courage to go to some place that
they had never been , to a community where they were
very obviously outsiders , because of the passion
that they felt for President Obama and his
vision for the future of the country . 
So I appreciate you indulging me on the
anniversary of the victory to talk about the warm
memories that I have of this important event , not
just in the history of the people who have supported
President Obama over his career , but in the
history of the country . 
And to all of my colleagues and friends who
worked on that campaign and are marking that day
today , I continue to feel the sense of solidarity
and comradery with them that was so critical to
our victory nine years ago . 
So with that long wind-up , Darlene , welcome back . 
Happy New Year . 
The Press : Same to you . 
Mr . Earnest : And let ' s go to some questions . 
The Press : Great . 
So tomorrow , the President is going to the Capitol to
talk to Democrats there about health care . 
Mr . Earnest : That ' s right . 
The Press : What is the message ? 
What is the goal ? 
What does he hope to accomplish by going up
there and meeting with them ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , this will be an opportunity for
the President to meet with the Democrats in the House
and the Senate for the
incoming United States Congress . 
And they ' ll be there to principally discuss how to
counter the stated Republican objective of
repealing the Affordable Care Act . 
The stakes are high . 
And I know that , particularly at this time , 
when we ' re thinking about -- when there ' s a lot of
discussion about the President ' s legacy , that
some people might think that , well , the President
is very concerned about the political capital that
he ' s invested in this and he doesn ' t want to
see it all go away . 
That ' s certainly true . 
But the President ' s priority and the
President ' s motivation is rooted in looking out for
the interests of the 22 * 30 million Americans
whose health care would be taken away if Republicans
repeal the Affordable Care Act . 
He ' s interested in looking out for the millions of
Americans who get health care through their
employer who have seen that the growth in their
health care costs has been sharply limited -- just
3 . 4 percent in 2016 . 
Overall , the growth in health care costs is the
lowest it ' s been on record . 
And if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act , 
they will reverse that progress . 
Millions of Americans across the country are
protected from being discriminated against
because they have a preexisting condition . 
They ' re allowed to keep their kids on their
insurance plan until their kids turn 26 . 
Women are not allowed to be charged more by their
insurance company just because they ' re women . 
All of that would be undone if Republicans
repeal the Affordable Care Act . 
Obviously , we ' re deeply concerned about the impact
this would have on Medicaid and Medicare . 
The Affordable Care Act extended the lifespan of
the Medicare trust fund by 11 years . 
So if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act , 
they ' ll be hastening the demise of Medicare that
millions of seniors rely upon for their basic
health care needs . 
So the President is deeply concerned about the impact
that this Republican action could have . 
He ' s also concerned about this Republican tactic of
repeal-and-delay that ultimately is nothing more
than just bait-and-switch . 
The prospect of , oh , don ' t worry , the 22 * 20 million
Americans who have health insurance because of the
Affordable Care Act , we ' ll get around to offering up
a replacement at some later date . 
That ' s not a responsible way to govern , and it
certainly is not an indication that you ' re
looking out for working people in this country . 
Democrats are , however , interested in looking out
for working people in this country , no one more so
than the Democratic President of the United
States , Barack Obama . 
So that ' s what they ' ll be there to talk about , and
the President ' s message will be to encourage them
in that fight and to offer his own insight about the
most effective way to engage in that fight . 
The Press : Is he going to be looking in some way to
exploit Republicans appearing to be divided
over what to replace Obamacare with ? 
Is that part of the discussion tomorrow ? 
Sort of take advantage of their inability to
agree on a replacement ? 
Mr . Earnest : There does appear to be some division
in the Republican Party . 
That ' s understandable . 
Many of you have told the stories of people who are
represented in Congress by Republicans , who voted for
those Republicans , who are pleading with those
Republicans not to take away their Obamacare . 
So it ' s not surprising to me that there are some
Republicans who are now a little queasy about the
prospect of -- the impact that repealing Obamacare
would have on their own supporters , on people in
their congressional districts . 
Because we know there are people all across the
country who benefit from this law , who are
protected by this law , whose lives have been
saved by this law . 
And the prospect of taking it away is a question of
life or death for some people . 
And so it ' s not surprising to me that that does leave
some Republicans queasy . 
What the President has long said -- and I ' m sure
that this is true of other Republicans on Capitol
Hill -- I don ' t speak for them -- but the President
has long been open to the idea that if there are
Republicans who are genuinely interested in
reforming the Affordable Care Act in a way that
would strengthen the program the President
would be strongly supportive of that effort . 
And he ' s put forward his own ideas for how we could
do that , but he certainly would be open to ideas
from Republicans to do that . 
But that ' s not what Republicans have offered . 
What they ' ve offered more than 50 times is just a
proposal for tearing the program down in a way that
would leave millions of Americans vulnerable . 
So there is this division in the Republican Party
that does leave them vulnerable because they
haven ' t actually indicated any desire to work with
Democrats to strengthen the program , which means
that there is a premium placed on Republican
unity , and if they ' re not able to preserve that
unity , it will pose a challenge to their efforts
to accomplish this goal . 
But there are a lot of steps to this process that
Republicans have laid out that they ' re prepared to
undertake , and we ' ll see
if they are able to do them . 
The country would be much better served by them
looking to work in a genuinely bipartisan
fashion to strengthen the Affordable Care Act and
not just extend , but actually strengthen the
many protections that benefit millions of
Americans across the country . 
The Press : Last one on this . 
The President has said on a few occasions that his
administration has been good on policy , but where
it had fallen down has been in communicating
policy to the public . 
And I ' m wondering --
Mr . Earnest : I try not to
take that personally when he says that .  
( Laughter .  ) 
The Press : S I ' m wondering if the trip
up to Capitol Hill tomorrow and then this
health care-related interview that he ' s doing
later in the week on Friday -- is this some
sort of attempt to kind of do the sales job on
ACA over or better ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , look , I don ' t think -- I think as
you all have seen in covering the President
over the last eight years , there
aren ' t many do-overs . 
I can ' t think of any . 
So , no , this is not a do-over . 
But I think this is an opportunity for the
President once again to make what he finds to be a
particularly persuasive argument about the
benefits of the proposal . 
And the one thing that we have long said that has
proved to be true is that the more that people
understand what ' s included in the Affordable Care
Act , the more that people see firsthand how they
benefit from the Affordable Care Act , the
more popular it ' s likely to be . 
And there ' s no denying that Obamacare has been
subjected to hundreds of millions of dollars of
political attacks -- many of them , if not most of
them , false -- about the impact of the law . 
So there is stiff headwinds that we have
encountered in trying to make the argument in favor
of the Affordable Care Act . 
But the one thing that has proved to be true is that
the more that people understand what ' s included
in the Affordable Care Act and how they benefit from
it , the more popular the program is and the harder
it is for Republicans to build political support
for tearing it down . Jeff . 
The Press : Josh , North Korea has said it is close
to testing an intercontinental ballistic missile . 
As the Obama administration comes close
to its end , what more can you do on North Korea in
the remaining three weeks of the President ' s term , 
and what kind of advice do you have for the incoming
administration ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , Jeff , the most important thing
that any Commander-in-Chief has to
do is protect the American people . 
And for years , the United States has -- at the
direction of the Commander-in-Chief , 
President Obama -- has increased the defenses
that are deployed in the Pacific region to protect
the American people from this threat . 
So there are radar facilities and
antiballistic missile facilities that have been
installed in places like
Japan and Guam and in Alaska . 
There are naval vessels , ballistic missile defense
ships that are patrolling the Pacific Ocean . 
The number of them has been
increased as a result of a decision made early on by the
Commander-in-Chief to make sure that we could protect
the American people from this threat . 
And I can confirm once again that the United
States military does believe it has the
capacity to protect the American people from the
threat that ' s emanating from North Korea . 
But these defenses are not the only steps that the
Commander-in-Chief has ordered . 
The United States is also engaged in a rigorous , 
intensive diplomatic effort to build
international support for tough sanctions against
the North Korean regime . 
And the United Nations Security Council last fall
passed the toughest resolution yet , imposing
the toughest sanctions yet against the North Korean
regime , putting a hard cap on the amount of coal that
can be exported -- because we know that they use the
revenue from those coal exports to try to fund
some of these programs , so putting that hard cap in
place is going to have an impact on their ability to
continue to develop their programs . 
And we ' re only able to succeed in implementing
those measures with the cooperation of China . 
And given the differences that we have with China on
a number of other issues , it ' s no small diplomatic
undertaking to get them to work effectively with us
-- which they have , to their credit -- to impose
some of these measures and to increase pressure on
the North Korean regime . 
The problem has not been solved , but we certainly
have defenses in place to protect against the threat
that emanates from there . 
And we certainly have made progress in building
important diplomatic support to apply pressure
to the North Korean regime to limit their ability to
continue to develop this program , but also to give
them an incentive to change their strategy . 
They haven ' t yet , but we ' re going to continue to
apply that pressure . 
Our advice to the next administration I think
will largely be to listen to the advice of our
military commanders about what ' s necessary to
protect the American people with regard to our
deployments in the Pacific , and to look for
opportunities to work effectively with countries
like China and Russia and our allies -- South Korea
and Japan -- to apply pressure to North Korea to
make clear that they should renounce their
nuclear ambitions and put an end to the kind of
destabilizing rhetoric that we ' ve seen all too
often emanate from the North Korean capital . 
The Press : Thank you . 
And on a separate issue . 
The White House ' s reaction to the congressional
Republicans ' decision to curtail and then not
curtail the Office of Congressional Ethics today
-- is this one of those perhaps rare instances
where you agree with President-elect Trump ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , first of all , I think that it is
rather revealing that the first step taken by
congressional Republicans in the new Congress was to
vote in secret to gut ethics regulations . 
These are ethics regulations , by the way , 
put in place by Democrats in response to ethical
scandals plaguing congressional Republicans . 
So I note that there ' s a lot of talk about ethics
and revolving doors , but the revolving door that we
see right now is the continual challenge on the
part of congressional Republicans to skirt
responsibility for their ethical violations . 
With regard to the -- well , let me also say , I
suspect this is not going to be the first time that
we see congressional Republicans in this
Congress seeking to help people in positions of
power and influence escape accountability when it
comes to the interests of the American people . 
I ' m confident we ' re going to see congressional
Republicans do the work of their donors on Wall
Street to try to gut Wall Street reform that would
allow them to escape accountability for a bunch
of financial transactions that we know are not in
the public interest and actually do put taxpayers
at risk and potentially put taxpayers on the hook
for bailing out those big banks if those
risky bets go bad . 
One other thing we know congressional Republicans
are likely to do is to go to their donors in the oil
industry and say , hey , we can help you escape
accountability for polluting the air and
water and land that the American people treasure
and in some cases depend on for our sustenance . 
I think the real question for the President-elect is
will he stand up to them then . 
The Press : Would you agree then with my , I guess , 
question that this is a rare instance where you
agree with the President-elect ' s criticism ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , first of all , I ' ll let the
President-elect ' s team explain exactly what he
was intending to communicate in this tweet . 
It was not immediately obvious to me that he was
indicating opposition to the gutting of
ethical requirements . 
Some people at least interpreted his tweet as
indicating that the optics
of doing it first were bad . 
But again , I ' ll leave it to the incoming
team to explain it . 
Because the position of this administration is
that people who are entrusted with positions
of authority in the United States government do have
certain ethical obligations and they
should be held independently accountable
for adhering to those ethical requirements . 
Certainly the executive branch does in
a variety of ways . 
And I do recall that when President Obama served in
the United States Senate , he was one of a small
number of members of the United States Senate who
championed legislation to create and independent
ethical oversight structure on the
Senate side , too . 
Unfortunately , that effort did not succeed . 
But the President ' s views on the importance of these
kinds of ethical oversight structures are well known . 
And the President has long placed a priority on
ensuring that they are strong . Michelle . 
The Press : You didn ' t paint a very hopeful
picture at one point there . 
But the fact that this did die , that leadership took
it out , do you see that as promising at all ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , I started out reading a
speech about hope , so I
try to be an optimistic guy . 
But what I also -- just to go back to that speech -- 
 " We know that hope is not blind optimism . 
It ' s not ignoring the enormity of the tasks
ahead or the roadblocks that stand in our path .  " 
So when you have a bunch of Republicans who
campaigned for their office saying that they
want to gut regulations that prevent Wall Street
bankers from taking advantage of middle-class
families , when you have a bunch of Republicans who
run for Congress saying that they ' re going to make
it easier for their largest contributors in
the oil industry to pollute our water and our
air , it ' s hard to feel particularly optimistic
about their willingness to
look out for the American people . 
But like I said , if the President-elect is willing
to stand up to them in those instances that
would be welcome news . 
So we ' ll just have to see
exactly how that plays out . 
I will say that it is -- even in the face of all
that optimism , it is disheartening that the
very first thing that Republicans in Congress
chose to do was to vote in secret to gut
ethical accountability . 
That ' s not draining the swamp . 
But that ' s day one . 
We ' ll see what the days in the future lead to . 
The Press : Okay . 
So you talked about the President on the Hill
tomorrow talking to Democrats to encourage
them and how best to counter gutting Obamacare . 
So what specifically does he want them to do ? 
I ' m confused on what there is that can be done . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , you ' ll have an opportunity , as
Darlene referenced , to hear from the President at
greater length about this later this week . 
But I think you can certainly anticipate that
the President will encourage Democrats to
focus on those aspects of the Affordable Care Act
that are strongly supported in bipartisan
fashion all across the country . 
The best example for this is the consumer protection
that prevents insurance companies from
discriminating against people that have
preexisting conditions . 
There ' s nothing ideological or partisan
about that notion . 
It ' s actually just a matter of basic fairness . 
And what we have found is now that that law -- or
that rule has been in effect for the last few
years , we ' ve actually seen Democrats and Republicans
both come together and acknowledge that that ' s a
good idea , that actually is fair . 
And so the question , really , for Republicans is
how do you construct a policy that
protects that fairness ? 
Right now what Republicans are suggesting is that
they would basically take away the requirement that
everybody has health insurance , and that
ultimately is going to interfere with the ability
to ensure that insurance
companies sign everybody up . 
So that ' s ultimately something that Republicans
are going to have to reconcile . 
And I think this is something the President
has talked about at some length , which is that
there is a difference between campaigning
and governing . 
There ' s a difference between going out there on
a campaign trail and using all kinds of rhetoric
saying you ' re going to repeal the Affordable Care
Act because of the impact
it ' s having on our economy . 
So you have to ignore a lot of facts in order to
make that kind of rhetorical statement . 
But once you are faced with actually implementing
it , the questions get a lot harder . 
And your ability to follow through on that promise
that sounded really good on the campaign trail is
called into question . 
The Press : So he wants Democrats to pressure
their Republican colleagues ? 
When you say , focus on that , what does he expect
them to be doing right now ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think the President ' s message to
them is that they should be out there telling the
stories of their constituents who are
benefitting from this law . 
I think that ' s certainly the most important
thing they can do . 
There are a number of Democrats on Capitol Hill
who do have ideas of things that could be done
that would strengthen the Affordable Care Act . 
So some of them may choose to use this as an
opportunity to offer up some additional
suggestions and try to seek to Republican
cooperation to strengthen the law . 
The President certainly would encourage them to do that . 
I think you can also expect to hear the
President make the case that it ' s not just about
protecting the Affordable Care Act , it ' s also about
making sure that we ' re
protecting Medicaid and Medicare . 
And if we tear down the Affordable Care Act , we ' re
having a terribly negative impact on Medicare and
Medicaid , as well . 
So I think there are a lot of strong , persuasive
arguments to be made that would I think persuade
many Americans that the idea of tearing down the
Affordable Care Act is a bad idea . 
The Press : Okay . 
And just quickly , does the administration believe
that North Korea is that close to that
ICBM capability ? 
And what does the President think of Donald
Trump ' s response to North Korea via his tweets ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , what I can -- the intelligence
community has previously said that the United
States has not seen North Korea test or demonstrate
the ability to miniaturize a nuclear weapon and
put it on an ICBM . 
I ' m not aware that that assessment has changed . 
And some of the administration -- the
intelligence community officials that I have
spoken to today were not aware that that
assessment has changed . 
If it has changed , it ' s something that will come
from the intelligence community . 
With regard to the President-elect ' s tweets , 
I ' ll let his team explain exactly what he means . 
Thanks , Josh . 
Mr . Earnest : Margaret . 
The Press : Thank you , Josh . 
I appreciate it . 
Happy New Year . 
Mr . Earnest : Happy New Year to you . 
The Press : Thanks . 
So I ' m just wondering whether you ' ve spoken with
President Obama about the possibility of slapping a
tariff on cars made in
Mexico and imported into the U . S . 
and what you think the impact of that would be on
foreign policy or the economy . 
Mr . Earnest : I have not
spoken to President Obama about that . 
I know that that is contrary to the approach
that President Obama has taken when it comes to
trying to manage our
trade relationships around the world . 
In fact , the President was strongly supportive of a
Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that his
administration negotiated that included Mexico that
would have raised labor standards , raised
environmental standards , would have protected
intellectual property , and would have made it easier
and fairer for U . S . 
businesses that are competing against
Mexican businesses . 
That would have been
good for the U . S . economy . 
That would have been good for U . S . workers . 
It would have been good for U . S . businesses . 
The incoming President does not seem to share
that view and he believes in a different approach . 
And many economists have expressed concerns about
how the imposition of tariffs like some have
suggested would actually have a starkly negative
impact on the economy because it would not just
result in higher prices being paid by American
customers , it means that American goods that are
shipped overseas face
a similar retaliatory tariff . 
And since we ' re not starting out on a level
playing field , even if the tariff is equal in stature
to the tariff that ' s imposed by the United
States , it will have a disproportionate , negative
impact on those American products . 
And many economists have made the argument that
imposing a tariff like that is actually the worst
of both worlds when it comes to the interests of
the United States , our consumers , our workers , 
and our economy . 
So that ' s why the President has tried a much
different approach . 
But ultimately , the next administration will have
to pursue the strategy that they believe is the
best , and we ' ll have an opportunity to
evaluate what works best . 
The President has a very strong track record when
you consider the performance of the U . S . 
economy under his leadership , under the
economic strategy that he has put together . 
But the incoming President was elected on a promise
to try things different -- to try different things , 
and to do things differently . 
And we ' ll have an opportunity to evaluate
how well it works . 
The Press : I just wanted to go quickly -- do you
know whether President Obama has spoken with the
President of Mexico ? 
Today , perhaps ? 
Mr . Earnest : No , I ' m not
aware that they ' ve spoken today . 
The Press : And the kind of flipside to the
President-elect ' s Twitter-related actions on
car policy , the Ford Motor Company has announced that
they ' ve canceled this major expansion into
Mexico and are going to
preserve some jobs in the U . S . 
Would you say that that ' s good news ? 
And would you applaud President-elect Trump for
his actions on that ? 
Or do you know enough about it to comment on it ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' ve read some of the news
coverage of this . 
I ' ve not been in touch with either the transition
team or the auto -- Ford about their announcement , 
but I read in published reports about their
announcement that it was not tied to any political
considerations . 
And I noted that over the last five years or so that
Ford has actually increased the number of
workers at their company by about 28 , 000 . 
So this is only the latest step in a long-running , 
significant and positive trend for the U . S . 
economy that those jobs are being protected . 
So that ' s obviously good news . Jon . 
The Press : Josh -- The Press : 28 , 000 domestic ? 
Mr . Earnest : We can look up the numbers for you . 
We ' ll follow up . 
The Press : Josh , on the measures taken against
Russia , why was Vladimir Putin not mentioned as one
of those sanctions ? 
Is that an indication you didn ' t have evidence that
the Russian leader was responsible for this , or
directed this , approved it ? 
Mr . Earnest : Not necessarily , Jon . 
The intelligence community has indicated their view
that given the significance of the
actions that Russia carried out against the
United States , their conclusion is that this is
something that had to have been directed at the
highest levels of the Russian government . 
The Press : So why not hit the President ? 
I mean , he ' s the guy responsible . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , as you know , typically , with
regard to sanctions policy , that there are
only certain circumstances in which the leader of the
country is personally named . 
I can ' t get into all the -- there ' s no denying that
this is a significant action . 
So what I would say is just that it would be
rather extraordinary if Mr . Putin himself were
among the people who were listed . 
But I can ' t speak to the decisions that were made
by the experts at the Treasury Department about
who was named and who was not . 
The Press : So when the Chinese hacked OPM in
2015 , 21-plus million current and former
government employees and contractors had their
personal records stolen by the Chinese . 
Why did the White House do nothing publicly in
reaction to that hack , which , in some ways , was
even more widespread than what we saw here from the
Russians , allegedly ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think that what we ' ve seen is
that these are two cyber incidents that are
malicious in nature , but materially different . 
The Press : Twenty-one million people had their
personal data taken . 
Fingerprints , social security numbers , 
background checks -- I mean , this was a
far-reaching hack . 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not downplaying the
significance of it , I ' m just saying that it ' s
different than seeking to interfere in the
conduct of a U . S . 
national election . 
I can ' t speak to the steps that have been taken by
the United States in response to that Chinese
malicious cyber activity . 
The Press : But nothing was announced . 
There was not a single step announced by the
White House in response to that . 
Mr . Earnest : That is true that there was no public
announcement about our response , but I can ' t
speak to what response may
have been initiated in private . 
The Press : But no diplomats expelled , no
compounds shut down , no sanctions imposed , 
correct ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , I can ' t speak to -- The
Press : You don ' t do that stuff secretly . 
I mean , that ' s -- Mr . Earnest : Well , 
certainly when it comes to the diplomats , that ' s
right , there were no diplomats PNGed . 
That ' s something that we would announce publicly . 
But , look , I can ' t speak to the response because , 
as you pointed out , that ' s not something that
we have announced . 
It certainly is something that we take seriously . 
It certainly -- the President has raised
directly with his Chinese counterpart . 
And we certainly have seen commitments from the
Chinese with regard to some norms in cyberspace
that we would like to see them observe -- for
example , we did see the Chinese President commit
in the Rose Garden in the fall of 2015 that Russia
-- or that China would not be engaged in the kind of
cyber-enabled theft for commercial gain that ' s
sponsored by national governments . 
So that represents some progress , and that does
represent the protection of U . S . 
commercial interests here in the United States . 
And that certainly is an important step , an
important part of establishing some of these
rules of the road that will allow the
international community to resolve how to limit the
malicious behavior of some actors in cyberspace . 
The Press : But do you see how -- that there ' s just
this wildly different response ? 
With the Russians , which , of course , is very
politically charged , the White House takes this
action , makes it public . 
With the Chinese , which was not so political
charged but was absolutely as far-reaching a hack as
we had ever seen in this
country , nothing was done publicly . 
Mr . Earnest : At least of the government . 
At least of the government , right ? 
There are ample examples of other malicious cyber
actors in the private sector -- The Press : But
in response to that OPM hack -- Mr . Earnest : --
exploiting personal identifiable information
and engaging in other wide-reaching malicious
cyber activity . 
But , look , I ' m not suggesting that somehow
that ' s not important . 
What I ' m just saying is that it ' s materially
different than the kind of hack-and-leak strategy
that we saw the Russians engage in to try to
influence our democracy . 
That is significant . 
That ' s serious . 
And that explains the serious steps that
President Obama has imposed against the
Russians in response . 
But with regard to the Chinese , we have made some
progress with them in trying to limit the kind
of malicious cyber activity that could
threaten U . S . 
interests either in the United States or around
the world , in our government or in
the private sector . 
And we ' re pleased with some of the progress
that we ' ve made . 
But there is no denying that the next
administration will assume a significant burden in
trying to craft a policy in cyberspace that
effectively stands up to our adversaries and looks
out for the interests of the American people . 
The Press : Okay . 
And then just one other quick -- Sean Spicer . 
I think this is your first briefing since he was
announced as the incoming press secretary for
President Trump . 
Mr . Earnest : It is . 
The Press : Any advice to
Sean on how to conduct this job ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen , I had an opportunity to
congratulate Sean via email shortly after the
announcement was made . 
As you all have heard me say on a number of
occasions , the opportunity and the honor to stand
before this podium and advocate for a set of
values and a President that I deeply believe in
is extraordinary , and it ' s the kind of opportunity
that I wouldn ' t trade for anything . 
I sincerely hope that he finds the same kind of
challenge and satisfaction in the job that I have . 
And I don ' t know Sean personally , but I expect
to get the chance to meet him soon and to talk to
him about this job a little bit . Isaac . 
The Press : Iwant to bring it back to
North Korea for a second . 
Does the President feel confident in Donald
Trump ' s ability to protect the United States if a
nuclear missile is launched by North Korea ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , Isaac , that hearkens back to some
of the rhetoric that was used by both sides in the
campaign leading up to the election , and the
President expressed some rather profound concerns
about the incoming President . 
But the election is over . 
And I ' ve done my best to
avoid re-litigating those fights . 
I think what I can tell you is that the President
has strong confidence in the men and women of the
United States military , the men and women of the
United States intelligence community , the men and
women in the United States State Department who
ultimately are responsible for implementing policies
that protect the American people , including from the
threats that emanate in North Korea . 
So we ' re going to be counting on our men and
women in the intelligence community to continue to
provide decision-makers with the best available
intelligence about North Korea ' s actions . 
We ' re going to rely on the Department of Defense and
the men and women of the United States military to
make more strategic decisions about stationing
equipment and antiballistic missile
technology to protect the American people . 
And we ' re going to be relying on the men and
women of the State Department to go and build
an international coalition to increase the pressure
on the North Korean regime to compel them to
pursue a different path . 
And those are all institutions and patriots
who , every day , set aside politics , set aside their
own political leanings , set aside their own
preferences about who should be President of the
United States , and just focus on the task at hand . 
And the people in those three communities -- at
the State Department , the Defense Department and
intelligence community -- all have substantial
responsibilities when it comes to protecting
the American people . 
And the President has confidence that those men
and women , those American patriots , will continue to
do their important work with enormous skill and
expertise and patriotism to protect the country . 
The Press : But going back to -- as you said , there
was a lot of talk about this during the campaign . 
It ' s been about two months since he delivered his
last campaign speech . 
In those two months , does he feel more confident in
Donald Trump ' s ability to handle the nuclear
situation , both in having the nuclear codes and
protecting from a nuclear attack ? 
Less confident ? 
Or is he in the same place that he was the day
of the election ? 
Mr . Earnest : I haven ' t spoken to the President
about this , but my assessment would be that
his opinions have not changed . 
But the time and place for presenting those opinions
has come and gone , and we ' re focused
now on a transition . 
The Press : And just on the WikiLeaks -- Julian
Assange did an interview in which he -- with Fox
News in which he says that the administration --
first of all , he says that WikiLeaks did not receive
its information from a state actor , and , second
of all , says that there are essentially holes in
the case that the administration has laid
out about the role that WikiLeaks had , that
WikiLeaks wasn ' t mentioned in anything that the
President or anybody has said about this , and that
this means that you guys must not be sure that
there is a connection there . 
What ' s your response to that ? 
Mr . Earnest : My response is that the President has
complete confidence in the assessment that ' s been put
forward by the intelligence community , 
and there ' s no reason to doubt it . 
The Press : And that WikiLeaks received -- that
there ' s no lack of mentioning WikiLeaks for
any purpose , or -- what Assange is talking about
is that you guys didn ' t say -- you ' ve connected it
to the Russians , but you haven ' t said , well , then
it went to WikiLeaks from the Russians , that that ' s
just semantics , essentially , from Assange ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , I didn ' t see the entirety
of his -- I didn ' t see much of any of his
interview , so it ' s hard
for me to respond directly in kind . 
I think what I can tell you is the President has
complete confidence in the assessment that ' s been put
forward by the intelligence community . 
And there ' s still work
that they ' re doing on this . 
And the President has tasked the intelligence
community with putting forward more information
before January 20th not just about what Russia did
in the 2016 election , but about some of the
malicious cyber activity that we saw in the context
of the 2008 and 2012 elections , as well . 
And there certainly is the possibility that more
evidence that ' s pertinent to some of those claims
could be included . 
We ' ll have to wait and see . 
The Press : Just last question -- do you have
any update on when we should expect the
intelligence report that the President
has asked for ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t have an update on timing at
this point , just before January 20th . Julianna . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
David Axelrod tweeted -- going back to the House
Ethics Office -- David Axelrod tweeted " This
House Ethics drama was an absolute gift to Donald
Trump , a big fat zeppelin for him to shoot down , 
which he did .  " 
Do you think that this was teed up for the
President-elect , who himself has had some
issues regarding conflicts of interests and some of
his own ethical questions swirling around him
leading into his inauguration ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I haven ' t spoken to David today . 
My guess is he wasn ' t expressing admiration for
a clever strategic move on the part of Republicans to
make the President look -- the President-elect look
good . 
I actually think he was making the opposite point , 
that Republicans in Congress have revealed a
lot about their priorities when the first action that
they took was to vote in secret to gut some of the
ethical requirements that they ' re subject to . 
So I think the point that David was making is simply
that it ' s pretty obvious to everybody that that ' s a
really bad idea . Kevin . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
I just want to circle back on Jon ' s question about
Russia versus China , and the reaction . 
Lisa Monaco has previously cited diplomatic inroads
with China as part of the reason why the
administration has had some success in limiting
and reducing cyber activity -- negative cyber
activity from the Chinese . 
And I ' m curious why , then , would the administration
continue that same process with the Russians to get a
similar response , rather than the sort of
heavy-handed expelling operatives and shuttering
-- Mr . Earnest : Well , Kevin , I think the
response to the Chinese action has been different
than the response to the Russian action because
their actions that both those countries
undertook were different . 
What we saw on the part of the Chinese was concerning
with regard to some of the malicious cyber
activity that had an
impact on the U . S . government . 
The Russian cyber activity was actually a more
specifically directed threat to undermine
U . S . democracy . 
So their tactics were different . 
Their ultimate goal was different . 
And that would explain why our
response was different . 
In both cases , we ' ve taken that malicious cyber
activity and those breaches quite seriously , 
but our responses have , as I acknowledge to Jon , 
have been different . 
The Press : Also , on the Ford Motor announcement --
and you may or may not have had a chance to see
it , the one where they ' re saying essentially they ' re
going to not develop this plant over in Mexico . 
Donald Trump had previously threatened to
levy some sort of a tax or , if you will , some sort
of tariff on cars that were made there that would
come back to the U . S . 
You were asked earlier if you thought this was a
victory for I think maybe Donald Trump , but I ' d be
curious if you think this is a victory for the
American people and American workers in
particular , who may now benefit from the fact that
there will be more jobs related to this decision
than might have been . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , Kevin , it won ' t surprise you to
hear that the President who has presided over an
economy that ' s created nearly 900 , 000
manufacturing jobs is pleased to hear when
another 700 manufacturing jobs have been saved . 
The Press : I also want to ask you something the
President sort of hinted at -- or maybe not hinted
at , maybe he just came right out and said it .  
( Laughter .  ) He said ,  " Listen , if I were able to
run again , I would have beaten Donald Trump .  " 
Why do you think the President made that point ? 
What was behind his decision to make a
comment like that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Because his point was -- if you go
back and look at the interview , he was making
the point that the message that he delivered in his
2008 campaign and in his 2012 campaign is one that
deeply resonated with the American people and got
him -- allowed him to build a strong coalition
all across the country , that allowed him to be
elected in 2008 and reelected in 2012 with
strong majorities not just of the electoral college , 
but actually a majority of the voting population . 
And President Obama is the first President to be
elected and reelected with more than 51 percent of
the vote since Eisenhower . 
And that ' s an indication of how much strong support
there is all across the country for the
President ' s message . 
And the President believes , after eight
years , that he ' s stayed true to that message , that
he ' s campaigning on the same set of values and on
the same set of -- message that appeals to the idea
that everybody in America should have an opportunity
to succeed and that people shouldn ' t be -- The Press : 
-- that message in North Carolina ; he was
out very forcefully . 
They saw that message in Michigan ; he was
out very forcefully . 
And neither state went for the Democrat in that
particular circumstance . 
Mr . Earnest : That ' s true . 
But I think what we ' ve found -- and this was true
in 2010 and to a lesser extent in 2014 , but still
in 2014 -- that when the President wasn ' t on the
ballot that he didn ' t have as much success as he
would have liked in making that same argument in
support of other candidates . 
And I think there are a lot of theories as to why
that is , but that ' s undeniably true . 
The Press : Would the President like to debate
Donald Trump ?  
( Laughter .  ) 
Mr . Earnest : No , he would
not . April . 
The Press : Josh , the President is going to be
-- when it comes to ACA and the contributions it ' s
given to millions of people -- and you ' ve
already cited some of the positive points . 
But because this is so important for the
President in the waning days to lean in like this , 
can you get into the conversations that
President Obama has had with Donald Trump in the
lead-up to tomorrow ? 
Can you talk to us about what he said about
ACA on the phone ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t . 
I ' ve worked hard to try to protect the ability of the
President of the United States to have private
conversations with the President-elect . 
And when some of the fact of those calls has spilled
into the public , we ' ve done our best to try to
confirm and explain to you the context of those
conversations . 
But for the substance of the calls , I ' m going to
protect their ability to have those
calls in private . 
The Press : The President here , the last day before
he went on vacation , did say when he talks to
Donald Trump , he explains the benefits
of some issues . 
Was he talking about ACA as one of those
conversations and the benefits that he was
talking about ? 
Mr . Earnest : I wouldn ' t be surprised if the
Affordable Care Act was among those . 
The Press : So when he says " benefits ,  " does he tout
the things that we already know ? 
Or does he go into the weeds about things and
talk about more that we -- things that the average
person doesn ' t know and how it works ? 
What makes it work ? 
What would be a problem if it ' s taken away ? 
What does he say when he talks about the benefits
to Donald Trump about that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , I ' m just not going to get
into the context of their -- to the substance of the
conversations that they ' re having . 
The Press : The President did allude to that , so he
didn ' t -- he didn ' t allude to it , he did tell us that
from this podium . 
Mr . Earnest : Okay . 
The Press : Okay . 
So lastly , with everything going on now , the
back-and-forth between the President-elect and the
sitting President of the United States in the
waning days of this President ' s presidency , is
there a possibility , a strong possibility that
there will be a final press conference from
President Obama before he leaves office ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t have any scheduling
announcements at this point , but I wouldn ' t be
surprised if something like that happened . 
We ' ll keep you posted . 
The Press : Is it to protect -- would it be to
protect his legacy more so , or to put a final note
to America ? 
Mr . Earnest : We ' ll wait until we have something to
announce before we
describe why we announced it .  
( Laughter .  ) 
Jordan . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
While the President was in Hawaii , it was reported
that the Obama administration is -- well , 
it informed Congress that it could transfer up to 19
prisoners from Guantanamo Bay before the President
leaves office . 
Are you able to confirm those reports ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not in a position to confirm
individual notifications to Congress . 
As you know , Jordan , the statute does require that
when the administration is prepared to transfer a
detainee from the prison at Guantanamo Bay to
another country in the context of security
requirements that would limit their ability to
pose a threat to the United States , the
administration is required to give Congress 30 days ' 
notice before completing that transfer . 
So this is part of our routine effort that we ' ve
undertaken over the last several years to reduce
the population of the prison at Guantanamo Bay . 
But I can ' t speak to any individual notifications
that have been made to Congress or give you a
specific preview about
potential upcoming transfers . 
But I think I would expect at this point additional
transfers to be announced before January 20th . 
The Press : On that note , Donald Trump tweeted today
that there should be no
further releases from Guantanamo . 
Is his attitude on that issue going to factor into
the administration ' s decisions at all on
transfers in the final day ? 
Mr . Earnest : No , it will not . 
He ' ll have an opportunity to implement the policy
that he believes is most effective when he takes
office on January 20th . Ron . 
The Press : On the Russia hacking , you ' ve heard some
of the statements from the President-elect that are
skeptical of the intelligence assessments . 
Has there been any conversation between
members of this administration and the
incoming administration about the skepticism , 
about the intelligence about Russia being
behind this hack ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t speak to any specific
conversations , but I ' m confident in the context
of the transition and getting the
President-elect ' s team up to speed on a range of
important national security issues that we ' re
currently dealing with here . 
I ' m confident that officials in the
administration , including at the White House , have
represented to the transition team full
confidence in the assessment in conclusions
that have been announced
by the intelligence community . 
The Press : So what do you think of the
President-elect ' s statements that he knows
things that others don ' t know and that he still is
not convinced that the Russians are behind this ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m glad that it ' s somebody else ' s job
to explain exactly what he meant .  
( Laughter .  ) 
The Press : Because you --
Mr . Earnest : Because I don ' t know . 
So presumably , somebody who has an opportunity to
speak to him directly can try to explain to those of
us in the public who weren ' t quite sure what
he ' s referring to . 
The Press : But this is a serious thing , though , 
because this was a matter of national security that
-- Mr . Earnest : Yes , I -- The Press : -- the
sanctions were levied and these diplomats
were expelled . 
This was a big , big deal . 
How concerned is the President or the
administration about the President-elect ' s attitude
that he knows more or something different and
that he ' s still not convinced ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , in the context of the campaign we
had ample opportunity to -- The Press : This is the
real thing -- this is not the campaign . 
Mr . Earnest : The campaign is over , that ' s right . 
The campaign is over . 
And now we are in a position where our
responsibility is , as public servants in the
Obama administration , to do as much as we possibly
can to help the President-elect ' s team get
up to speed and understand the complexity and depth
of the range of issues , both domestic and national
security , that they ' re going to be tasked with
managing , starting just 16 days from now . 
The Press : Bottom line , you can ' t explain why
there ' s this difference of opinion here in terms of
-- Mr . Earnest : The bottom line , there ' s a reason
that the President-elect has his own spokesperson , 
and there will be somebody else standing behind this
podium when he takes office . 
The Press : When you were talking about the review
that ' s underway on cyber issues , I think you said
that in terms of proof or evidence that there may or
may not be a public release of what we would
consider proof or evidence of the claims . 
Is that true ? 
Mr . Earnest : There are a couple of things on this . 
Isaac was asking me about some of the claims that
were apparently made in an interview about how or
whether or to what extent WikiLeaks may have been
involved in this effort . 
And I was trying to answer his question by saying
that it ' s possible , though I don ' t know , but it ' s
possible that additional information that would be
helpful in understanding what WikiLeaks ' s role in
all of this could be included in that report . 
I don ' t know whether it will be or not . 
The Press : But as to the role that the Russians
played in the -- the intelligence agencies in
Russia and so forth . 
Mr . Earnest : That ' s a definitive conclusion
that ' s been reached -- that was announced , 
actually , before the election . 
Some of the information that was included in the
Joint Analysis Report that was released by the FBI
and DHS last week included technical information
about the tactics and technology and software
that was used by the Russians to carry out
these actions and other actions like them . 
I think that ' s -- its technical , but I think
it ' s pretty solid evidence of Russian involvement in
this matter . 
The Press : So you don ' t -- the administration doesn ' t
feel a need to present more proof ? 
Mr . Earnest : No . 
The administration feels a responsibility to
communicate as directly and as clearly as possible
with the American public to help them understand
what the U . S . 
government knows about Russian efforts to
undermine our system of government . 
And we ' ve already done that . 
We did that before the election , and I would
anticipate that that report that the
intelligence community is working on would also
further that goal . 
The Press : And on meetings on Hill about the
Affordable Care Act , is that the only issue
on the agenda ? 
Or is there anything else that the President wants
to communicate to these incoming members of
Congress about his concerns , his priorities , 
his hopes and fears ? 
Mr . Earnest : Protecting the Affordable Care Act is
the primary topic on the agenda . 
I wouldn ' t rule out that other things may come up . 
And if they do , we ' ll do our best to give
you a readout . 
The Press : What else is there ? 
I guess I ' m just trying to get a sense of -- 17 and a
half days or whatever is left -- what else is there
that the President is really trying to --
Mr . Earnest : Well , we obviously touched on a
couple of them . 
We talked about the Affordable Care Act , and
there isn ' t just the need to try to protect the
Affordable Care Act from being destroyed by
Republicans ; there ' s also a need to make sure that
we ' re doing everything we can to make it possible
for people to sign up for the Affordable Care Act . 
And we ' ve actually seen people signing people up
at a record clip . 
Despite all this negative publicity and despite some
of the uncertainty that Republicans are injecting
into this process , we ' re actually seeing a record
number of people signing up for the Affordable Care
Act that are at a record rate . 
So that ' s a positive step . 
And we certainly -- that didn ' t happen by accident . 
And we certainly want to make sure we ' re doing
what ' s necessary to facilitate those signups . 
Obviously following through on the business
with Russia in terms of implementing the steps
that were announced last week ad also putting
forward this report before January 20th are steps
that we ' re focused on . 
You can certainly always expect the President to be
very focused on the counter-ISIL campaign . 
And the President will continue to meet with his
national security team . 
I wouldn ' t be surprised if that ' s something that
members of Congress may be interested in . 
And of course , we ' re focused on a smooth and
effective transition . 
And that means trying to pay attention to all the
little details that may not rise to the level of
an interaction like this , but are still critical to
a seamless handoff of governing responsibility
from one administration to the next . 
And that requires the time and attention of a lot of
people inside the administration , including
the President of the United States . 
The Press : How is all that going ? 
Mr . Earnest : So far it ' s going well . 
The Press : We ' ve heard mixed messages about it . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' ve heard mixed messages about
this from the other side . 
But this administration has remained focused on
the effective -- facilitating the effective
transition that President Obama promised at the
beginning of last year . 
And we ' ve made good on
that promise so far . Mark . 
The Press : Josh , now that the new Congress has been
convened , does President Obama have any intention
of making any nominations or resubmitting any old
nominations to the new Congress ? 
Mr . Earnest : Nothing that I have to preview here . 
But if we have -- if we ' re going to re-nominate some
people , we ' ll make sure and let you know publicly
that we ' ve done such . 
The Press : Should we assume the Garland
nomination has now lapsed ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think the President acknowledged
at a Hanukkah event that Chief Judge Garland
attended last year that President Obama expects
Chief Judge Garland to continue to serve the
American people with distinction on the United
States Circuit Court of Appeals . 
The fact that he was not given the opportunity to
explain to the Senate and to the American people why
he would have served the country honorably and with
distinction on the United States Supreme Court is a
scar on the reputation of the United States Senate . 
It is a part of the legacy of Republican leadership
in Congress from the last several years . 
And I don ' t mean that as a compliment . 
And I think that for years the United States Senate
will be dealing with the fallout of the decision
that they made to so egregiously subject Chief
Judge Garland to such unfair treatment . 
Republicans themselves have praised Chief Judge
Garland . 
Republicans have described him a consensus nominee . 
Republicans have praised his service to this
country -- both as a judge but also as a federal
prosecutor , and a senior official at the Department
of Justice who led the investigation and
prosecution of one of the worst terrorists in
American history . 
Merrick Garland is a patriot . 
And he deserved far better treatment than he received
from Republicans in the United States Senate . 
But because he ' s the bigger man , he ' s going to
continue to serve this country with honor and
distinction at the United States Circuit Court of
Appeals . 
And the President is quite proud that he ' ll do that . 
The Press : What do you mean by fallout ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I mean that there will be
difficulty in the Senate not just in the Trump
presidency , but for future Presidents as they
navigate the process of nominating judges to the
federal bench . 
What sort of credibility do Republicans have in
making the case to Democrats that they should
fairly consider the nominations of a
Republican judge -- of a Republican President ? 
Republican senators blocked an eminently
qualified Supreme Court nominee whose
qualifications were not in question simply because he
was nominated by a Democratic President . 
How then can Republicans go to Democratic senators
and say that they should support nominees put
forward by a Republican President ? 
They have no standing in which to do that . 
Now , will Democrats do the right thing and fulfill
their constitutional obligations ? 
I think they probably will . 
But they won ' t be doing it because Republicans have
any semblance of moral high ground or any sort of
moral leverage or any moral weight to their
claim that that ' s what
Democratic senators should do . 
And I think that that breakdown of comity in the
United States Senate , that abdication of the basic
responsibility of members of the United States by
subjecting it to such intense partisanship and
actually allowing partisanship to supersede
constitutional obligation , it ' s discouraging . 
And it ' s a precedent that I think Republicans will
regret setting . 
The Press : Also , can you tell us what President
Obama ' s thinking is in going to Chicago next week
for the farewell address ? 
I went back and checked . 
All the farewell addresses back to Eisenhower were
delivered here at the White House . 
Why does President Obama want to go out of town ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , President Obama is going
to go back to his hometown , go back to the
place where he began his career in public service
-- a community , a city that was so supportive of
him throughout his career in public service . 
And there is a unique story to President Obama ' s
public service having started out as a community
organizer and somebody whose first job in public
service wasn ' t in politics , per Senate -- at
least it didn ' t involve running for office -- but
was actually focused on trying to help people in
the economically disadvantaged communities
advocate for themselves . 
And that commitment to fighting for working
people is something that has motivated President
Obama from his earliest days as a community
organizer to his last days
as President of the United States . 
And so it ' s a fitting bookend that he would go
back to that city where he got his start to make a
speech like this . 
The Press : Will that be his last out-of-town trip ? 
Mr . Earnest : Yes , I would anticipate that it will be
his last out-of-town trip
as President of the United States . 
The Press : Thank you . 
Mr . Earnest : Alexis . 
The Press : Josh , to follow up on the list that you
were giving to Ron , is the President going to -- how
would he describe to Democrats that he speaks
to this week and also to the beneficiaries of DACA
what to expect , what they should plan on , what they
should anticipate after the 20th ? 
Because some Democrats have urged the President
to act in a unique kind of way before he leaves to
extend the benefits or to maintain the benefits of
DACA ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' m not aware of any specific
announcements that you should expect from the
President on this particular issue . 
Of course , there is a longstanding
precedent in the U . S . 
government for the way that information
like this is maintained . 
There ' s a commitment that was made to people who
came forward to apply for deferred
action -- DREAMers . 
These are individuals who came to the United States
as children , were brought to the United States as
children and are here through no fault of their
own . 
And the United States is the only country
they ' ve ever known . 
And many of these are young people who have
graduated from high school , gone on to
college , served on our military , have otherwise
shown themselves to be quality additions to the
country and to communities across the country . 
And so the President ' s view is that these
individuals are American in every way but their
papers , and that the limited enforcement
resources of the United States ' government are
better focused on people who are in the United
States illegally and have criminal records , or only
recently crossed the border . 
Those are the kinds of people that are worthy of
aggressive enforcement action . 
And that is exactly the kind of policy that this
administration has pursued . 
It ' s made our country safer . 
It ' s made our country fairer . 
And I know at least at one point , the President-elect
indicated that he thought
that was a pretty smart approach . 
But when it comes to what he will do after January
20th , even the current President of the United
States is not sure exactly what the incoming
President may decide to do . 
The Press : The other thing I wanted to ask you is a
small detail for January 20th . 
So is there any change to the normal protocol or
customary protocol where we expect the
President-elect , the Vice President-elect to come
for coffee at the White House and to ride together
with the outgoing
President to the swearing-in ? 
Mr . Earnest : I haven ' t seen the schedule for
January 20th . 
But obviously as that date gets closer , we ' ll be able
to walk you through all the minute details of that
day that symbolize the kind of peaceful
transition , the peaceful transfer of power that is
a hallmark of American democracy and it critical
to the strength and success of our country . 
The Press : But you can ' t confirm today that
President Obama and Mrs . Obama extend an
invitation to the Trumps to come for coffee before
they go up to the swearing-in ? 
Mr . Earnest : At this point , I would expect that
as we have over the last couple of months , we will
observe the kinds of traditions and steps that
have ensured a smooth and effective transition . 
That ' s what we ' ve been doing for the
last two months . 
I would expect that continue on the last day . 
But when it comes to the actual details of the
schedule , we ' ll have more to say about that as the
day gets closer . Francesca . 
The Press : Thank you , Josh . 
On Ford , you had said that it didn ' t seem like there
were any political considerations for the
decision that was made today , or at least that
you hadn ' t seen anything -- Mr . Earnest : I think
what I said is that Ford had indicated that their
decision was not affected by politics . 
The Press : Okay , sure . 
But the CEO of Ford did say that he was encouraged
by the pro-growth policies of President-elect Trump
and the new Congress . 
And that certainly sounds like it ' s a political
consideration or at least a calculation that it
would be better to build more cars in the United
States under the incoming President than under the
current President . 
Mr . Earnest : My guess is you should ask that
question to the Ford CEO . 
But I don ' t think that he would want his comments to
be interpreted that way . 
But you should ask
somebody who has spoken to him . 
The Press : A couple more on a different subject . 
Mr . Earnest : Sure . 
The Press : You seemed a little bit feistier today
in response to some of the things that the
President-elect has said , or else you ' re just happy
to see us -- Mr . Earnest : Maybe it ' s because I
shaved that holiday beard this morning , so I ' m
feeling a little -- The Press : That ' s
possibly could be it .  
( Laughter .  ) 
And again , perhaps it ' s just you ' re
happy to be back here . 
But it does seem like during the two-week break
between when we were last here and now , that the
dtente between the old administration and the new
administration has somehow been broken . 
You had President-elect Trump talking about
roadblocks that this administration was putting
out , and you directly challenging him today when
it comes to ethics , when it comes to Ford with
trade , that sort of thing . 
Is there a reason for that ? 
Is it that the clock is ticking down on
the administration ? 
Do you not see it that way ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t see it that way . 
I think that -- what I have done since the day
after the election when I stood at this podium for
almost two hours answering your questions is I ' ve
made clear that the vigorous , deeply held , 
passionate differences of opinion that we have on a
range of issues from policy to basic American
values , there are differences . 
And they ' re profound . 
But there ' s also a profound responsibility
that all of us who serve in this administration , 
including the President , has to ensure a smooth and
effective transition . 
That doesn ' t mean that we ' re prepared to go along
with everything that the incoming administration
says , but it certainly does mean that we have a
responsibility to give the incoming President every
opportunity to get a running start on the job . 
And that ' s something that President Obama has taken
to heart in his Oval Office meeting and the
handful of conversations that they ' ve had on the
telephone since then . 
And there have been a number of meetings all
across the federal government that
demonstrate our ongoing commitment to ensuring a
smooth and effective transition . 
It doesn ' t mean those differences went away . 
And the fact that those differences exist don ' t
mean that the transition has hit a rough spot . 
It means that these are deeply held views of the
Obama administration , and they differ sharply with
the President-elect . 
But the President-elect
campaigned on doing things differently . 
He campaigned on taking a different approach , and he
won an election against a candidate who was pursuing
a strategy that was more similar to what President
Obama has pursued . 
Now , the President-elect didn ' t get more votes , but
he did win the election . 
And since day one , this administration has been
focused on ensuring a
smooth and effective transition . 
And we ' ve made good on that promise . 
And the fact that we have differences of opinion is
not evidence that the
transition is breaking down . 
It ' s evidence that we ' ve got well-known
differences , but we ' re not letting them get in the
way of a smooth and effective transition . 
The Press : And on that note , could you tell us a
little bit more about the tone that the President
will take in that speech next week , what some of
the themes maybe he ' d hit upon would be , and whether
or not his family will go with him on that trip ? 
Mr . Earnest : We ' ll have more on the speech before
the end of this week . 
I know that the speech is
still going through some drafts . 
Rather than preview it now , let me get it a
little bit farther down
the process of being written . 
But I ' ll come back to you with something before the
end of the week . 
The Press : How many drafts ? 
Mr . Earnest : We ' ll keep you posted . George . 
The Press : I ' ve got to ask you a quick follow on your
nostalgic journey back to Decorah . 
Mr . Earnest : Yes . 
The Press : What happened
to those two young organizers ? 
Did they end up in the Cabinet ? Ambassadors ? 
How did you reward them ?  
( Laughter .  ) 
Mr . Earnest : know one of them worked at
the White House . 
And I ' m not sure what happened to the other one . 
The Press : You didn ' t reward the other one .  
( Laughter .  ) 
Mr . Earnest : Both of them have gone on
to do quite well , I ' m sure . 
But there are at least a couple of other people
that I first met in that Iowa , Des Moines -- at Des
Moines , Iowa campaign headquarters that are
still working at the White House today . 
So I ' m not the only one who is still around . 
Chris , I ' ll give you the last one . 
The Press : Great . 
Over the weekend , Judge Reed O ' Connor issued a
nationwide injunction against the Obama
administration interpretation of the
Affordable Care Act to prohibit discrimination
against transgender people and women who
have had abortions . 
Does it make sense for the administration to fight
that decision in the 17 days that remain before
Trump takes office ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' d refer you to the
Department of Justice for the legal strategy that
we ' ll pursue . 
But obviously the administration believes
deeply that all Americans regardless of their sex , 
gender identity , or sexual orientation should have
access to quality affordable health care
free from any sort of discrimination . 
That ' s not just a principle and a value that
the administration believes strongly in . 
I ' m confident that the vast majority of Americans
believe strongly in that principle , as well . 
Thanks , everybody . 
We ' ll see you tomorrow