Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , the
Vice President of the United States .  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , the President of
the United States .  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , please be seated .  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : The Troops representing America ' s Armed
Forces and participating in today ' s review from left to
right are the United States Army Old Guard Fife and Drum
Corps , the United States Army Band under the
direction of Colonel Timothy J . Holton . 
Elements of the Armed Forces include the Presidential
Marching Platoon from the Army ' s Third United States
Infantry Regiment the Old Guard , the United States
Marine Honor Guard from Marine Barracks 8th and I , 
Washington , D . C . The colors have always been one of the
most important elements of a military unit . 
At the center of our formation is an Armed Forces
Color Guard bearing the national colors and the
service flags of the Army , Marine Corps , Navy , Air
Force , and Coast Guard . 
The following is an element from the United States Navy
Honor Guard from Navy Yard , Washington , D . C . The next
element online is comprised of members from the United
States Air Force Honor Guard
from Joint Base Anacostia Bolling . 
Following is an element of the United States Coast
Guard Honor Guard from Coast Guard Station Alexandria , 
and to the rear of the formation are the 56 state
and territorial flags of the United States .  
( music playing )  
( applause )  
( inaudible dialogue )  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Sir , this concludes the honors . 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , please stand for
the advancing of the colors and remain standing for the
United States National Anthem .  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , please be seated . 
Male Speaker : Ceremonial .  
( inaudible dialogue ) 
Male Speaker :  ( inaudible dialogue )  . 
Male Speaker : The Department of Defense Medal for
Distinguished Public Service is presented to
President Barack Obama . 
President Barack Obama distinguished himself as the
Commander-In-Chief of the finest fighting force the
world has every known from January 20 , 2009 to
January 20 , 2017 . 
President Obama kept our nation safe , led a strategic
transition in our defense strategy , strengthened our
alliances and pursued new partnerships , and laid the
foundation for a force of the future that will
continue to win our nation ' s wars . 
President Obama countered decisively the immediate
threat to our national security -- terrorism . 
He directed the operation to kill Osama Bin Laden , 
decimated Al Qaeda ' s terrorist network , put the
Islamic state of Iraq and Levant on a path to a
lasting defeat , and developed counterterrorism
platforms from South Asia to North Africa . 
He did so relentlessly , effectively , with increased
transparency , and in strict accordance with our values . 
Simultaneously , President Obama achieved verifiable
nuclear disarmament to Iran , the gravest threat to
security in the Middle East . 
And while countering proliferation abroad , he
directed recapitalization of our vitally important
nuclear deterrent here at home . 
As he successfully neutralized immediate
threats to our security , President Obama also
directed a transition in our defense strategy . 
He implemented a rigorous intellectual policy and
legal framework to guide the most solemn decision that a
commander-in-chief makes -- to deploy and employ our men
and women in uniform . 
He supported strategic investments to perpetuate
our military edge in the air , at sea , with missile
defenses , and in space and cyber domains including by
establishing the United States Cyber Command . 
In so doing , he led the transformation of the United
States military from over a decade of counterinsurgency
into a full spectrum fighting force . 
And critically , he directed the United States rebalance
to the Asia-Pacific , the most consequential region
for America ' s future . 
President Obama also recognized that security in
the world cannot be America ' s
responsibility alone . 
He strengthened our alliances and pursued
new partnerships . 
In Europe , he led the adaptation of NATO to
continue its commitment to a stable Afghanistan and to
actively counter threats to Europe ' s east and south . 
In particular , President Obama directed the
bolstering of our Allied Military Presence in Europe
and reestablishing of deterrents against
Russian aggression . 
In Asia , he modernized our alliances with Japan and
Korea strengthening the cornerstone of security in
East Asia , and deterring threats from North Korea . 
In the Middle East , he strengthened Israel ' s
qualitative military edge including with an
unprecedented package of foreign military funding . 
But in an ever-changing world , President Obama
recognized that America ' s relationships must also change . 
He directed the advancement of new strategic ( inaudible ) 
including the unprecedented deepening of the
strategically consequential United States-India partnership . 
In all of this , President Obama recognized that the
source of America ' s greatest strength , including its
military strength , is its people . 
To ensure that the United States military stays the
best , he understood that we must continue to attract , 
recruit , retain , develop , and transition the best
talent that our nation has to offer . 
His repealing of the Don ' t Ask , Don ' t Tell Policy , and
the support for opening all military occupations and
positions to women will help ensure that . 
He also championed advanced research and an innovative
program to care for our nation ' s wounded warriors
and their families and led efforts to help veterans
make the transition to civilian life . 
These and many other distinctive accomplishments
of President Obama reflect great credit upon himself , 
the Department of Defense , and the United
States of America .  
( applause ) 
Ladies and gentlemen , please stand for the posting
of the colors . 
Male Speaker : Post the colors -- down , right , face .  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , please be seated .  
( inaudible dialogue ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , General Dunford . 
General Dunford : Mr . President , Vice
President Biden , Secretary Carter , distinguished guests
-- thank you once again for joining us as we pay tribute
to our Commander-In-Chief and the Obama family . 
Mr . President , I had the distinct honor today of
representing your soldiers , sailors , airmen , Marines , 
and Coastguardsmen . 
And as you know better than most , those men and women
are busy ,  . 
Thousands are deployed across the globe . 
They ' re meeting our alliance commitments and deterring
potential adversaries . 
They ' re taking the fight to the Islamic State , Al Qaeda , 
and other extremist organizations . 
They ' re maintaining freedom of navigation and they ' re
defending us from threats in space and cyber space . 
Throughout your time in office , we ' ve often heard
you express your appreciation for their
service and their sacrifice . 
But this afternoon , Mr . President , I want to
express our appreciation for your leadership and honor
your service as our Commander-In-Chief for the
past eight years . 
Mr . President , we ' ve been at war throughout your tenure , 
that ' s a period longer than any other
American President . 
And throughout those years , you ' ve always been there for us . 
You were there in a situation room where I
personally witnessed your thoughtful and careful
deliberations when ordering our young men and women in
harm ' s way . 
You were there visiting the force wherever it was
deployed , ensuring that our men and women had the
guidance and support necessary to get the job done . 
You were there in the holidays meeting with the
troops and calling them around the world to simply
say thanks . 
You were there when our wounded warriors return home
to heal . 
Your constant visits to Walter Reed were without
fanfare of ceremony , but always marked with heartfelt
words , hugs from moms , and more often than not , a few
lunges and pushups alongside those who were trying to
recover . 
Finally , Mr . President , you were there at Dover Air
Force Base to receive the remains of the fallen and
you were there to visit them at Arlington . 
I could go on , but let me share a few sentiments from
the men and women that you have touched as a leader . 
Lieutenant Colonel Will Phillips sent this message .  
 " Mr . President and First Lady , thank you both for your
tireless dedication to our nation . 
President Obama , you ' ve set an example for us all as a
statesman , a father , and a husband .  " 
Corporal David Dennis , who ' s currently deployed to Iraq
told me how much he appreciated your call on
Christmas Day to say thanks for his sacrifice and service . 
Sergeant Major Troxell and I , by coincidence , met with
him a few hours after your call and he was still pretty
pumped up after that call . 
I was a bit disappointed because after your phone
call that morning , a visit from the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs and his senior enlisted leader actually
didn ' t carry much weight .  
( laughter ) 
Major Matt Lampart made the following comment about your
hospital visit ,  " When I met the President , I was just
regaining the ability to walk . 
I had some days that were tough and some days of
doubt , but shaking hands with President Obama and
having a conversation with him was something that will
stick with me forever . 
Given the responsibilities that he shoulders , President
Obama ' s thoughtfulness and common touch were
pretty inspiring .  " 
Master Sergeant Keith Norris described what your support
for educational benefits as a senator and as a President
has meant to his family ,  " If it wasn ' t for the Post-911
GI Bill , my wife and I could not have afforded to send
our children to college . 
My oldest son just graduated and I ' m excited that he ' s on
track to be commissioned in the United States Air Force . 
While I wish he was going in the Army -- you may have
figured out that he ' s a Master Sergeant in the Army
-- while I wish he was going in the Army , I ' m incredibly
proud that he ' ll be the first military officer in my
family ' s history .  " 
Chief Warrant Officer Nate Powell commented on the
impact of your support to military spouses ,  " Like most
public school teachers , my wife doesn ' t earn all that
much , but she loves being a teacher . 
Because of the Military Spouses Residency Relief Act
that President Obama signed into law , my family saves
thousands of dollars a year that we ' d otherwise have to
pay just because she has chosen to move with me
across state lines from duty station to duty station .  " 
And on the lighter side , Captain Alex Lowe , who ' s an
Air Force Flight Surgeon is also apparently a big fan . 
He said ,  " I ' m glad to have started my service under
such a charismatic and cool Commander-In-Chief who can
also play ball and sing a mean Al Greene .  "  
( laughter ) 
I can ' t witness that , Mr . President . 
I ' ve not had the opportunity to see that in the situation
room , but I ' m going to take Captain Lowe ' s -- Captain
Lowe ' s word for it . 
Mr . President , on behalf of Lieutenant Colonel Phillips , 
Corporal Dennis , Major Lampart , Master Sergeant
Norris , Chief Warrant Officer Powell , Doc Lowe , 
and all of our men and women in uniform , we recognize and
appreciate your service , your sacrifice , your
commitment to the force , and your leadership . 
Of course , just as military families serve , so has the
Obama Family . 
While unable to join us this afternoon , Mrs . Obama and
Mrs . Biden ' s creation of joining forces has made a
lasting impact . 
In significantly expanded veteran job placement and
educational opportunities . 
The First Lady ' s legal advice and tireless advocacy
has also benefitted military working spouses making
careers more transportable for spouses who move every
few years . 
In fact , the entire Obama family has served . 
It ' d be impossible to sum up all their contributions
this afternoon . 
So , in closing , I ' ll simply say , Sasha and Malia , thank
you for sharing your mom and dad with us and the nation . 
Mrs . Obama , thank you for improving the lives of our
families and veterans and thanks for representing our
nation with such class . 
And Mr . President , thank you for being a
Commander-In-Chief that we have been proud to follow . 
On a personal note , sir , thanks for your confidence
in me and in all of the senior leaders who have had
the privilege to serve on your watch . 
And now , ladies and gentlemen , it ' s my privilege
to introduce another individual who has made a
lasting impact on our Joint Force and someone we ' ve been
proud to follow , our Secretary of Defense , the
Honorable Ash Carter .  
( applause ) 
Ash Carter : Thank you , Chairman Dunford , for that
tribute to the President and the First Lady ' s commitments
to our troops and our families . 
Mr . President , Mr . Vice President , Department of
Defense leadership , distinguished guests , ladies
and gentlemen -- welcome . 
As the Department honors our Commander-in-Chief of eight
critical years for one final time . 
This afternoon I ' d like to do so by speaking to those
aspects of his service and commitment to our national
defense that have been so striking and that will be
so memorable . 
Each one , a constant throughout his tenure as
our President . 
His focused strategic leadership , his steps to
strengthen our force both in its people and in its
capabilities , and his decision making . 
Through it all , President Obama has led our military
with an appreciation that America ' s defense is so
vital that we , to whom it is entrusted , must ensure its
continuity and excellence across the years and across
the domains of armed conflict . 
Not just air , land , and sea , but also space and cyber
space -- across parties , across government agencies , 
from strategic era to strategic era , and from
Presidential administration to Presidential administration . 
And he ' s done so not only for the last eight years , 
but even today as we prepare for new administration we ' re
following the President ' s leadership and ensuring a
smooth and orderly transition . 
Our military is a global force , one that President
Obama has steadfastly and strategically led in every
region of the world to ensure the men and women of
the strongest and most principled fighting force in
history effectively defend our country , deter our
adversaries , bolster our alliances and partnerships , 
and make a better world for our children . 
In the Asia Pacific , President Obama has
sustained a comprehensive rebalance of military power
to that region , the single most consequential one for
America ' s future . 
There , we ' re repositioning 60 percent of our naval
forces and overseas air assets including some of our
most advanced systems , and we ' re strengthening and
modernizing key alliances and partnerships with Japan , 
with South Korea , India , Vietnam , Australia , many others . 
In Europe , following Russia ' s illegal annexation
of Crimea , and use of hybrid warfare techniques , 
President Obama has stood strong with our NATO allies
and led a united response to deter Russian aggression , 
enhancing U . S . force presence and implementing a
new playbook so NATO can adapt against 21st Century threats . 
In the Middle East , President Obama secured an
accord that ' s verifiably preventing Iran from
acquiring a nuclear weapon removing a key source of
danger in the region . 
But as we continue to counter Iran ' s other
destabilizing activities , he ' s also strengthened the
defense relationships with all our key
regional partners . 
For example , providing our allies , Israel , 
unprecedented security assistance and advanced
capabilities across domains . 
And around the world , in the face of terrorist threats
from Al Qaeda to Al Shabbab to ISIL , President Obama has
led the most robust and sustained counterterrorism
fight in American history . 
In the counter ISIL campaign , the President
consistently supported the development and acceleration
of the coalition military campaign plan focused on
destroying the fact and the idea of an Islamic state
based on this evil ideology in Iraq and Syria , 
countering the ISIL cancer ' s metastases everywhere they
emerge , and most important -- protecting our homeland
and our people . 
In addition to countering ISIL , he ' s taken action to
ensure Afghanistan does not become a safe haven for
terrorist threat in America . 
He ' s directed eight years of unrelenting strikes on Al
Qaeda to devastate that terrorist organization both
before and after bringing Osama Bin Laden to justice . 
He ' s built a counterterrorism apparatus
that has thwarted countless lots against our homeland . 
And he did all of this -- all of it , consistent with
our values . 
Because our President knows as he ' s put it ,  " That we
lose ourselves when we compromise the very ideals
we fight to defend .  " 
At the same time , President Obama made sure our military
stayed strong and grew stronger in our people and
our capabilities to meet those ambitious , but
necessary commitments . 
Indeed , our President knows very well that the single
factor above all others that makes the U . S . 
military the finest is its people -- some represented
here today , far more around the world . 
President Obama has been dedicated to improving the
quality of life of our force making sure our service
members get what they need not only when it comes to
training and equipment , but also important benefits
critical to recruitment and retention like maternity and
paternity leave . 
He ' s helped keep sacred the commitment to wounded
warriors , the families of the fallen , to military
families , and to veterans . 
He ' s made sure our people are treated with the dignity
and honor befitting the profession of arms from
supporting DOD ' s efforts to rid our ranks of sexual
assault to improving our suicide prevention efforts . 
He ' s helped ensure the long-term viability of what
is , after all , an all-volunteer force
recruited in comparatively small numbers from the
entire American population , recognizing we have to
compete for top talent and that to have the best , we
must select the best solely on their qualifications to
meet our high standards -- not race , gender , identity , 
or sexual orientation -- rather focusing only on
whether someone can meet our standards . 
And he ' s also supported veterans on their transition
to whatever ' s next for them in life whether it ' s earning
a degree , finding a job , or starting a business . 
I know how much that matters , because I ' m old
enough to remember a shameful time when our
veterans were treated very differently . 
After our people , it ' s America ' s capabilities that
make our military edge second to none . 
And President Obama has sharpened that as well . 
He always asks ,  " Are we looking around the corner ?  " 
To ensure we not only anticipate the changing
nature of warfare and future threats , but also stay ahead
of them and take full advantage of new technology . 
Under his leadership , DOD began returning to full
spectrum capability in the Army and Marine Corps after
many years of skillful , but all absorbing focus on large
counterinsurgency deployments . 
We grew the size and the lethality of our navy and
drove forward the development and production
of new fighters , bombers , and tankers for the Air Force . 
We increased funding for innovative technologies in
R & D , notably in critical domains like space , cyber , 
and electronic warfare . 
All this , amidst persistent budget turbulence
and uncertainty . 
And even as President Obama has worked towards a world
without nuclear weapons , he ' s also ensured the United
States maintains a safe , secure , and effective
nuclear deterrent for as long as these weapons exist . 
And finally -- finally , from the vantage of someone who ' s
worked for 11 defense secretaries over 35 years , 
under both Democratic and Republican presidents -- and
now being secretary myself , I want to offer some
perspective on the nature and the quality of President
Obama ' s leadership and decision making as our
Commander-In-Chief . 
Because it ' s often most appreciated by those who ' ve
had to sign deployment orders , who ' ve been to
Dover , to Bethesda , Walter Reed -- who know that the
decisions he makes have consequences . 
Most Americans don ' t get to see how President Obama
makes decisions about our national security , so let me
give you a window to what it ' s like when we meet in
the situation room or the Oval Office . 
To begin with , he ' s steady , deliberate , rigorous , and
demanding of himself and of us . 
Always reflecting the seriousness -- seriousness
with which he approaches the grave responsibilities of
the Presidency . 
He makes us think through the consequences of our
proposed course of action as thoroughly as that
can be foreseen . 
And he always focuses first and fixedly on our north
star -- America ' s national interests . 
I ' ve been grateful that I ' ve always gotten a full hearing
for my views and recommendations . 
And in my observation , Chairman Dunford always did
as well . 
For President Obama valued not only my strategic advice
and his other advisors , but also candid , professional
military advice . 
And he was always willing to what we had to say , even if
I knew it wasn ' t something he wanted to hear . 
President Obama also knows it ' s not only whether the
decisions made are good that matters , but also whether
they ' re implemented with excellence . 
And that ' s a management style that ' s actually rare
among policymakers in Washington . 
Whether it was accelerating the counter-ISOL campaign , 
stopping the spread of Ebola , or rebalancing the
Asia Pacific , President Obama ' s always insisted on
getting the job done to the end . 
He never hesitates to ask hard questions , and keep
asking until there ' s an answer . 
That ' s not only because he wanted his decision and met
our objectives achieved -- though both are important , 
but because he was committed to making sure that all our
soldiers , sailors , airmen , marines , had what they
needed to do their job . 
As you heard from Chairman Dunford , that kind of
commitment means a lot to our troops . 
I ' ve seen that up close as well . 
Many times , I visited service members on bases
after the President has stopped by , or wounded
warriors and their families at military hospitals after
he ' s visited with them . 
And no matter how much time was passed , whether he
visited the week before , the month before , or the year
before , they remember the genuineness of
President Obama . 
They can feel as only young troops can -- the unending
concern he has for our men and women in uniform and
their families , and the boundless care with which he
makes decision that put them in harm ' s way . 
Over the course of eight years , President Obama ' s
level of dedication and mastery of his
responsibilities has been remarkable . 
It ' s difficult for anyone to imagine the toll of never
being able to unplug from their duties , and their
stakes for that long . 
All the while , being a gracious and inspiring
example , and all the while , also helping to raise
two daughters . 
It ' s impossible to imagine a man caring more , although
possibly two sons . 
Mr . President , for this and more , I ' ve been proud to
serve as your Secretary of Defense . 
And from me and the entire Defense Department , thank
you , in full measure , for your leadership , your
support , and your devotion to our country and its defense . 
May you begin to feel the great weight shift from
your shoulders . 
May you feel the warm wind of the nation ' s gratitude at
your back . 
May God bless you and your family , and may God continue
to bless the United States of America .  
( applause ) 
Ladies and gentlemen , President of the United
States , Barack Obama .  
( applause ) 
The President : Thank you so much . 
Thank you . 
Thank you . 
Please be seated . 
Well , good afternoon . 
Turns out , these are easier when you ' re talking about
somebody else . 
In moments like this , I think of all the times that
I stood before our men and women in uniform . 
Commissioning our newest officers , presiding over
promotions , presenting the Commander in Chief ' s trophy
to the best football team in the military -- I will let
you argue over that that ; I have never taken sides . 
Secretary Carter , I could not be more grateful for
your gracious words , but more importantly , for your
outstanding leadership across , as you noted , more
than three decades and nearly all of my presidency . 
You have always given me , Ash , your strategic counsel . 
You ' ve made sure that we were investing in innovation
for the long term , and a strong force for the future . 
As a physicist , Ash is also one of the few people who
actually understands how our dispense systems work , and I
know that our troops and their families are immensely
grateful for the compassion that you and Stephanie shown
them over the years . 
So , to you and your family , on behalf of all of us , 
thank you for your outstanding service .  
( applause ) 
General Dunford , we relied on you as commandant of the
Marine Corps , as our commander in Afghanistan , 
and now , as our nation ' s highest ranking
military officer . 
I thank you and General Selva and the entire joined
chiefs for the unvarnished military advice that you
always provided to you . 
For your dedication . 
For your professionalism . 
For your integrity . 
Because of you , because of this team , our Armed Forces
are more integrated and better prepared across
domains -- a truly joint force . 
Which is why , as a White Sox fan , I can overlook the fact
that you love the Red Sox . 
Moreover , on a personal note , outside of your
professional qualities , you are a good man . 
And I am grateful to have worked with you , and thank
Ellyn for allowing you to do this .  
( applause ) 
To members of Congress , Vice President Biden , who , along
with Jill , has known the love and the pride and the
sacrifice of a military family . 
To Deputy Secretary Work , service secretaries , 
distinguished guests , dedicated civilians from
across the Defense Department , my national
security team . 
Most of all , our men and women in uniform . 
I thank you for this honor , and for the warmth and
respect that you ' ve always shown me . 
The support that you ' ve shown Michelle and our
daughters during these past eight years . 
And so , although I recognize that the formalities require
me listening to praise directed , in large part to
me , I want to turn the tables . 
I am still Commander in Chief , and so I get to do
what I want to do , and I want to thank you . 
Of all the privileges of this office -- and there are
many , I will miss Air Force One . 
I will miss Marine One .  
( laughter ) 
But I can stand before you today and say that there has
been no greater privilege and no greater honor than
serving as the Commander in Chief of the greatest
military in the history of the world .  
( applause ) 
When I took office , I noted that presidents -- and those
of you in uniform , swear a similar oath : to protect and
defense this country , and the Constitution that
we cherish . 
And by stepping forward and volunteering , by raising
your right hand and taking that oath , each of you made
a solemn pledge . 
You committed yourself to a life of service , 
and of sacrifice . 
And I , in turn , made a promise to you , which , to
the best of my abilities , I tried to uphold every single
day since -- that I would only send you into harm ' s
way when it was absolutely necessary with the strategy
and well-defined goals , with the equipment and the
support that you needed to get the job done . 
Because that ' s what you rightfully expect , and that
is what you rightfully deserve . 
I made that pledge at a time when less than 1 percent of
Americans wear the uniform . 
Fewer Americans know someone who serves . 
And as a result , a lot of Americans don ' t see the
sacrifices you make on our behalf . 
But as Commander in Chief , I do . 
I ' ve seen it , when I look in the eyes of young cadets , 
knowing that my decisions could very well send them
into harm ' s way . 
I ' ve seen it when I visited the field , in Bagram and
Baghdad , far from your families , risking your lives
so that we can live ours safely , and in freedom . 
And so , you ' ve inspired me , and I ' ve been humbled by
you consistently . 
And I want every American to know what I know . 
Through year after year after year of continuous
military operations , you have earned your place among
the greatest generations . 
The list of accomplishments that Joe and Ash so
generously mentioned -- they ' re because of you . 
It ' s what I tell my staff . 
I ' m the front man . 
But you ' re the ones doing the work . 
Because of you , our alliances are stronger --
from Europe to the Asia Pacific . 
Because of you , we surged in Afghanistan -- trained
Afghan forces to defend their country , while
bringing most of our troops home . 
Today , our forces serve there on a more limited
mission because we must never again allow
Afghanistan to be used for a safe haven in attacks
against our nation . 
It ' s because of you , particularly our remarkable
Special Forces , that the core Al-Qaeda leadership
that attacked us on 9 / 11 has been decimated . 
Countless terrorist leaders , including Osama bin Laden , 
are gone . 
From south Asia to Africa , we have forged partnerships
to go after terrorists that threaten us . 
Because of you , we are leading the global coalition
against ISIL . 
These terrorists have lost about half of
their territory . 
They are losing their leaders . 
Towns and cities are being liberated . 
And I have no doubt this barbaric terrorist group
will be destroyed because of you . 
You ' ve shown that when it comes to fighting terrorism , 
we can be strong and we can be smart -- not by letting
our forces get dragged into sectarian conflicts and
civil wars , but with smart , sustainable , 
principle partnerships . 
That ' s how we brought most of our troops home -- from
nearly 180 , 000 troops in Iraq and Afghanistan , down
to 15 , 000 today . 
That ' s how , even as we ' ve suffered terrible attacks
here at home , from Boston to Orlando , no foreign
terrorist organization has successfully planned and
executed an attack on our homeland these past eight years . 
Because of you , the world is seeing the awesome reach of
American Armed Forces . 
In some of the first few weeks of my job , when Somali
pirates took Captain Phillips -- later on , when
they kidnapped Jessica Buchanan , it was you that
went in , and you that risked everything , and you that
brought these Americans home to their families . 
The world has seen your compassion -- the help you
deliver in times of crisis , from an earthquake in Haiti
to the tsunami in Japan . 
Think of Ebola , and the countless lives this Armed
Forces saved in West Africa . 
It was you that set up the architecture , and set the
example for the world ' s response . 
And one woman in West Africa said ,  " We thanked God first , 
and then we thanked America second for caring about us .  " 
That ' s the difference you made . 
You continue to make , in the lives of people around
the world . 
As you know , with service comes great sacrifice . 
And after 15 years of war , our wounded warriors bear
the scars , both seen and unseen . 
In my visits to their bedsides and rehab centers , 
I have been in awe , watching a wounded warrior grab his
walker and pull himself up , and through excruciating
step , take a step , and then another . 
Or hearing troops describe how they grappled with
post-traumatic stress , but summon the strength to ask
for help . 
As a military and as a nation , we have to keep
supporting our resilient and incredibly strong wounded
warriors as they learn to run and walk and heal . 
As they find new ways to keep serving our nation , 
they need to know that we still need your
incredible talents . 
You ' ve given so much to America , and I know you have
more to give . 
And then , you have not seen the depths of true love and
true patriotism until you ' ve been to Dover . 
When our troops receive our fallen heroes on their final
journey home . 
Until you have grieved with our gold star families , 
who ' ve given a piece of their heart to their heart
to our nation . 
A son or a daughter . 
A father or a mother . 
A husband or a wife . 
A brother or a sister . 
Every one , a patriot . 
Every single one of these American families deserves
the everlasting gratitude and support of our
entire nation . 
Today , after two major ground wars , our Armed
Forces have drawn down , and that is natural and
it is necessary . 
And after reckless budget cuts of sequester , we need
to keep improving the readiness and the training
and modernizing our forces . 
So , let me take this opportunity , while I still
have it , to appeal to our friends from Congress who
are here . 
We cannot go back to sequestration . 
There ' s a responsibility way forward , investing into
America ' s strengths , our national security , and our
economic security , investing in the reform and the
equipment and the support that our troops need , 
including the pay , and the benefits , and the quality of
life , and the education , and the jobs that our troops and
our veterans and all of your families deserve . 
But make no mistake . 
Even with the challenges of recent years -- and there
have been challenges , our allies and adversaries
alike , understand America ' s military remains , by far , 
the most capable fighting force on the face of the earth . 
Our Army , tested by years of combat , is the best trained
and best equipped planned force on the planet . 
Our Navy is the largest and most lethal in the world , on
track to surpass 300 ships . 
Our Air Force , with its precision and reach , 
is unmatched . 
Our Marine Corps is the world ' s only truly
expeditionary force . 
Our Coast Guard is the finest in the world . 
And we ' re also the best because this military has
come to welcome the talents of more of our fellow Americans . 
Service members can now serve the country they love
without hiding who they are , or who they love . 
All combat positions in our military are now open to women . 
And Joe Biden and I know that women are at least as
strong as men . 
We ' re stronger for it . 
It ' s one of the reasons that our military stands apart as
the most respected institution in our nation by
a mile . 
The American people -- 
( applause ) 
The American people look up to you and your devotion to
duty , and your integrity , and your sense of honor , and
your commitment to each other . 
One of my proudest achievements is that I have
been able to , I think , communicate through the
constant partisan haze , along with so many others , 
how special this institution is . 
And the esteem in which our military is held has held
steady and constant and high throughout my presidency , 
and I am very grateful for that because you remind us
that we are united as one team . 
At times of division , you ' ve shown what it means to
pull together . 
So , my days as your Commander-in-Chief are
coming to an end , and as I reflect on the challenges we
have faced together , and on those to come , I believe
that one of the greatest tasks before our Armed
Forces is to retain the high confidence that the American
people rightly place in you . 
It ' s a responsibility , not simply for those of you in
uniform , but for those who lead you . 
It ' s the responsibility of our entire nation . 
And so , we are called to remember core principles
that we must never hesitate to act , when necessary , to
defend our nation , but we must also never rush into
war because sending you into harm ' s way should be a last , 
and not first resort . 
It should be compelled by the needs of our security , 
and not our politics . 
We need to remember that we must not give in to the
false illusion of isolationism because in this
dangerous time , oceans alone will not protect us , and the
world still seeks and needs our leadership as the one
indispensable nation . 
We have to remember that our military has to be prepared
for the full spectrum of threats , conventional and
unconventional -- from 20th century style aggression to
21st century style cyber threats . 
And when we do go to war , we have to hold ourselves to
high standards , and do everything in our power to
prevent the loss of innocent life because that ' s what we
stand for . 
That ' s what we should stand for . 
We have to remember that as we meet the threats of our
times , we cannot sacrifice our values or our way of
life -- the rule of law and openness and tolerance that
defines us as Americans . 
That is our greatest strength , and makes us a
beacon to the world . 
We cannot sacrifice the very freedoms that we ' re
fighting for . 
And finally , in our democracy , the continued
strength of our all-volunteer force also
rests on something else . 
A strong bond of respect and trust between those in
uniform and the citizens that you protect and defend . 
At a time when too few Americans truly understand
the realities or sacrifices of military service . 
At a time when many political leaders have
not served . 
If some in the military begin to feel as though , 
somehow , they are apart from the largest society they
serve , those bonds can fray . 
As every generation learns anew , freedom is not free . 
And so , while less than 1 percent of Americans may be
fighting our wars , 100 percent of Americans can do
their parts , at the very least , to support you and
your families . 
Everybody can do something . 
Every business , every profession , every school , 
every community , every state , to reach out and to
give back , and to let you know that we care to help
make the lives of our troops and your families just a
little bit easier . 
Everybody can do something . 
And that ' s why Michelle and Joe Biden have mobilized
more Americans to honor and support you and your
families through joining forces . 
And that ' s why , even after we leave the White House , 
Michelle and I intend to keep on looking for ways to
help rally more of our fellow citizens to be there
for you , just like you ' ve always been there for us . 
So , we can ' t say it enough , and we can ' t show it enough . 
Thank you for your patriotism . 
Thank you for your professionalism . 
Thank you for your character , and representing
the very best of the American spirit . 
Our nation endures . 
We live free under the red , white , and blue because of
patriots like you . 
It has been a privilege of a lifetime to serve with you . 
I have learned much from you . 
I am a better man having worked with you . 
I ' m confident that the United States and our Armed
Forces will remain the greatest force for freedom
and security the world has ever known . 
God bless you and your families , and God bless the
United States of America .  
( applause )  
( inaudible dialogue )  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , the service songs
of the Armed Forces of the United States .  
( music playing ) 
Male Speaker : Ladies and gentlemen , this concludes
today ' s farewell tribute in honor of our Commander in
Chief , Barack Obama , the 44th President of the
United States . 
Please remain at your seats , and enjoy the United States
Army Band until the departure of the official
party from Conmy Hall . 