CTD arrests two ‘ target killers ’ 
March 01 , 2022
The Counter Terrorism Department ( CTD )  , Sindh , has announced the arrests of two men , including an activist of a political party , who were allegedly involved in target killings and other crimes . 

A CTD investigation team claimed arresting a man on Monday on a charge of his involvement in the Saudi Consulate grenade attack in 2011 . In a statement , the department said on Monday the team carried out a raid on a tip-off about the presence of suspects in the West Range area and apprehended Syed Zaki Kazmi after some resistance . 

During the interrogation , he said he was associated with the Mehdi group , and identified his accomplices as Kashif , Ibrar , Mohsin , Ali alias Bubloo , Sikandar , Rashid and Kashan . He further disclosed that in 2011 he along with his associates had lobbed a grenade at the Saudi Consulate . Later , he said , he said he remained involved in target killings . 

The statement said that in 2010 Kazmi along with his accomplices had targeted Imran in the Shara-e-Noor Jehan area . During the same year , they had targeted Dr Khursheed at his clinic in the Iqbal Market police remit . 

He was also allegedly involved in lobbing a grenade at a mosque situated in the Taimuria police remit , where several worshipers were injured . In a second encounter , CTD personnel arrested an alleged target killer associated with a political party . 

According to a statement , after an informant tipped off the CTD cell tasked with solving target killing cases about the presence of notorious hitmen in New Karachi , anti-terror cops conducted a raid and arrested Fazalur Rehman alias Fazlu after facing some resistance . 

During the interrogation , the suspect admitted that he was involved in a number of target killing cases and was the incharge of a team of hitmen in Lines Area . He was also a former unit incharge of the same area and had been involved in target killings from 2011 to 2015 . He was also allegedly involved in police encounters , attempts to murder and other crimes . 

In 2011 he along with his companions targeted Adeel , owner of Habib Sweets in Lines Area , after he refused to pay extortion money . In 2012 he along with his accomplices targeted MQM worker Salahuddin in Lines Area . During the same area , he had also targeted MQM councillor Babu in PECHS . 

Rehman also targeted Assistant Sub Inspector ( ASI ) Ali Mohsin Naqvi in 2012 when he was returning home after dropping his children at school . Also in 2012 , he along with his associates had attacked a police mobile in the Brigade police limits . 