Mr . Earnest : Good afternoon , everybody . 
Nice to see you all . 
I do not have any comments at the start , so we can go
straight to your questions . 
Darlene , would you like to start ? 
The Press : Yeah , thanks . 
Would you give us a brief oral readout of the
President ' s meeting on the Hill today with
congressional members ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' d be happy to . 
The Press : He was there for more than 90 minutes , 
so he must have had a lot to say . 
Mr . Earnest : He did have a lot to say . 
And you ' ve heard a little bit about his comments
from some of the Democratic leaders who
attended the meeting . 
The President began his remarks by expressing his
gratitude and pride for all of the progress that ' s
been made over the last eight years . 
And that gratitude was rooted not just in the
political success that Democrats have had in
advancing that agenda , but rooted in the tangible
positive difference that their efforts have made in
the lives of millions of Americans in communities
large and small across the country . 
And much of that work would not have been
possible had the President not been able to work
effectively with Democrats in Congress to get so much
of that done , given the unreasonable and
unprecedented obstruction that was erected by
congressional Republicans . 
The President continued saying that that should
fuel their efforts moving forward . 
And even though Democrats in Congress will not have
the kind of cooperative partner that they ' ve
enjoyed for the last eight years in the White House , 
they still have a set of values and priorities that
are worth fighting for . 
And the good news is that those are values and
priorities that most Americans agree with and
strongly support , and those are values and
priorities that lead to policies that make
people ' s lives better and make our country stronger . 
And the President expressed his -- the word
that he used was " envy " for the opportunity that
they have to keep up that fight . 
And the President expressed his confidence
in their ability not just to wage those fights with
passion , but he expressed confidence in their
ability to succeed -- again , both because the
majority of the American people agree with them , 
whether it ' s investing in the kinds of policies that
expand economic opportunity for
middle-class families , whether it is expanding
access to health care for every American making it
not just a privilege but a right , making sure that
there are consumer protections in place so
that every American can ' t be discriminated against
because they have a preexisting condition , and
they can ' t be subject to lifetime caps that allow
them to no longer benefit from insurance coverage if
someone in their family gets sick . 
These are the kinds of values and priorities that
Democrats have long fought for , and these are the
values and priorities that most Americans agree with . 
So that was essentially the President ' s opening
statement , and then he took questions
from a substantial number
of House and Senate Democrats . 
And most of the questions centered on the proximate
fight on Capitol Hill , which is the Republican
attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act , but
the President had an opportunity to touch on
some other areas , as well . 
And the President really enjoyed the opportunity to
go up there , and was warmly received , which he
has been every time by Democrats on Capitol Hill , 
even when he ' s gone up there to address
differences that they have . 
But I got to tell you , in this case the President
has gone to -- in the past , and you all have
covered times when the President has traveled to
Capitol Hill to try to bridge differences with
Democrats on Capitol Hill -- that was not
the case this time . 
This time the President was there to affirm his
support for the agenda that Democrats in Congress
are fighting for . 
And that unanimity will be a source of strength for
Democrats in the years ahead . 
And the President encouraged them to draw on
it as they continue to fight for the values that
they ' ve been fighting for not just the last eight
years , but for most of the people in the room they ' ve
been fighting for for their entire career
in public service . 
The Press : And you mentioned other areas . 
What other issues did they
talk about besides health care ? 
Mr . Earnest : There were a range of legislative
issues that I think you would expect -- criminal
justice reform , immigration reform , 
infrastructure -- some of the other issues that
Democrats are likely to be working on over the
next couple of years . 
The Press : To go back to the question of what he
wants Democrats to do when it comes to health care , 
once the law is repealed , would he like Democrats to
negotiate with Republicans
to come up with a replacement ? 
Or would he like them to refuse to negotiate and
just leave Republicans to be the ones to come up
with a replacement on their own , since they
didn ' t vote for it in the first place and they ' re
the ones that are anxious to repeal it ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , let me start out by answering
your question by making a little news and saying
that I agree with Congressman Rand Paul --
or Senator Rand Paul -- I just gave him a demotion
-- Senator Rand Paul on something . 
Senator Rand Paul wrote an op-ed in which he
indicated that the people who repeal the Affordable
Care Act are going to assume the blame for the
chaos that ensues . 
That ' s true . 
And that ' s not a direct quote from his op-ed , but
I think that is a faithful
representation of what he wrote . 
And I do think that ' s an illustration of something
you ' ve heard the President talk about quite a bit
since November 9th , which is that there ' s a
difference between delivering a poll-tested , 
sound bite-packaged promise on the campaign
trail , and actually delivering on that promise
once you assume the responsibility to govern
the greatest country in the world . 
And there is no better example than the
Republicans who -- and I ' m not just talking about the
President-elect here , I ' m talking about Republicans
in states all across the country who have spent
years excoriating the Affordable Care Act and
vowing to do everything that
they possibly can to repeal it . 
The time has now come for them to consider how
they ' re going to make good on that promise . 
Republicans are in charge of the
House of Representatives . 
Republicans are in charge
of the United States Senate . 
And starting on January 20th , Republicans will be
in charge of the White House . 
And they ' re going to have to decide how to make good
on that promise to repeal and replace . 
The challenge is , is that there are a lot of people
in the great state -- the Commonwealth of Kentucky
who are strong supporters of Senator Rand Paul , 
whose livelihood and , in some cases , life depends
on the health care they receive from Obamacare , 
whether that ' s expanded Medicaid or insurance that
they ' ve purchased in the marketplace run by the
Commonwealth of Kentucky . 
So you could understand why Rand Paul would have
some anxiety about this plan -- about this
strategy that ' s put forward by Republicans , 
and the anxiety is palpable . 
One of the most articulate Republicans on Capitol
Hill is the Speaker of the House , and he did a news
conference today where he was unable to explain why
Republicans have not put
forward their replacement plan . 
He ' s a smart guy , he ' s
spent years thinking about this . 
He ' s smart when it comes to politics , he ' s smart
when it comes to policy . 
We ' ve got profound differences and he ' s got a
different point of view , but there ' s nobody that
questions his intellect . 
And even he can ' t articulate exactly why
they aren ' t putting
forward a replacement plan . 
That does not bode well for Republicans making
good on this promise . 
But we ' ll see . 
One other reason , and this is something that the
President did discuss with Democrats on Capitol Hill , 
and one of the reasons that this is particularly
hard for Republicans , including Republicans who
represent states like West Virginia and Kentucky , 
Tennessee -- not typically states that you consider
as bastions of Obama supporters -- but these
are states that have many communities that have been
ravaged by the opioid epidemic . 
Expanded Medicaid and health insurance that
people purchase through Obamacare marketplaces
offer support and service and treatment to people
who are being ravaged -- or to people who are
addicted to opioids and
are trying to beat that addiction . 
And we know that this is an issue that
Republicans care about . 
Republicans , at the end of last year , were bragging
about a piece of government spending that
they had passed to increase support for
treatment for people
who are fighting opioid addiction . 
The worst way to fight the opioid crisis is to strip
away health care from
millions of Americans who rely on it . 
A similar argument could
be made about cancer research . 
That was also included in the package that
Republicans were bragging about passing at the
end of last year . 
What good is it to invest billions of dollars in
cancer research if you ' re going to prevent millions
of Americans from being able to get a
check-up once a year ? 
We don ' t need to do a bunch of intensive
academic research in cancer to understand what
kinds of screenings are important and how
important those screenings are , particularly for
people of a certain age , a certain demographic , and a
certain medical condition . 
So these are the kinds of complexities that
Republicans are now responsible for because
they ' re responsible for governing a country of 300
million people . 
And so to go back to your more direct question --
and I think this is the other element of the
answer that the President offered to Democrats -- is
something that you ' ve heard him say before -- in
fact , since the day that he signed the Affordable
Care Act into law -- which is the President believes
that the country would benefit from Democrats and
Republicans on Capitol Hill actually having a
conversation about ideas for strengthening and
improving the Affordable Care Act . 
The President has never made the argument that the
Affordable Care Act is perfect . 
It ' s done a whole lot of good for people , it saved
lives , but it could be improved . 
But that ' s never the offer
that Republicans have put forward . 
Democrats have put it forward . 
The President himself has put forward ideas for how
to strengthen and improve the program , but there ' s
never been a willingness
on the part of Republicans to do that . 
If Republicans changed their tune , recognizing
these complexities , and say , all right , Democrats , 
we acknowledge that tearing this thing down is
not going to be good for the country and is a
little more politically complicated than we
anticipated , but you guys got to admit that there
are some things that we can do to improve this
proposal , that ' s a conversation of an entire
different color . 
And that is a conversation that the President
encouraged Democrats to consider engaging
Republicans on , but that would require a different
approach on the part of Republicans , but it ' s a
change in approach that
President Obama would welcome . 
You ' d have to talk to Democrats on Capitol Hill
what their reaction to that would be . 
I suspect they would say it depends , but I think
even if they say it depends , that does
indicate that they ' re open to it . Ayesha . 
The Press : You talked about the -- going back to
the health care meeting -- you talked about the
importance of Democrats sticking together . 
At least one Democrat Senator , Joe Manchin , 
didn ' t attend the meeting . 
He felt like -- although he also criticized Vice
President-elect Pence for having his meeting , but he
did say that to have President Obama come that
it was kind of like a poison pill that is going
to hurt bipartisanship . 
I mean , at this point , is there any consideration
that having the President come out so forcefully
saying that Democrats need to do this or do that
regarding health care , that it does make this a
more partisan issue ? 
And then also , when you ' re talking about strategies , 
if the Republicans are unwilling to work with the
Democrats , what exactly does the President
envision them doing ? 
Should they take some of the Republican tactics and
begin -- I don ' t know if it would be possible --
like shutting down government or doing things
like that to get these issues -- to stop the
repeal of Obamacare ? 
Like what specifically can they do if Republicans
don ' t want to work with them ? 
Mr . Earnest : Ayesha , I think a presidential
critic would have to engage in remarkable
rhetorical contortions to try to make the case that
the President is the one who had made health care
a partisan issue . 
When you consider that the President hosted a meeting
at the Blair House with Democratic and Republican
leaders in Congress trying to get them to come
together around some basic principles of health care
reform , when you consider that the essence of the
Affordable Care Act was cooked up by the Heritage
Foundation and implemented successfully by a
Republican governor in Massachusetts who , oh , by
the way , happened to be the Republican nominee for
President in 2012 -- that ' s been the approach
that the President has taken . 
Republicans have voted 50 times strictly along party
lines to try to repeal the bill . 
So I think it ' s hard for anybody to suggest --
seriously , at least -- that somehow the President
has made this a partisan issue . 
In fact , I just indicated the President is
continuing not just willingness but desire to
see Democrats and Republicans come together
around some ideas to strengthen the bill . 
With regard to Democratic unity , I can ' t speak to
Senator Manchin ' s schedule , but I ' ve heard
him speak about why repealing Obamacare would
be a terrible idea for hundreds of thousands of
people in the state that he represents in the
United States Senate . 
He agrees with the President and the
Democrats in Congress , and is showing the same kind
of concern that even people like Rand Paul are
showing about the impact of repealing the bill . 
So , again , you ' ll have to ask -- I guess I would say
it this way : I would welcome the standard of
Democratic unity being whether or not Senator
Manchin agrees about the repeal
of the Affordable Care Act . 
I think that he would say what the President has
said , which is that it can be improved , Democrats and
Republicans should work together to improve it , 
but the idea of repealing it would be bad for the
state and would have bad consequences for people
all across the country . 
The Press : And when it comes to specific
strategies , would the President support
Democrats kind of shutting things down , or like what
type of specific strategies could they take
on if the Republicans don ' t --
Mr . Earnest : Look , the President acknowledged in his
meeting with the legislators that he ' s not
the one who is the expert in legislative mechanics , 
so he didn ' t have any specific tactical advice
for Democrats up there . 
But the President believes that these are principles
that are worth fighting for ; that health care is
not a privilege -- access to quality , affordable
health care is not a privilege , it ' s a right ; 
that the policies that limit the growth in health
care costs for workers , for families , for business
owners , and for the United States government is a
good thing and something that should be protected ; 
that people shouldn ' t be discriminated against
because they have preexisting conditions ; 
that women shouldn ' t be charged more by the
insurance company just because they ' re women ; 
people shouldn ' t have to worry about having to
declare bankruptcy just because somebody in their
family gets sick . 
Those are principles that are worth fighting for . 
And there were a lot of nodding heads when the
President made that point . Michelle . 
The Press : You were asked about should Democrats
work with Republicans , and you mentioned it would
require a different tactic . 
So are you saying that if the tactic remains repeal , 
then Democrats should not work on negotiating that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Repealing the Affordable Care Act would
have devastating consequences for people
all across the country , and it ' s not something
that Democrats support , nor should they . 
And we ' re seeing that a lot of Republicans are
queasy about supporting it -- and they should be --
because of the obvious , tangible , direct
consequences that that will have on the lives of
millions of people across the country . 
Twenty-two million people are going to lose their
health insurance if the
Affordable Care Act is repealed . 
It ' s going to rip a hole in the deficit -- in the
federal budget , and the deficit will go up if the
Affordable Care Act is repealed . 
That ' s not just my conclusion . 
You can ask the CBO about that . 
The implementation of the Affordable Care Act
strengthened the Medicare trust fund and extended
the life of the trust fund by 11 years . 
Repealing the Affordable Care Act would roll
back that progress . 
And we ' ve seen , since the Affordable Care Act went
into effect , the slowest growth in health care
costs in our nation ' s history . 
If Republicans want to go back to a day in which
health care costs for everybody are
skyrocketing , they can do that , but that ' s going to
be bad for the economy and will create the kind of
chaos that the American people will hold
them accountable for . 
The Press : You talked about Democrats , that
they ' d be willing to work with Republicans to
improve Obamacare , but only if it ' s not repealed . 
Is that right ? 
Is that what you ' re saying ? 
Mr . Earnest : Repealing the Affordable Care Act is
not an improvement . 
Looking for ways to design an increase in subsidies
so that working families can get even more
affordable access to health care that ' s
available for purchase in the marketplace -- the
President thinks that ' s a pretty good idea . 
And that is -- subsidies
is another word for tax cuts . 
Ordinarily , you would think that would be
something that Republicans would be able to support
-- and not just able to support , enthused
about supporting . 
But that ' s not the reaction that we ' ve
seen from them . 
That ' s just one idea that the President has put
forward , but it ' s the kind of idea that ' s rooted in
trying to find compromise that the President has
been committed to since the day that he signed the
Affordable Care Act into law . 
The Press : And you talked about Republican promises
to repeal it , and now they ' re going to be --
they ' re going to have to be accountable
for what comes next . 
Today , Steve Scalise said that the President himself
made promises that if you like your health care , you
can keep it , and that
he should actually be apologizing . 
What ' s your response to that ? 
Mr . Earnest : My response is simply that the
President ' s record on the Affordable Care Act
speaks for itself . 
And when the President-elect put
forward his nominee to be the Secretary of Health
and Human Services , Congressman Tom Price , I
predicted that at some point in his tenure as the
Secretary of Health and Human Services he will
stand at this podium and be putting forward a plan
that he believes is the right one for the country . 
And I said at the time that it should be measured
against the progress that President Obama has made
in reforming our health care system . 
And I feel strongly about that . 
And whether that ' s expanding access for
health care so that 20 million Americans have
access to health care , reducing the uninsured
rate in this country to all-time lows , limiting
the growth in health care costs , preventing people
from being discriminated against because they have
a preexisting condition , preventing people from
having to declare bankruptcy because
somebody in their family gets sick , preventing
women from being charged more for their health
insurance by their insurance company just
because they get sick , extending the life of the
Medicare trust fund , reducing the deficit by $3
trillion over 20 years -- that ' s the standard that
President Obama has set . 
That is the way that the American people can and
should judge the President ' s record when it
comes to health care reform . 
And it ' s a record that the President is enormously
proud of , not just because of the politics , but
because of the impact that it ' s had on the lives of
millions of people all across the country . 
That ' s what he came into office promising to do . 
That ' s what he campaigned on nine years ago in 2008
when he was crisscrossing the country , was taking on
the kinds of tough challenges that Washington
had been ignoring for too long . 
And Democratic and Republican Presidents for
100 years had tried , or at least considered trying to
take on the notion of health care reform . 
President Obama took it on and succeeded in getting
it done , and he ' s enormously proud of that . 
The Press : He apparently did talk about some
tactics , at least generally , saying that
Democrats should adopt some of the things that
the Tea Party did in opposing Obamacare and
they should go out to town
halls and things like that . 
Can you expand on that ? 
I mean , what do you think that would accomplish ? 
And does the President intend to keep working on
this , even after he leaves office ? 
Mr . Earnest : The President was making the point that
Democrats need to place a priority on telling the
story of people who benefitted from the law . 
And there are lots of those stories to tell --
not just the 20 million Americans who got health
insurance because of the Affordable Care Act that
didn ' t have it before , but the millions more
Americans who are not being discriminated
against because they have a preexisting condition , 
who are able to keep their child on their health
insurance until age 26 , who are not being charged
more from their insurance company just because
they ' re a woman . 
These are the kinds of stories that we can tell . 
Certainly the expansion of Medicaid has saved
countless lives across the country . 
And the President does believe that it would be
an effective tactic , as this debate is waged
inside the halls of Congress , to communicate
with the American public
about the stakes of this debate . 
And the President feels strongly that this is a
debate that Democrats can win because of the impact
that repealing the law , as Republicans are vowing to
do , would have on the lives of people in
communities all across the country . 
And that is something that shouldn ' t just steel the
spine of Democratic members of Congress ; it ' s
going to -- as I think is evident from Senator
Paul ' s op-ed , it ' s going leave a lot of
Republicans quite uneasy . 
The Press : So are we going to keep hearing from
President Obama on this after he leaves ? 
Mr . Earnest : Look , the President has been clear
about his post-White House plans . 
He ' s going to take a vacation , and he expects
to be in a position that he can observe and follow
the tradition that previous Presidents have
shown , which is the country deserves an
incoming President with an opportunity to go and lead
the country in the direction that he believes
is right , and this is a debate that will continue . 
And the President also feels strongly that he ' s
been on the national stage for more than eight years
if you consider his national campaign to win
the Oval Office . 
It ' s time for the fresh blood . 
It ' s time for the next generation of Democrats , 
and even some Republicans who share his values , to
speak up and speak out . 
It ' s time for them to get the spotlight . 
It ' s time for them to have an opportunity to
make that argument . 
And the President believes
that ' s important for the country . 
It also ends up being important for the
Democratic Party in terms of making sure that the
next generation of Democrats is ready to take
up the mantle . Jordan . 
The Press : I just want to follow up on that , because
Congressman Cummings told a group of reporters after
the meeting that the President made it " very
clear that as a citizen he ' s going to lend his
voice to this fight .  " So that seems to contradict a
little bit what you said . 
So where ' s the gulf there ? 
And does he in some ways plan to speak out about
this health care issue after he leaves office ? 
Mr . Earnest : Look , the President made clear his
solidarity with congressional Democrats , 
and there ' s no doubt about
that among anybody in the room . 
But , yes , being a citizen is different than being
the President of the United States or being an
elected member of Congress . 
And being a former President does necessarily
give you a larger platform , but the
President is hopeful that he ' ll be able to observe
the kinds of standards that previous Presidents
have in giving the next
President the opportunity to succeed . 
But look , the President has been pretty blunt
about his approach here . 
He ' s talked a lot , even while in office , about how
important the office of citizen is both in terms
of educating yourself about the issues and
engaging in a democratic process . 
The President will certainly do that . 
And the President will be interested in supporting
Democrats in Congress . 
He stands with them in solidarity . 
But there are some limits to what former Presidents
typically do once
they leave office . Julianna . 
The Press : Thanks . 
Just to clarify on that , it sounds like on the one
hand you ' re saying he ' s resigned to sitting on the
sidelines and watching Republicans dismantle the
Affordable Care Act , and the same time there ' s the
community organizer in him that would be trying to
lend a hand to the effort
to salvage elements of the law . 
So where does that exactly leave him ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen ,  " resigned " is not at all
the word that I would use . 
I think it was evident from the Democrats in the
room that the President feels quite passionate
about all of these issues . 
And the President is confident that the kind of
argument that Democrats can put forward
is a winning one . 
So the President continues to be very confident , 
particularly on this issue of the Affordable Care
Act , in the ability of Democrats to make the kind
of argument that ' s going to resonate deeply with
the American people . 
And there ' s already some evidence that Republicans
are uneasy about this , both as -- and so the two
pieces of evidence that I cited today are the op-ed
from Senator Paul and the inability of one of the
most articulate Republicans on Capitol
Hill to explain why Republicans don ' t have
their own replacement plan to put forward , even
though he ' s the guy who ' s responsible for putting
that plan forward . 
So I think that is an indication that
Republicans are already starting to reckon with
the challenge of keeping this promise . 
At the same time , the President acknowledges
that he ' s leaving the national stage . 
That ' s what the Constitution requires . 
That ' s certainly consistent with his wife ' s
preferences . 
And it ' s going to be time for somebody else to pick
up the mantle . 
Does that mean that the President is any less
committed to these issues than he was before ? 
Of course not . 
But it does mean that the President expects to be in
a position that he can observe the kinds of
customs and courtesy , frankly , that was afforded
to him by his predecessor . 
Now , the President has also been clear , and the
President did discuss this in the meeting as well , 
that he ' s hopeful that this won ' t happen . 
But if there are basic , fundamental American
values that are undermined by a specific policy
proposal , then he may feel the need to speak out . 
But it is his hope , and I would say even his
expectation , that that ' s not something that
he will have to do . 
And I think the other thing I want to point out
here -- and I think this is relevant to the entire
context -- what I ' m trying to lay out and describe to
you is the President ' s plans for the first year
or two that he ' s out of office . 
And President Obama is obviously leaving this
office at a young age -- he ' s just 55 -- and I
think that there ' s -- he still has a lot of
ambition and a lot more that he would like to do . 
Most of it he hopes he will be able to do behind
the scenes in terms of continuing to stay true to
his roots as a community organizer , and motivating
and inspiring and even offering training to
people who feel called in a similar direction . 
He wants to make sure that public servants , or people
who aspire to public office are people who can
get trained in the
fundamentals of community organizing . 
He wants to make sure that young people around the
world are exposed to the kinds of values and
principles and norms and customs and traditions of
the United States when it comes to democracy and
citizen engagement and respect for all people , 
and even entrepreneurship . 
These are things that the President has talked about
as a President and something that he hopes to
continue in his post-presidency . 
So I don ' t want to leave you with the impression
that there ' s still not a lot of important work for
former President Obama to be engaged in -- there is . 
He recognizes that . 
And he ' s got a long to-do list . 
But that is different than being engaged in the same
back-and-forth that he ' s responsible for engaging
in as President . 
The Press : So you ' re saying he has not closed
the door to , let ' s say , over the next six months
to a year , if he sees the direction of the
Affordable Care Act , or whatever it would be
replaced with , moving in a way that he is not
comfortable with , that you said he feels like it
doesn ' t hold up to certain American values , that he
would lend his voice in some way or another
to that debate ? 
Mr . Earnest : Look , I think the President ' s hope and
expectation is that he will be able to allow
others to take up this mantle -- with his strong
support -- to carry this fight , and to do so
publicly and engage in the back-and-forth . 
And that ' s the expectation that he has and that ' s
what he intends to pursue . 
And I think that is the
best description of his plans . 
And , yes , I acknowledge that that stops short of
entirely ruling out any sort of contingency that
may prompt him to speak out publicly . 
And I ' m being intentional about that . 
But I want to be clear that the President does
not envision routine , regular engagement on
these issues publicly . 
That ' s the responsibility of Democrats in Congress ; 
it ' s the responsibility
of the next generation of Democrats . 
And , look , it ' s a remarkable opportunity . 
So I go back to the way the President began his
remarks to Democrats today . 
They ' re on the playing field fighting for the
issues and priorities and values that this party and
this country has long stood for . 
And there ' s nobility in that . 
And he admires those who are willing to do it . 
He is extraordinarily proud of the way that they
are choosing to fight for those values and those
priorities , and he will
stand with them as they do it . 
But ultimately it ' s a
fight that they will lead . Ron . 
The Press : Specifically , the Republicans talk about
the soaring premiums and triple-digit increases in
places , and high deductibles that make the
policies in some cases somewhat useless
because of these costs . 
Now , I think your argument has been that subsidies
and tax credits sort of illuminate that argument . 
What ' s the truth here as far as you ' re concerned ? 
Because again , there have been premium increases . 
There are high deductibles . 
And the other one they argue about is
choice being limited . 
So what are your numbers about premiums and
deductibles specifically ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , obviously , this is the
kind of debate that we welcome and one that I
think leaves Republicans uneasy , because -- and let
me explain to you why . 
When we ' re talking about premium increases , it ' s
important to note that the vast majority of Americans
get their health insurance through their employer , 
and premium increases -- The Press : Right . 
3 . 8 percent or something . 
Mr . Earnest : Just 3 . 4 percent . 
The Press : Sorry . 
Mr . Earnest : That ' s okay , I ' ve got the numbers in
front of me ; I ' ve got an advantage . 
So it ' s important that the vast majority of Americans
have benefitted from the law because we know that
the Affordable Care Act has had a positive impact
in keeping the growth in those health care costs
low for the vast majority of Americans . 
So there is a smaller group of Americans that
doesn ' t get health
insurance through their employer . 
And before the Affordable Care Act went into effect , 
these were people who didn ' t have access to
health care , or the only health care they had
access to was health care that was riddled with
loopholes that didn ' t actually provide the
kind of protections the
insurance companies promised . 
So what the Affordable Care Act did is it
essentially established a marketplace and said this
is the benchmark for policies that can
be sold publicly . 
So people had access to quality health care . 
Now , the question is you ' ve got that benchmark
and so there ' s quality health care that ' s
available for people who don ' t get health insurance
through their employer
-- how do we make it affordable . 
And the way that we make it affordable through the
Affordable Care Act -- the aptly named Affordable
Care Act -- is that more than 70 percent of the
people who go shopping at that marketplace of
quality plans will get assistance , subsidies , 
from the federal government that will allow
them to purchase those
plans for less than $100 a month . 
That ' s a good deal . 
That ' s about the cost of a cellphone . 
It ' s not free , but it ' s a good deal . 
And it does give them access to health care that
they didn ' t previously have . 
The question is , for the three in ten , or less than
three in ten Americans who don ' t get health insurance
through their employer -- so this is a minority of
the minority -- there has been a lot of volatility
in some markets with health insurance . 
And so the question is , what do we do
for those people ? 
The President has put forward some ideas . 
One of the ideas that he ' s put forward is to expand
subsidies and make it easier for more people to
get access to subsidies , or higher subsidies , so
that more people can get access to that affordable
health insurance . 
Another idea that the President had put forward is --
The Press : But that essentially raises the
numbers , right ? 
The government cost raises -- does it not ? 
Mr . Earnest : I potentially could , but
we ' d be happy to --
The Press : And that ' s the argument against this , 
that it ' s more government
involvement , that it costs more . 
Mr . Earnest : Mor government involvement
only to the extent that it is providing tax credits
to Americans to make it easier for them to choose
which health insurance they would like to buy . 
So I don ' t buy the argument that it is more
government involvement . 
I do understand the argument that it is more
government spending . 
But it ' s a paltry increase when you consider that
over the next two decades the Affordable Care Act is
going to reduce the deficit by $3 trillion . 
So the increase in subsidies and the cost of
doing so is a drop in the bucket when you consider
the long-term deficit decrease associated with
the Affordable Care Act . 
The Press : So why , if you take yourself away from
this for a minute -- not too far away but -- 
( laughter ) --
Mr . Earnest : Sometimes I would like to .  
( Laughter .  ) 
The Press : You will soon . 
And you just said something about how the
President feels very confident that they have
an argument that will resonate with
the American people . 
Well , it didn ' t in the election clearly . 
And you would say that this was , in many ways , 
the defining and animating issue for the
Republicans -- repeal . 
How does the President explain that , 
this distance ? 
Mr . Earnest : Because there is a difference between
campaigning and governing . 
The Press : No , no , no , I get that --
Mr . Earnest : Right ? 
So it is easy to go and stand on the campaign
trail and make a bunch of promises about repealing
and replacing the Affordable Care Act . 
It ' s another thing altogether to come into
office and be responsible for the 22 million people
who will lose health insurance if you do that . 
The Press : So you ' re saying it ' s just a
failure of messaging ? 
This is the Democrats ' and the President ' s , perhaps , 
failure to show up every place , as he says , and go
to Iowa a hundred times and all ? 
I mean , is that -- because
you still argue on the merits . 
You think if you look at the numbers that this
argument about premium increases and deductible
increases , it ' s just not there , it ' s just not true . 
Mr . Earnest : I think the argument is , simply , that
Republicans are the ones who now bear the burden of
explaining how the American people are going
to benefit from their ideas . 
And yes , Democrats have
shown how difficult that is . 
But we ' ve been willing to pay that political price
to make a difference in the lives of millions of
Americans across the country , and we ' ve got a
good argument to make because we ' re right
on the merits . 
So not only does the complexity make it harder
for Republicans to actually explain what
impact their policies would have . 
There ' s also the rather inconvenient fact that the
Republicans ideas are actually bad for people . 
They ' re bad for the economy . 
They ' re bad for small businesses who are trying
to pay for insurance for their employees . 
They ' re bad for people who have to purchase their
insurance through the market . 
They ' re bad for people who have to purchase their
insurance , or get their
insurance through their employer . 
They ' re bad for the U . S . 
government that will see the deficit skyrocket if
Republicans follow through on their plan to replace
the Affordable Care Act . 
So as complicated as it ' s been for Democrats to make
a compelling case about the positive impact of our
plan , it ' s going to be even more complicated for
Republicans , not just because they have to delve
into the complexity , but
because they have bad ideas . 
And trying to convince people , in the space of
that complexity , that their bad ideas are
actually good is going to
make it even harder for them . 
And when you consider how wrapped around the axle
they are on day one of the new Congress , I think that
would explain some of the
President ' s confidence . Steven . 
The Press : Josh , since you ' ve been to the podium , 
the Senate has passed the budget resolution . 
Senator Paul voted against it , but there were 51 votes --
Mr . Earnest : Boy , that is a pretty
narrow margin , isn ' t it ? 
The Press : So what do you make of it ? 
Mr . Earnest : Yeah , well , I make of that -- well , 
first of all , the bill they passed today , this
suggestion to instruct Congress -- you know the
lingo better than I do ; I haven ' t worked
on Capitol Hill . 
But essentially , this is the first step
in that process . 
The actual vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act is
one that ' s coming . 
And I anticipate a vigorous debate between
now and then , particularly when you consider that
when -- some of colleagues here in the White House
have had a little more experience working on
Senate campaigns than I do -- but it sounds like 51
Republican senators may have cast the deciding
vote to take away health care from 22
million Americans . 
They may have cast the deciding vote to blow a
hole in the deficit . 
They may have cast a deciding vote to shorten
the lifespan of Medicare and to weaken it by a
decade or more . 
They may have cast the deciding vote to take away
protections that prevent people from being
discriminated against because they have
preexisting conditions . 
You see where I ' m going here . 
And Senator Rand Paul looks like he ' s eager to
avoid being on receiving end of those critiques . 
And he ' s not a particularly vulnerable
incumbent -- at least yet . 
We ' ll see . 
Thank you for the opportunity to
answer the question . Jennifer . 
Nice to see you . 
Welcome to the White House . 
The Press : Thanks . 
So Julian Assange from WikiLeaks -- what ' s the
administration ' s current assessment on him ? 
Should he be considered as credible or should he be
considered a criminal or a fugitive . 
What ' s the assessment ? 
Mr . Earnest : The assessment I think that I
can share is the assessment that was put
forward by the intelligence community --
all 17 agencies of the intelligence community --
on October 7th , 2016 . 
And it said in part this -- I ' m just going to
directly quote from them :  " The recent disclosures of
alleged hacked emails on sites like DCLeaks . com and
WikiLeaks , and by the Guccifer 2 . 0 online
persona , are consistent with the methods and
motivations of Russian-directed efforts . 
Mr . Assange , of course , is famously in charge
of WikiLeaks . 
So I think that ' s a pretty definitive statement from
the 17 different agencies of the United States
government that deal in intelligence . 
And this is an assessment that they put out back in
October before the election . Lalit . 
The Press : Thank you , Josh . 
I wanted to ask you a question , basically a
follow-up on the retweet done by the U . S . 
Ambassador to India , Richard Verma . 
In the retweet , he has tweeted a two-and-a-half
minute video of three ( inaudible ) in Mumbai , and 
( inaudible ) offering the job of a class teacher to
President Obama after he retires on January 20th . 
Has the President seen it ? 
Is he planning to take up that offer ? 
Mr . Earnest : Lalit , I have to admit I have not seen
the retweet , but why don ' t we take a look at it and
we ' ll get back to you with an answer , okay ? 
The Press : And when the President hands over his
mantle to Trump on January 20th , what are the things
he would like Mr . Trump to do when he becomes the
President on the
front of India-U . S . relationship ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , the President has -- President
Obama has invested deeply in strengthening the
relationship between the United States and the
world ' s largest democracy in India . 
And the President believes that there are profound
national security , diplomatic and economic
benefits for strengthening those ties . 
So I haven ' t heard the incoming President
articulate what ideas he has for the relationship
between the United States and India , but President
Obama has certainly found that relationship one
that ' s worth investing in . 
And he certainly is optimistic about the
ability to strengthen the United States economically
and to enhance our influence around the globe
by strengthening our relationship with India . Kevin . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
Following the Senate vote there , on the Donald Trump
tweet about the delay in the intel briefing until
Friday , is that an accurate description of how --
Mr . Earnest : It ' s not . 
The Press : Can you sort of explain that process , and
I don ' t know if you can explain why he said
what he said . 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t . 
And fortunately , that ' s not my job . 
What I can tell you is that the intelligence
community has been working at the direction of the
President to put together a report that reflects
their consensus view about malicious cyber activity
in the context of the 2016 , 2012 , and 2008
presidential elections . 
This is only a month or so ago that the President
directed the intelligence community to work on this
report , and he asked them to produce this report
before he leaves office on January 20th . 
I can tell you that the intelligence community
will make good on meeting that deadline with some
time to spare . 
And based on what I ' ve been told by the
intelligence community , they have not encountered
any delays in producing that report . 
One of the other notable things is that the
President didn ' t just -- in addition to directing
them to compile the report , the President
directed the intelligence community to both brief
the contents of the report to relevant members of
Congress on Capitol Hill and to the President-elect
and his team to make sure that they understood
exactly how serious this is . 
So that ' s something that the President directed the
intelligence community to do , and I ' m confident that
they ' ll make good on that promise as well . 
I think the real question that looms is a question
that ' s been raised by some of the public comments or
tweets from the President-elect , which is
just simply , who are you going to believe ? 
On the one hand , you ' ve got the Russians and the
aforementioned Mr . Assange . 
On the other side , you ' ve got the 17 intelligence
agencies of the United States government , outside
cyber experts that have taken a look at this
situation , you ' ve got Democrats on Capitol Hill , 
you ' ve got Republicans on Capitol Hill , and at least
one adviser to Mr . Trump expressing concern about
Russia ' s malicious activity in cyberspace in
the context of the election . 
So there ' s a pretty stark line that ' s been drawn , 
and the President-elect will have to determine who
he ' s going to believe . 
And the decision that he makes about that I think
will have long-term consequences for the way
he chooses to govern the country . 
The Press : How confident are you that that report
will make its way to the hands of lawmakers before
the end of this week ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t have a timeframe to set on it , 
but I can tell you -- I can confirm that the
intelligence community will meet their deadline
of January 20th with ample time to spare . 
The Press : Is it fair to say that the President ' s
trip to the Hill today was also , in part , to preserve
and protect his legacy , not just the Affordable
Care Act but also to encourage Democrats to
fight for the many pieces of legislation , executive
orders -- to really uphold his vision and their
vision , presumably , moving forward ? 
Is it fair to characterize his trip to the Hill
in that way ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think the way that I would
characterize the President ' s trip to the
Hill is it was an opportunity to say thank
you to Democrats in Congress who have been
fighting shoulder-to-shoulder with
him to move the country in a direction that ' s more
fair , that ' s more just , that ' s more prosperous , 
and that ' s more safe . 
And over the last eight years , they ' ve made remarkable
progress in doing that . 
And the President has spoken on many occasions
about how much of that progress would not have
been possible without the tenacity and courage and
passion and commitment of Democrats in Congress . 
And so he wanted to say thank you , not just in
terms of how appreciative he is for their
cooperation and their collegiality , but also to
thank them on behalf of the country for the
progress that we have made . 
But he also went up there to encourage them , and to
motivate them , and to inspire them that even as
he leaves and even as somebody who has not
committed to working with Democrats on Capitol Hill
enters the White House , that Democrats have a set
of values and an agenda that ' s worth fighting for . 
And Democrats have the benefit , the advantage of
being strongly unified around that agenda and
around those values , and that will serve them very
well because Republicans aren ' t . 
Republicans on Capitol Hill aren ' t unified , and
they don ' t appear to be particularly unified when
it comes to a bunch of priorities that are being
decided by the incoming President-elect , including
on the issue of Russia ' s malicious cyber activity
and their interference in our democracy . 
So that is an advantage that Democrats have , it is
an advantage from which they should draw strength , 
and it is an advantage that I think will serve
them very well in the years ahead as they do
fight for a set of priorities that President
Obama has been trying to
advance for the last eight years . 
The Press : Given that , last question , is it then
fair to say that he is not concerned at all about his
legacy , about a dramatic change happening here in
Washington once he leaves office ? 
Or would you take the opposite view that he is
concerned about a great many of the ideas that he
had will be , frankly , undone ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think the President is concerned
about the impact that Republicans would have if
they made good on their promises to dismantle so
much of the progress that we have made over the
last eight years . 
And his concern is rooted in the fact that millions
of Americans have access to health care because of
what President Obama and Democrats in Congress were
able to achieve with the Affordable Care Act . 
Rolling that back is going to have a negative impact
on the lives of those 22 million Americans , but
that ' s what Republicans are promising to do . 
Democrats in Congress and the administration worked
effectively together to implement the Wall Street
Reform legislation that has made sure that
taxpayers will no longer be on the hook for bailing
out big banks who make risky bets that go bad , 
and they implemented that in a way that the economy
still thrived . 
The stock market more than doubled since that bill
was signed into law , and the President is pleased
with that progress and is concerned about the impact
that it would have on our economy if Republicans
roll all that back . 
The same is true when it comes to a range of
national security issues . 
The same is true when it comes to investments
in clean energy . 
The same is true when it comes to investments
in education . 
So that ' s what the President ' s concern is . 
And the truth is , the only people who -- well , I ' d
say it this way : The people who are in by far
the best position to prevent that from
happening are congressional Democrats
who are unified around the idea that those things are
worth fighting for , and the President is confident
that they will , and the President is confident
that they ' re going to have
some success in doing it . Sean . 
The Press : I wanted to follow up on one exchange
you had with Michelle a little earlier . 
You said that after the President has been on the
national stage for eight years that " it ' s time for
fresh blood .  " 
I take it you were referencing congressional
Democrats , but does the President have
satisfaction in the current ranks of the
Democratic leadership given that there really
hasn ' t been much fresh blood there ? 
We see Charles Schumer moving up to majority
leader in the Senate , but he was already a senior
Democrat in the Senate , and the House Democratic
leadership looks the same , 
at least at its highest levels . 
Mr . Earnest : The reference that I was making there
was certainly to congressional Democrats , 
but not just to congressional Democrats . 
There ' s an opportunity for mayors and governors and
other people who aspire to elective office to make
their voices heard . 
It ' s not just people who are in elective office who
have a responsibility to speak out on the most
important issues facing the country . 
Citizens have that same kind of responsibility , 
and the President does believe that when he
leaves the stage there will be big shoes to fill , 
and not likely by one person , at the risk of
mixing metaphors . 
And the President is hopeful , I would say even
confident , that there will be Democrats in Congress
and across the country who step up to answer the call
to fight for the kinds of democratic values that are
good the country , that make America more
prosperous , that make America more safe , that
make America more fair , and that will serve the
country and the party very well . 
With regard to congressional Democrats , 
the President has deep respect and admiration for
the ability of the congressional leaders that
have been there the entire time that he ' s been here
for the last eight years . 
But I think even those leaders would be the first
ones to acknowledge they ' re not going to be
able to do it alone . 
We ' re going to need to see rank-and-file Democrats
standing up and making the case , not just on ABC
News , but back home , talking to their people in
the communities and making the case to local
newspapers and on local radio and on local
television stations about what Democrats are
fighting for and about what Democrats believe in
and why it ' s in the best interest of the people in
those communities . 
So at one point during the meeting today -- I don ' t
remember who exactly it was -- one of the leaders
had suggested that all the newly-elected members of
the Democratic caucus should raise their hand to
be recognized , and a lot of hands went up . 
I ' m sure somebody was taking attendance at the
meeting ; I wasn ' t . 
I don ' t think that every member of the Democratic
caucus was there . 
I don ' t think Senator Manchin was the only one
who didn ' t attend . 
I don ' t know what reasons they may have for that , 
but it sure looked like a lot of the people who were
elected for the first time and are serving their
second full day in office as a member of the United
States Congress spent an hour and a half with the
President today . 
And I think that ' s a pretty good indication
that the President ' s words and message has resonated
deeply with them , has certainly played at least
some part in inspiring
them to seek public office . 
And I think that means that they ' re more than
energized for the fight ahead . 
The Press : But as the President looked around at
the Senate and the House Democratic caucuses , he
must have seen that the numbers are a lot smaller
than they have been in previous years . 
And particularly after the wave election in 2010 , a
lot of this was a result of the political capital
he spent on Obamacare , right ? 
That there was a wave back against the President for
passing that legislation . 
Does he at all acknowledge the political capital that
was spent then and have any regret of some of the
other legislative priorities he didn ' t get
through , like criminal justice reform , 
immigration reform , infrastructure -- those
other things you mentioned earlier ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen , I think there ' s a lot of
analysis that can be done of the 2010 election , and
let me just stipulate that I disagree with the
analysis that you put forward about that solely
being a backlash against the Affordable Care Act . 
I think the President would acknowledge that
capital was spent in terms of passing and
implementing the Affordable Care Act . 
But to a person , I feel confident that Democrats
would agree that it was worth it if that ' s what ' s
required to get 20 million
Americans covered on insurance . 
If we ' re going to outlaw insurance companies from
discriminating against people with preexisting
conditions or charging women more just because
they ' re women -- it ' s worth it . 
That ' s the reason you got into the fight , that ' s the
reason you ran for public office in the first place . 
It ' s the reason that you chose to engage in public
debate in the first place . 
So , yes , the President is proud of that and the
progress that we ' ve made as a result . 
Does that answer your question ? 
The Press : Yes . 
I have one quick other question . 
So as far as the Russian hacks go , I know normally
you can ' t discuss sources and methods and how you
guys are given intelligence , but can you
at least characterize the sort of intelligence
that ' s coming in that proves that this was a
Russian hack ? 
Is it digital fingerprints that you ' re tracing back
to a computer in Russian possession ? 
Is it human sourcing , that you ' re intercepting phone
calls and hearing Russians
talk about this kind of thing ? 
Or where is the confidence coming from ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' m obviously quite limited in
what I can say from here , but I think there are a
couple of things that I can point to that I think
answer the questions that you ' ve raised . 
It ' s essentially two . 
The first is , the statement that was issued
by the intelligence community in October of
2016 before the election , making clear that Russia
was interfering in our election represented the
consensus view of 17
different intelligences agencies . 
That ' s not usually the way intelligence works . 
That kind of unanimity of opinion , particularly when
the stakes are so high , is notable . 
The decision by the intelligence community not
just to reach that conclusion , but to make it
public , is notable . 
And I think it reflects the depth of their
confidence in that assessment . 
But your question goes to what explains the depth of
that confidence -- why . 
I think the only thing that -- the thing that I
can certainly say from here is that there was a
release last week of the Joint Analysis Report that
was issued by the Department of Homeland
Security and the FBI , and included in that report
was specific technical advice to computer network
operators , systems administrators across the
country and around the world about steps that
they could take to protect their networks from
malicious Russian cyber activity . 
I think that ' s an indication that there was
a deep technical analysis that was done . 
And being able to put forward that technical
analysis so that people could protect themselves
from the Russians I think reflects the work that was
done that pretty definitively ties this
back to the Russians . 
The other effect of releasing that information
means that Russia now has to go back to the drawing
board and change some of their tactics . 
If people who are responsible for defending
computer networks are now aware of the places from
which those attacks originate , if they ' re
aware of the kinds of tactics that are used in
erecting and executing those attacks , if they ' re
aware of the kinds of software , the malware that
is used and they can defend their networks
against that malware , that ' s going to make
things a lot more
difficult for the Russians . 
So that isn ' t just an effort to erect defenses
to repel malicious Russian activity , it ' s actually to
set back Russian efforts to carry out those
kinds of attacks . 
So I think that is an indication of the depth of
the analysis that was done . 
It ' s technical in nature , I would stipulate that
from the beginning . 
But I think it ' s an indication that the
intelligence community is following more than
their gut instinct . 
And I think the way that you can tell that is based
on the technical analysis that was put forward , and
the demonstration of the conviction in their
analysis by expressing their unanimous opinion
publicly before election
about what exactly happened . 
The Press : It sounds like , though , that you ' re
pointing more to the digital fingerprint more
so than human intelligence . 
Is there any concern that that could be manipulated
if somebody was so smart to manipulate the intel so
that it made it look like it was Russia ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think what I ' m pointing to is the one
thing that I feel like I can point to publicly to
substantiate some of the claims that we ' ve made . 
It doesn ' t mean that there isn ' t additional evidence
out there ; I ' m sure that there is . 
But there is a priority that ' s placed on
protecting sources and methods . 
And with regard to sort of this question about
manipulating that kind of digital evidence , I felt
confident based on that expertise and technical
know-how of the United States intelligence
community that that ' s something that they
considered before putting forward that technical
information and before putting forward their
unanimous high-confidence assessment about what
exactly happened . 
Bill Press . 
Nice to see you , Bill . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
Nice to see you . 
Happy New Year . 
Mr . Earnest : Happy New Year . 
The Press : I was wondering , having you had
an opportunity yet to meet with or to speak with the
person who ' s been designated as your
successor at the podium ? 
Mr . Earnest : I did have an opportunity yesterday to
meet with Sean Spicer , the gentleman that has been
hired by the President-elect to succeed
me as the White House Press Secretary . 
The Press :  ( Inaudible .  ) Mr . Earnest : I was going
to say , I believe that I had met Sean in passing
previously at a social occasion , but this is the
first time I had had an opportunity to sit down
with him and have a conversation . 
And yesterday , in my office , we sat down with
him and his assistant , and Jen Psaki joined for that
conversation , and we had a long conversation about
what it ' s like to work at the White House . 
And we certainly talked about some of the
complicated logistics of working in this
environment , but we also talked a little bit about
the approach to the job that Jen and I have taken
in fulfilling our roles at this White House . 
And it was a good conversation , and I know
that he ' s excited about the opportunity --
and he should be . 
Getting to work at the White House is a genuine
honor , and certainly having the opportunity to
stand at this podium and speak to all of you , and
engage in a debate about a set of issues that I
certainly feel strongly about , and to advocate for
a President that I respect
enormously is a genuine honor . 
And I think Sean sees it the same way , 
and he should . 
The Press : It has certainly been a question
among many of us : Did the subject of whether or not
he intends to hold daily press briefings come up in
your conversation ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' ll let him speak to whatever plans
that he has . 
The Press : If it did come up or if it does come up , 
from your perspective , having been there now for , 
what , the last four or five years , what would
your advice be about the importance or the wisdom
of the daily press briefings ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , the argument that I ' ve made in
the past is I think there is genuine value to the
day-to-day engagement that I have with all of you . 
The symbolic value of the President hiring somebody
to play a senior role in his staff , to come out
here every day on camera , on the record , and answer
whatever question you guys dream up , and be an
advocate for the policies that the President has
prioritized and be held accountable for knowing
what the President thinks , faithfully expressing his
view , and being factual and accurate in making
that case -- that ' s a healthy part
of our democracy . 
There aren ' t many countries in the world
that encourage this kind of engagement . 
So I think it ' s genuinely a good thing . 
I think there are some aspects of it that are not
as efficient as they may
have been a generation ago . 
Before iPhones and Blackberrys and email , 
there were many fewer opportunities for the
press corps to interact with White House staff . 
But the truth is , I think there ' s a lot of symbolic
value to doing this , and it ' s good for the country , 
and I think the President believes that it serves
his interest well to have somebody out here making
an argument in support of his policies . 
And I think it certainly serves your viewers and
listeners and readers to hear firsthand from
somebody at the White House who ' s willing to
stand up here and put their name behind a
forceful case and an explanation of what the
President is doing and why he ' s doing it . 
But obviously the incoming administration will have
to make up their own mind about the wisdom of
pursuing a strategy that the President believes in
because of its role in our democracy , but also
because of the way that it ' s contributed to his
success as President . Dave . 
The Press : Josh , Democratic leaders in the
California legislature announced today that
they ' ve hired Eric Holder as outside counsel to
represent the state in what they anticipate will
be legal battles against the Trump administration . 
Does the White House think it ' s appropriate for a
former Cabinet member to get paid to fight the
policies of a new administration ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' ve seen only the headlines of
some of the news reports that you ' re citing , and
there ' s nothing that struck me in reading those
reports that there ' s anything at all
inappropriate about what Mr . Holder was
choosing to pursue . 
First of all , I ' ll say that it ' s not surprising
to me at all that the state of California would
want to choose somebody as smart and as experienced
and well-versed in these policy issues as
Mr . Holder is . 
It ' s one of the reasons that President Obama chose
him to be the Attorney General . 
Obviously , Mr . Holder is a telegenic , articulate
advocate for a whole set of issues , and I suspect
that the people of the state of California will
benefit from him putting those same skills to work , 
advocating for them . 
And it doesn ' t strike me that there ' s
anything wrong with it . 
The Press : The President obviously has been very
close to Mr . Holder over the years , 
considers him a friend . 
Did he know about this ? 
Mr . Earnest : I haven ' t spoken to the President
about Mr . Holder ' s new job , but it ' s certainly
true that the President holds Mr . Holder in high
regard , both for his intellectual and legal
abilities , but also
because he ' s a pretty good guy . 
Jared , I ' ll give you the last one . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
A couple different versions of the Affordable
Care Act repeal being discussed . 
On one hand , you ' ve got reconciliation , which the
Senate parliamentarian has ruled doesn ' t apply to all
of the law but only certain parts of it . 
And then you ' ve got the Vice President-elect and
Sean Spicer discussing today the possibility of
executive actions that could be taken on day one . 
Does the legislative team here at the White House
have any sense of what could be done to the
Affordable Care Act by executive action , and
whether any of that would be , in this
administration ' s mind , an improvement of the law ? 
Mr . Earnest : I am not aware of what the incoming
team may have been referring to with regard
to potential changes through executive action
that they ' re looking at . 
I think the thing that I can faithfully relate to
you is that if we had conceived of a way for the
President to use executive action to strengthen the
Affordable Care Act , then I assure you we
would have done it . 
But look , I think we ' ll have to let the incoming
administration provide some more insight into
what their plans are
before I can comment on it . 
The Press : Do you think that it signals strength
or weakness of the plan that executive action is
one of the first out of the gate moves for this , 
or do you not have enough to go on ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think it ' s hard to discern at this
point exactly what their plans are . 
I just think that whatever changes they choose to
make , they ' ll be held to a rather high standard for
assessing the success or failure of those changes . 
And we ' ll be counting on all of you to hold them to
that standard . 
Thanks , everybody . 
We ' ll see you tomorrow