US shuts Belarus embassy , approves evacuation from Moscow embassy
Secretary of State Antony Blinken announced the suspension of operations and the authorised departures in a statement . 

Person holding Ukrainian flag
Blinken said the United States was taking these steps “ due to security and safety issues "  [ Kevin Lamarque / Reuters ] 
Published On 28 Feb 2022
28 Feb 2022
The United States shuttered its embassy in the capital of Belarus and allowed non-emergency employees and their family members to leave from its embassy in Moscow on the fifth day of Russia ’ s invasion of Ukraine . 

Secretary of State Antony Blinken in a statement on Monday announced the suspension of operations at the Minsk embassy and the authorised departure from Moscow . 

KEEP READING
list of 3 items
list 1 of 3
Ukraine , Russia begin talks on Belarus border
list 2 of 3
Which countries are sending military aid to Ukraine ? 
list 3 of 3
Russia-Ukraine war by the numbers : Live Tracker
end of list 
 “ We took these steps due to security and safety issues stemming from the unprovoked and unjustified attack by Russian military forces in Ukraine ,  ” he said . 

Flowers outside Ukrainian embassy in USThe US government urged citizens to consider leaving Russia immediately on commercial flights amid the increasing flight cancellations [ Kevin Lamarque / Reuters ] 
The latest evacuations come after Russian President Vladimir Putin put Russia ’ s nuclear deterrent on high alert on Sunday in the face of a barrage of reprisals by Western nations for his war on Ukraine . 

Amid Russia ’ s deepening economic and political isolation after it invaded Ukraine last Thursday , ceasefire talks between Russian and Ukrainian officials began on the Belarusian border . Ukraine ’ s presidency said the aim of the talks should include a complete withdrawal of Russian forces . 

A photo posted on Twitter by US ambassador to Belarus Julie Fisher showed mission staff lowering the American flag .  
 
 “ Belarus ’ complicity in Russia ’ s war against Ukraine has shown the regime ’ s loss of sovereign decision-making ,  ” Fisher said in a tweet .  
 
 “ The United States of America has suspended operations of our embassy in Minsk . All American staff have departed Belarus ,  ” she said .  




The US had relocated its Ukraine embassy operations from the capital Kyiv to the western city of Lviv two weeks ago as Russian forces massed at Ukraine ’ s borders . 

Also on Monday , the US blocked Americans from engaging in any transactions involving Russia ’ s central bank , dealing another blow to the country ’ s economy . 

The sanctions are likely to jack up Russian inflation higher , cripple its purchasing power and drive down investments , US officials said . 

Meanwhile , Russia on Monday barred airlines from 36 countries from using Russian airspace after European nations and Canada on Sunday moved to shut their airspace to Russian aircraft . 

The US is considering similar action , but has yet to make a final decision , according to US officials . The US government over the weekend urged citizens to consider leaving Russia immediately on commercial flights amid the increasing flight cancellations . 