Mr . Earnest : Good afternoon , everybody . 
Don ' t all answer at once .  
( Laughter .  ) 
The Press : Good afternoon . 
Mr . Earnest : I do not have comments at the top , so we
can go straight to your questions . 
Josh , would you like to start ? 
The Press : Sure . 
Thanks , Josh . 
So some of our intelligence leaders were
on the Hill today for quite a while testifying
about Russian hacking , among other things . 
And Clapper talked a lot about what Russia did , but
declined to call it an act of war , saying it wasn ' t
really their place to do that . 
But it seems it would be the place of the White
House to make that kind of determination if it felt
that it was appropriate . 
So based on the details that were laid out on the
Hill , does the White House feel that the Russian
hacking related to the campaign constituted
an act of war ? 
Mr . Earnest : Josh , what I can tell you is that the
Obama administration takes very seriously the effort
that was undertaken by the Russians to interfere
with , and even undermine , 
the basics of American democracy . 
And the intelligence community takes that quite
seriously , and that was evident from the
extraordinary statement that they issued back in
October , a month before the election , indicating
that they had concluded with high confidence , 
unanimously , that Russia had undertaken this effort
and that this was an effort that could only
have been directed from the highest levels of the
Russian government . 
I think you can discern the seriousness with which
we take this issue . 
But taking a close look at the report that was issued
last week detailing the U . S . 
government ' s response to this malicious cyber
activity from the Russians -- of course , that report
was not comprehensive , but it certainly noted all of
the public steps that were taken by the United States
government in response . 
So I think you can discern that President Obama and
the rest of the administration takes this
issue quite seriously . 
I don ' t have a new label to apply to it today , but
this is something that has rightly drawn the
attention of the American public and certainly drawn
the attention of the President of the United States . 
The Press : There seemed to be this debate playing out
in the course of that hearing about whether
intelligence assessments are debatable or
irrefutable or open to interpretation , and
intelligence officials acknowledging that they
put forward information and that policy leaders
have to make their own judgments about it . 
But in light of the President-elect ' s comments
about what the intelligence community has
come up with , does the White House think that
what the IC has said about
Russia ' s involvement is irrefutable ? 
Is there any interpretation that is
open to -- or would you push back on that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , let me answer that question a
couple different ways . 
I think the first thing -- and this is a point that
I ' d made in the past but I think it bears repeating , 
and I ' ll keep it brief . 
The fact that the 17 intelligence agencies of
the United States government issued a public
high-confidence assessment a month before the
election I think should give you an indication of
the degree of confidence that those intelligence
communities had and have in those conclusions , 
in that analysis . 
So this isn ' t a situation where -- look , there are
many situations in which the intelligence community
is responsible for drawing upon different strands of
partial information and trying to present to
policymakers a complete picture . 
That requires some interpretation . 
That requires -- in some cases they would probably
even say that it ' s educated guessing . 
And what the President has always asked is that the
intelligence community provide to him their
unvarnished assessment . 
He ' s also asked the intelligence community to
provide dissenting views , if they exist ; that
surfacing disagreements that exist in the
intelligence community actually does serve
policymakers well by helping them get a variety
of perspectives to try to
understand exactly what ' s happening . 
And President Obama has time and again insisted on
the unvarnished assessment
of the intelligence community . 
He ' s insisted on being able to consider
dissenting views . 
The President has insisted that the intelligence
that ' s presented to him should not be shaded to
advance a policy or ideological objective . 
The President has insisted that the intelligence
community should not hesitate to present to the
President what could be considered bad news , 
because a white-washed assessment doesn ' t
serve anybody well . 
Somebody who ' s consuming this intelligence using
rose-colored reading glasses is not going to be
able to make good decisions . 
So the President has time and time again asked the
intelligence community to provide him solid , 
up-to-date , unvarnished assessments about what ' s
happening around the world . 
And the President ' s decision-making has been
very well-served by that , and the President is
entirely confident that that ' s what they have
produced in this case . 
Because there ' s not -- again , according to the
public statement that we saw from the intelligence
community that was issued on paper before the
election , based on the testimony that you saw
from leaders in the intelligence community
today , this is not one of those scenarios where the
intelligence community has to make a tough call based
only on partial information . 
They ' ve been quite definitive . 
And what you heard from some of those officials
today is not just that they continue to have
confidence in the assessments that they
issued back in October , but based on the work that
they have done in the intervening months , they
actually have more confidence in the
conclusion that they ' ve put forward in October . 
So I think the other thing that bears mentioning , 
Josh , is that the men and women of the intelligence
community are experts in their field . 
These are men and women who don ' t do those jobs
because they are getting a big paycheck . 
In many cases , the men and who serve in our
intelligence community are experts who could command
a much higher salary in the private sector , but
they choose to dedicate their talents to
protecting the country . 
They don ' t do it for the glory because , in many
cases , members of the intelligence community
have to do their work in secret , so their names are
never made public . 
And in some cases , those officers have paid the
ultimate sacrifice and
given their lives for this country . 
And even now , even though they have made that
remarkable sacrifice , their names are prevented
from being made public because of the damage it
could potentially do to our national security . 
So the men and women of the United States
intelligence community are patriots , they ' re experts , 
and they are dedicated to getting the facts right
and providing information regardless of their
political motivation
or their political preference . 
And President Obama has benefitted enormously from
their service , their sacrifice , their
professionalism , and their expertise . 
And the President believes that those qualities will
serve the incoming President well if he
chooses to draw on that resource in the same way
that President Obama has . 
The Press : Can you say whether the President has
been briefed on the version of the
intelligence report that he has now received , and
whether there ' s anything that he learned from that
new report that adds to his understanding based on
what he knew previously ? 
Mr . Earnest : What I can tell you , Josh , is that
the White House does have the report , and President
Obama is being briefed on it by a range of senior
officials who are members of his national security
team , some of whom you
saw on television earlier today . 
And -- The Press : It ' s happening today ? 
Mr . Earnest : It ' s happening right now . 
And this is -- obviously , the President directed the
intelligence community to
put together this report last month . 
He asked them to complete this report before January
20th , so they are beating that deadline by a
couple of weeks . 
And the President has also asked the intelligence
community to ensure that they are briefing
Congress , which is something that Director
Clapper indicated earlier today that he would do . 
He has asked the intelligence community to
brief the President-elect , something that apparently
has been scheduled for tomorrow . 
The President has also directed the intelligence
community to make as much of the information that ' s
included in the report public because it ' s
important for the American people to understand that
it ' s our democracy that has been interfered with . 
And so the people who are participating in that
democracy should have as much information as
possible about what exactly happened . 
Now , what the intelligence community will also have
to do -- and this is a critical priority -- is
protect sources and methods . 
They need to protect their ability to guard against
these kinds of intrusions in the future . 
That ' s going to limit their ability to make as
much public as they probably would
otherwise like to do . 
But they will scrub this report and make as much of
it public as they possibly can . 
But it will be a different version than is consumed
by officials at the highest level of the
United States government . 
And I know that Director Clapper has indicated he ' s
hopeful that he ' ll be able to produce a public
version of the report early next week . 
But for more precision on the timing of that
release , I ' d refer you to his office . 
The Press : And I think you were alluding to this a
moment ago , but I wanted to ask you about the
reports that the President-elect ' s team is
considering a shakeup in the way that the
intelligence agencies are structured and possibly
pulling back some of the employees in some of
those key agencies . 
Have any of the intelligence agencies , to
your knowledge , received any request for
information from Trump ' s transition team that you
believe could be used to try to do that kind
of a restructuring ? 
And is the President urging his successor not
to dismantle the intelligence apparatus , as
we know it ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , a couple things about this , Josh . 
I did have a chance to read that report that I
think surfaced last night that was attributed to
anonymous transition officials . 
I know that there are other transition officials
speaking on the record who denied that report today . 
So I think it ' s difficult to tell exactly what the
incoming President ' s plans actually are . 
That being said , the President tasked his
administration and agencies all across his
administration to be very focused on ensuring a
smooth and effective transition with the
incoming President ' s team , and that includes the
intelligence community . 
I can ' t speak with a lot of precision about the
conversations that have already taken place , but I
know that there already -- there ' s been extensive
planning and a variety of conversations that have
already taken place to try to prepare the incoming
President and his team to
assume responsibility for U . S . 
national security , including responsibility
for the intelligence community . 
But I can ' t speak to what plans they may have for
reforming the intelligence community . 
But obviously when he enters the Oval Office on
January 20th , he ' ll have an opportunity to consider
what kinds of reforms he believes would best serve
him , his team , and the country . 
But I ' ll just say one more time how much President
Obama has benefitted from the service and sacrifice
of the professionals and patriots who serve this
country every day , working around the clock , on
weekends , over the holidays , to ensure the
safety and security of the country . 
The Press : But I guess that ' s the point
right there , though . 
I mean , are you hearing from the intelligence
officials who currently report to this President
and this administration that they ' re demoralized
by the disparagement that is coming from
the President-elect ? 
Mr . Earnest : I know that Director Clapper and
others had the opportunity to speak to this today , 
and I think -- well , we heard Director Clapper
express concern about some of the President-elect ' s
comments and tweets having
a negative impact on morale . 
And that certainly is unfortunate . 
These are -- like I said , these are men and women
who could get a much bigger paycheck in
the private sector . 
These are men and women who don ' t get a lot of
glory and fame for their work . 
These are men and women who work long days and
late nights and over the weekend and over the
holidays to keep us safe . 
And they are worthy of nothing less than our deep
gratitude for their service and for the safety
and security that we enjoy
because of their service . Ayesha . 
The Press : Just one more question on the
intelligence briefing . 
Are you expecting that the President will give like a
formal response to the report , or will there be
something in writing ? 
Will there be some type of response
from the President ? 
Mr . Earnest : At this point , I would not expect
a formal response from the
President of the United States . 
Obviously , if that changes , we ' ll make sure
that all of you know . 
But at this point , that ' s not part of the plan . 
Presumably , at some point in the next few days , the
President will have an opportunity to answer
questions about this . 
So to the extent that there is a response from
President Obama about some of this , I would
anticipate that it would come in that form . 
The Press : On another subject , going back to --
which was a big topic yesterday , was the meeting
on Obamacare and basically strategizing with the
Democrats on what to do next . 
I wanted to kind of clarify -- does the
President still believe that Democrats should work
with Republicans to help make changes to Obamacare
or to repeal and replace Obamacare ? 
Or is the idea that if they ' re going to repeal it
and replace it , that Democrats should sit back
and just kind of let the Republicans deal with the
consequences of that ? 
What exactly is the
President ' s position on that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Look , this is an excellent question and
I think your colleague , Michelle , asked a similar
version of this yesterday . 
And this is important . 
The President ' s approach from day one , since the
day that he signed the Affordable Care Act into
law back in March of 2010 -- so we ' re talking about
almost seven years ago -- the President has
indicated not just an openness but a desire to
work closely with Democrats and Republicans
around ideas to further strengthen the law . 
The President has even put forward some of his own
suggestions for how the law could be strengthened ; 
increasing tax credits to families to make some
health care purchases even more affordable . 
The President has also even floated the
possibility of enhancing competition in some areas
of the country that don ' t currently have a lot of
competition by introducing a public option in some of
those communities . 
By enhancing competition , you could foster better
options at potentially a lower cost . 
These are some of the ideas the President
has put forward . 
These are the kinds of ideas that you would
expect Republicans to be able to support . 
Republicans spent a lot of time talking about
free-market solutions and tax cuts for
working people . 
This falls squarely in that category . 
But the point here , Ayesha , is that the
President has put forward specific ideas for
strengthening the law . 
He has welcomed -- or he would welcome Republicans
and Democrats working together to implement some
of those ideas to strengthen the law . 
That has been true throughout his presidency , 
and that will be true into the next presidency . 
But unfortunately , that is not the approach that
Republicans have pursued . 
Republicans , rather than being willing to look for
solutions , have been focused for seven years on
just trying to either sabotage the law , or to
repeal it outright . 
And when I say " sabotage ,  " I ' m making a reference to
repeated lawsuits that Republicans have filed in
courts to try to interfere
with the implementation of the law . 
I ' m referring to Republican governors who
have refused , in the face of all common sense , to
expand Medicaid in their state . 
The expansion of Medicaid is paid almost
entirely by the U . S . government . 
We know that providing essentially charity care
-- health care to people who can ' t afford health
insurance -- is a significant drain
on state budgets . 
We know that it would improve health care
outcomes because people would be getting
checkups more often . 
So people would be healthier , lives would be
saved , and it would save
money for all these states . 
But because Republican governors think that
politics are more important than saving
money , more important than saving lives , they ' ve
blocked Medicaid expansion in far too many places . 
So the Republican idea of sabotaging the
implementation of the Affordable
Care Act is not new . 
And fortunately , they ' ve been unsuccessful . 
They ' ve been unsuccessful in repealing the law . 
They voted 50 times to
repeal it and they haven ' t succeeded . 
And despite their best efforts to undermine the
implementation of the law , we ' ve actually seen that
20 million Americans have gotten health insurance
because of the law . 
We ' ve seen that since the law was signed into force , 
that health care costs have risen at the slowest
rate on record . 
So despite these Republican efforts , the
law remains in place and it has worked . 
So the advice that the President has to Democrats
is if Republicans are willing to actually focus
on a constructive effort to strengthen the law , 
that Democrats should work with them . 
Repealing the Affordable Care Act is not
strengthening the law . 
Repealing the Affordable Care Act is taking health
care away from up to 30 million Americans . 
Repealing the Affordable Care Act is to shorten and
weaken -- shorten the lifespan of and
weaken Medicare . 
Repealing the Affordable Care Act is to take away
consumer protections that currently prevent
Americans from being discriminated against
because they have preexisting conditions . 
HHS recently released a report indicating that
more than 130 million Americans have preexisting
conditions , and they can ' t be discriminated against
or prevented from signing up for health insurance
right now because of the Affordable Care Act . 
So that ' s 130 million Americans who are going to
have this protection stripped away if
Republicans follow through on their plan . 
So that ' s not strengthening the law . 
There ' s no reason that Republicans should -- or
that Democrats should be a party to a Republican
effort to tear that law down . 
But if Republicans are actually interested in
trying to strengthen the law and improve outcomes
for the American people , then Democrats absolutely
have a responsibility to work with them . 
The Press : And will that depend on then the idea of
what strengthening means ? 
Because , I mean , obviously , they ' re going
to repeal it -- they say they ' re going to repeal
it . 
Mr . Earnest : They say that , but we ' ll see if --
you know , the President spent a lot of time
talking about this yesterday . 
Republicans have a tough road to hoe . 
The promise of it sounds really good , and that ' s
why you heard them repeat it on the campaign trail
so often :  " We ' re going to repeal Obamacare .  " 
That was typically met by cheers from people in the
crowd , many of whom probably were benefitting
from Obamacare . 
Trying to explain that situation is something
that you ' ll have to turn to somebody else for . 
But the point that the President has made is that
there ' s one thing -- saying it on the campaign
trail and getting raucous cheers from a political
rally is one thing . 
Actually implementing the repeal and governing the
country is yet another . 
Reckoning with the consequences of 130
million Americans having critically important
protections being stripped away , that ' s pretty
complicated . 
That doesn ' t roll right off the tongue at a
campaign rally . 
Taking health care away from 30 million Americans
-- that ' s something that you have to explain and
compensate for once you start governing , once the
campaigning has ended . 
So I do not think that it is a foregone conclusion , 
particularly because Democrats are united
around the idea that the Affordable Care Act is
something that ' s worth protecting . 
And we see lots of Republicans , including
Senator Rand Paul , who voted against the
reconciliation bill yesterday , expressing a
lot of heartburn -- no pun intended -- about the idea
of repealing the law in a way that ' s going to weaken
it , and in a way that ' s going to take health care
away from people and take away protections that
are actually popular . 
So I don ' t think it ' s a foregone conclusion , and I
think Democrats should draw a lot of confidence
from the kind of position that they ' re in right now
to defend a law that is producing for the American
people . 
And the prospect of taking it away may sound good
when it comes to the rhetoric , but when it
comes to explaining exactly what they ' re
doing , I think it ' s going to give those politicians
a lot of pause . 
Justin . 
The Press : I wanted to go back to when you were
talking about dissenting views and sort of in the
context of these conclusions that have been
made . 
Trying to connect I think the two things that you
said , would it be fair to take away that there were
no sort of dissenting views in any of the --
obviously , everybody signed off on this
conclusion . 
Mr . Earnest : Yes . 
The Press : But it is accurate to say that
within the ranks of the intelligence community
there was kind of universal agreement that
Russia was responsible for this attack and some of
the sort of motivations that we ' ve heard ascribed
to Russia for the attack ? 
Mr . Earnest : So you ' re right that the public
statement that was issued back in October , a month
before the election , that did indicate that Russia
was engaged in an effort to undermine our democracy
did represent the consensus view of all 17
intelligence agencies . 
For the opinions of individual officers in
those agencies , I think you ' d have to go to them
directly to get their opinion . But --
The Press : Well , what I ' m wondering I guess
is , is this report going to have -- oftentimes
reports are issued -- the evaluation of something , 
you will hear from dissenters why they might
question conclusions that were reached or an
evaluation of alternate theories for what
might have happened . 
And so I ' m wondering if we can expect those sorts of
things to be included in the publicly released
information , or if it will just be -- and it might be
that there ' s universal agreement that
Russia was responsible . But that ' s just --
Mr . Earnest : Look , I think this is an entirely fair question , 
but it ' s not one that I ' m in a position to answer . 
I don ' t know what ' s going to be included in the
report that is produced early next week . 
That ' s something that the intelligence community is
working on , so we ' ll have an opportunity to take a
look at it there . 
And then maybe we could have some more
questions about this . 
But look , the other thing I think I would encourage
you to do is to check with some of these intelligence
agencies and to see to what extent they factored
in dissenting views , or if those dissenting
views didn ' t exist . 
The Press : Buzzfeed reported that the FBI
relied on a third-party analysis of the DNC
servers to sort of reach their conclusions that
Russia was responsible for this hacking . 
I ' m wondering if that raised any concern within
the White House . 
It seems like a credible third party . 
But obviously I think some of the critics on the
transition team have said this is the equivalent of
the FBI not going to the crime scene itself
to look at it . 
Mr . Earnest : Look , I can ' t speak to the investigative
methods that were used by the FBI and the wisdom of
the approach that they pursued . 
So I ' d refer you to them for a comment on that . 
The Press : Director Clapper said in his
testimony today that Russia may have been
responding to cyberespionage activities
that the U . S . had taken . 
So I ' m wondering if you -- I guess if the White House
believes that the Russian actions were potentially
retaliatory rather than sort of proactively trying
to interfere with American democracy . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , the conclusion from the
intelligence community before the election was
that the Russian government was motivated
based on direction that was received at the
highest levels of the government to interfere , 
undermine , or raise doubts about U . S . 
democracy and our political institutions . 
Whether there were additional motives that
Russia may have had , that ' s something that I ' d
refer you to the intelligence
community to assess . 
But I guess the point that -- the thing that I would
point out independent of any special or classified
knowledge is simply that the two motives that you
cited are in no way contradictory . 
You could imagine a scenario -- I don ' t know
if it ' s true or not -- that Russia would be
motivated for one reason or another to try to
retaliate against the United States for some
sort of perceived slight , and that retaliation would
take the form of undermining confidence in
U . S . democracy . 
So it ' s easy to see how those two things aren ' t
mutually exclusive . 
The Press : One last one on a totally different topic . 
Some Turkish defense officials earlier this
week seemed to float the idea of ending the
use by the U . S . 
coalition of Incirlik Air Base . 
There seems to be some frustration over the
level of U . S . 
and international support for their
operation in Syria . 
What ' s the level of concern in the
administration that -- you ' ve spoken many times
about how important that air base is and what it
could mean for our attempts to go after ISIL . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , what I will say is that NATO is
obviously a critically -- Turkey is a critically
important NATO Ally , and we have benefitted from
our alliance with Turkey , and we obviously have
valued the partnership and commitment that they have
shown to going after ISIL . 
One of the priorities that we identified early on was
the need for Turkey to take steps to secure their
border with Syria , and they didn ' t take those
steps as quickly as we would have liked , but in
the last several months we have seen them take
definitive action that has had a positive impact in
securing that border that is limiting the ability of
ISIL to smuggle people and materiel across that
border into Syria . 
So we obviously are pleased that Turkey has
taken those steps . 
In general , the United States has been strongly
supportive of the steps that Turkey has taken , and
we have offered them additional support to
supplement some of their ongoing efforts against
ISIL right now . 
I think that it is -- it would seem to undermine
their case to threaten to eliminate our access to
the Incirlik Air Base . 
Presumably some of the kind of assistance that we
could provide would originate from
Incirlik Air Base . 
So it feels a little like cutting off one ' s nose
to spite your face . 
And hopefully that ' s not in the cards . 
Lynn Sweet . 
Welcome back to the White House Briefing Room . 
It ' s always a treat to have you here . 
The Press : Thank you . 
Mr . Earnest : Why are you looking at me like that ? 
The Press : I have a question . 
Mr . Earnest : That ' s why I called on you . 
The Press : Thank you . 
With President Obama coming home to Chicago on
Tuesday for his farewell address , is there any
message that you could share now that he may have
or want to sort of reflect on as the city is
grappling with a soaring murder rate ? 
It certainly is on the mind of a lot of people in
Chicago as he comes home and as he intends to put
his Obama Center in a part of the city that ' s so very
hard-hit by homicide . 
And could you also rule in or out if the President is
going to give any kind of commutation to
now-in-prison Governor Rod Blagojevich ? 
As you know , the nature of the crime , one of the
reasons he ' s in prison , is in part for the attempt to
try to sell then-Senator Obama ' s Senate seat . 
So I ' m hoping you could have some reflections . 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t have any comment on potential
offers of clemency . 
There ' s a process that we have --
The Press : He has applied . 
Mr . Earnest : Yeah , but there ' s a process that
will be administered by the Department of Justice , 
and so I don ' t have any comment on that . 
With regard to the violence that has been
plaguing the city of Chicago , you ' ve heard the
President over the last couple of years talk about
his deep concern about the violence that ' s
plaguing his hometown . 
And he is certainly concerned about the use of
illegal firearms in a lot of that violence . 
He believes that there are additional common-sense
steps that could be taken that would at least reduce
the number of illegal guns that are so readily
available on the street . 
He also believes that there are some simple
things that could be done to make those guns a
little harder to get , particularly for people
that have bad intentions and shouldn ' t have them
in the first place . 
That ' s not going to prevent every act of gun
violence , but it certainly
would have a positive impact . 
The President has also talked about some of the
work that needs to be done in the community there . 
And the President is certainly interested in
investing in the My Brother ' s Keeper initiative . 
This is a program that has been implemented in a
number of communities across the country , 
including Chicago , to try to mentor boys and young
men of color who too often go overlooked . 
And the President is hopeful that when he
leaves the White House , this is something that
he ' ll be able to devote more of his time
and attention to . 
I know the President and First Lady are also
optimistic about the potential of the Obama
Presidential Center having a positive economic impact
on the South Side of Chicago . 
And he is hopeful that that will spur some
economic activity and be a beneficial influence
in the community . 
And many of the plans for the Presidential Center
are focused on maximizing the benefits for the
surrounding community . 
Obviously , this work is in the earliest of stages , 
but in the years ahead I know that both President
Obama and Mrs . Obama will be making the positive
impact on the local community one of the
highest priorities of the Presidential Center . 
The Press : Quick follow-up . 
The foundation has said that some programming is
going to start in 2017 then . 
Are they going -- it ' s years away from this being
built and up and running , the center . 
So is there something that they ' re going to be doing
programming-wise , without the center being built , 
but since the foundation is up and running
in Chicago anyway ? 
Will they wait for the bricks and mortar to be
there , or will they , once they leave the White
House , try to get some programs going through My
Brother ' s Keeper or other -- My Brother ' s Keeper
Alliance , which now is a nonprofit , or
any other entity ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t speak to any specific programs that --
The Press : That ' s my main thing -- are they
going to wait until the thing is built , which is
years away , or do something sooner ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think they are very interested in
trying to make an immediate impact because
this is obviously a community that is very
close to them , and this is obviously where Mrs . Obama
grew up and a place where President Obama spent most
of his adult life . 
So this is a community that is close to their
hearts and one that will get a lot of their
attention beginning in 2017 . 
The Press : Do you know if he ' s been by
Jackson Park , or she has ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t know the answer
to that question . 
The Press : Will he swing by it ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not aware of plans to do that on
this trip , but I haven ' t looked carefully
at the schedule . 
So obviously if he does something like that , the
presidential pool will be along for the ride . Isaac . 
Mr . Earnest : You were speaking earlier about the
high regard of the President of both the
intelligence community and the work that they do . 
Is he concerned about the demoralizing effect that
some people have talked about from the way the
President-elect has spoken about them and the
assessments being made in a way that would make
America less safe over the course of the years to
come from that demoralizing ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I know that Director Clapper gave
voice to some of these concerns in
his testimony today . 
He indicated that some of the rhetoric and comments
could potentially have a negative impact on the
morale of the United
States intelligence community . 
And I think I would leave it to Director Clapper to
assess what sort of impact that could potentially
have on our national security . 
Based on what I know of our men and women in the
intelligence community , they ' re professionals . 
And even in the face of some of the rhetoric that
we ' ve seen , they ' re determined to do their job
for the right reason : to
keep the American people safe . 
And they will do their job to the best of their
ability without regard to who they would prefer to
see in the Oval Office , and I ' m confident that
that work will continue and it will continue to be
executed faithfully by the patriots in the
intelligence community . 
The Press : But the President doesn ' t share
Director Clapper ' s concerns ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think the President would -- I
think what is clear to anybody , even those of us
who are not in the intelligence community , is
it ' s hard to imagine how some of the rhetoric and
comments we ' ve seen would have a positive impact on
morale in the intelligence community . 
But I think President Obama would share my
assessment about the professionalism of the men
and women in the intelligence community , 
but he would also listen carefully to the
assessment of somebody like Director Clapper when
considering what the potential impact of those
comments and that rhetoric could be on the
intelligence community broadly . 
The Press : On a totally different topic , is the
President excited about Tom Perriello ' s candidacy
for governor in Virginia ? 
Mr . Earnest : I saw a news report in the Times today . 
I don ' t know that Mr . Perriello has made an
official announcement , unless that ' s happened since --
The Press : It ' s happening . 
Mr . Earnest : It ' s happening right now , huh ? 
The Press : They put out a video this morning . 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not aware that the President intends
to endorse in the race , but obviously
Mr . Perriello has served this administration
with distinction . 
And the President did enjoy a close working
relationship with him in Congress and appreciated
his commitment to a set of democratic values in the
context of his service in Congress . 
It was all too short , in the President ' s view . 
The Press : But you don ' t think that he would get
involved in this ? 
Mr . Earnest : But I ' m not aware that the President
will offer an endorsement , but maybe in his role as a
former President of the United States he ' ll have
more time to consider these kinds of decisions . 
So I ' m not in a position to rule out an
endorsement , but I ' m not aware of one
that ' s planned . Megan . 
The Press : Josh , do you expect the President will
be calling the President-elect after
today ' s briefing ? 
Mr . Earnest : I do not expect a phone call will
occur between the President and the
President-elect today . 
The Press : How often have they been communicating ? 
Mr . Earnest : Many of their telephone conversations
have been reported publicly , but I have tried
to protect their ability to have private
conversations by not talking about them too
much publicly myself . 
So I said a few weeks ago that they have had a
handful of conversations . 
They ' ve had more conversations since then . 
So I don ' t know if now it ' s two handfuls or not . 
But they continue to be in touch . 
The Press : Will the report be sent to Congress today ? 
And do we have an idea of when lawmakers are
going to be briefed ? 
Mr . Earnest : Director Clapper ' s office will be
responsible for disseminating the report
and following the President ' s instruction to
ensure that Congress is appropriately briefed . 
I don ' t know that the timing for all that has
been laid out at this point , but you can check
with his office and they can keep you up to
date on that . 
But the President ' s expectation -- and I think
this is something that Director Clapper committed
to -- is that Congress will be briefed on the
results of the report , and I would expect that to
happen soon . 
The Press : And then piggybacking off of Josh ' s
question , as far as the President ' s view of any
kind of intelligence community shakeup that the
Trump transition team may or may not be considering , 
what would the President think specifically about
doing away with the DNI -- with the role of the
Director of the National Intelligence ? 
Mr . Earnest : Yeah , listen , I think -- obviously , the
Office of the Director of National Intelligence was
created to address an intelligence failure in
the first place . 
And the President has benefitted from the
organizing function that Director Clapper ' s office
has performed in drawing on the material that ' s
collected by the wide variety of intelligence
agencies all across the U . S . government . 
And so serving as that organizing function I
think is valuable . 
Look , I think I would also add that Director Clapper
is somebody who has served as the Director of
National Intelligence more for than six years now . 
And President Obama has felt enormously well
served by the way that he has handled the
significant responsibilities of that office . 
But that ' s not new when you ' re talking about
somebody like Director Clapper . 
Director Clapper enlisted in the United States
Marine Corps in 1961 , and he is somebody who began
his career in the military as a rifleman in the U . S . 
Marine Corps Reserves . 
He is somebody who served in the Air Force and flew
73 combat support missions over Southeast Asia during
the Vietnam War . 
This is somebody who has put his life on the line
to protect this country , and he didn ' t do that
because he got drafted , he
did that because he signed up . 
And since then , he has had a career of public service
that ' s included him rising to the level as a
Lieutenant General in the United States Air Force . 
And he is somebody who has served Presidents
in both parties . 
He is somebody who is committed to the safety
and security of this country . 
And we owe him -- as he noted in his testimony
today , he is ending his career in public service
in January 20th , and we certainly owe him a deep
debt of gratitude for his service to the country , 
not just as a Director of National Intelligence , but
for the six decades that he has selflessly
served this country . 
The Press : Would the President advise the
President-elect of any room for improvement
within the intelligence community ? 
Mr . Earnest : Listen , I think what the President
would say is that the incoming President and his
team should take a close look at the intelligence
community , and if they have proposals or ideas
for implementing reforms that would ensure that the
country is better served , then that ' s something that
they should carefully consider . 
But the current structure that ' s in place now and
the individuals who populate the highest ranks
of that organizational chart have served
President Obama enormously well . 
And he is hopeful that the incoming President will
benefit from the same kind of sound advice and
expertise that has made the United States safer
over the last eight years . Michelle . 
The Press : So are you saying that the President
would say he shouldn ' t change it if it has served
him so well , meaning the structure ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think President Obama is simply
someone who has benefitted enormously from the
current structure and the people who serve
in that structure . 
But obviously the President-elect will have
an opportunity to consider if a new structure would
be better for him . 
Look , we ' ve already spent some time in here
previously talking about how the President-elect
has chosen to handle this information somewhat
differently than President Obama has . 
The President-elect has declined to get daily
intelligence briefings
from the intelligence community . 
So he clearly has different ideas for how
this should work . 
President Obama believes that he was well served by
getting this material briefed to him every day , 
and he believed that having a structure in
place to support that was good for the country and
good for his ability to make a good decision . 
But it may be that the President-elect has
some different ideas . 
The Press : So is there nothing about the current
structure that President Obama would change ? 
Mr . Earnest : Again , I think this is going to be
entirely up to President-elect Trump to
decide , but President Obama has been enormously
well served by the people
that are in the current structure . 
The Press : Okay . 
And we heard the Speaker of the House today say
publicly in an interview that Russia did not affect
the outcome of this election . 
Do you think that ' s a fair thing to say ? 
Is that something that can even be known , given the
intelligence that has been out there ? 
Mr . Earnest : I was not able to listen to the
entirety of the testimony , so I ' m relying on you to
provide the context for what was said . 
I suspect that the point that was being made is
simply the idea that the intelligence community has
concluded that Russia did not succeed in tampering
with voting rolls in a way that would interfere with
the ability of people to
cast a ballot and have it counted . 
So from that standpoint , there ' s no evidence that
the vote tally was manipulated . 
For the broader political impact of the
hack-and-leak strategy that the Russians
implemented , this is a strategy that obviously
had a negative effect on that Democratic
candidate for President . 
I think that ' s something that people will be
assessing for quite some time . 
I think you ' d be hard-pressed to make the
case that it had a positive impact on the
Democratic campaign . 
But ultimately , what was the -- how much of an
impact it had I think is something that will be
subject to debate for quite some time . 
The Press : Because I think in the past when you were
asked ,  " Did this hurt Democrats , did it hurt
Clinton in particular ,  " you would say , well , 
that ' s up to analysts . 
But you ' re saying that it ' s obvious that the
Russian meddling did hurt Clinton . 
Mr . Earnest : I think particularly the week or
so before we left for the holidays , I think I made
pretty clear the ample evidence that is available
to anybody who was paying attention -- The Press : I
mean , I think then we were talking about intent , that
it was clearly designed to hurt Democrats . 
But you ' re saying that it was obvious that it had a
negative effect on Clinton . 
Mr . Earnest : Yeah . 
The Press : I just wanted to make sure that is what
you ' re talking about . 
Mr . Earnest : Yeah , again , I don ' t think that ' s
different than what I said in December . 
I haven ' t -- I watch a lot of cable television and I
read a lot of newspapers , and I haven ' t heard
anybody come out and say that having John Podesta ' s
emails leaked on a daily basis , every day , for the
last three weeks leading up to Election Day was
good for the Clinton campaign . 
That would certainly be a controversial analysis . 
It would cut against the grain . 
But I think you ' d be pretty hard-pressed to
make that case . 
The Press : Okay , fine . 
And today , Senator Graham said that it ' s time at
this point to throw rocks at Russia , and
not just pebbles . 
So if we ' re going to go with the analogy of
throwing stones , the response that this
administration has put out there against Russia , do
you consider that a pebble , or is that a rock ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think that ' s a hard
thing to assess . 
I ' ll let Senator Graham
put forward his own analogies . 
I think what -- or metaphors . 
The Press : I mean , we know what the point is , that he
and others at this hearing are implying that
it ' s not enough . So --
Mr . Earnest : And I think what I would say is
that this is a forceful response . 
It ' s not the sum total of the response , but the
public report that was issued last week that
detailed the Russian government agencies being
sanctioned , that detailed the PNGing of Russian
diplomats from the United States , the closing of a
couple of diplomatic facilities , the Joint
Analysis Report that was issued that will interfere
with Russia ' s ability to carry out these kinds of
operations in the future , both because by releasing
this information system ' s administrators in the
United States and around the world can better
protect their computer networks against the
malware and the tactics that are employed
by the Russians . 
So that won ' t just improve the defenses of these
networks , it also means the Russians have to go
back to the drawing board to look for new tactics
and design new malware . 
That is going to interfere with their ability to
continue to carry out
these actions moving forward . 
So what you have seen is a serious response , and you
haven ' t seen the sum total of it . 
And I know that there are some , including some
members of the President-elect ' s team , 
who fretted that the response was too severe . 
So they ' re certainly entitled to their opinion , 
but the President believes that the serious effort
that Russia undertook to interfere in our election
deserves to be met with a serious response , and
that ' s what was announced last week . 
The Press : Okay , and lastly on -- we also heard
Senator McCain today . 
When he was asked was that hack an act of war , he
said in the broader sense he believes yes . 
And I know you don ' t want to add any additional
labels , but what we have here was an attack that
you said was designed to undermine essentially
democracy in America . 
So how do you draw the line in the cyber world ? 
What is an act of war and what isn ' t ? 
Mr . Earnest : Look , what the intelligence community
has assessed is that it certainly interfered with
our democracy , or the aim was to interfere with our
democracy and to undermine public confidence . 
And that ' s their assessment . 
And one of the challenges that policymakers will
face , not just in the next administration but
probably in subsequent administrations , is
establishing some norms in this new realm . 
In cyberspace , these norms don ' t exist . 
And it ' s a brave new world
out there , and it poses some risks . 
It obviously -- in cyberspace , we ' ve got
enormous capabilities to strengthen our economy , to
make it easier for small businesses to do business
around the globe , to make our lives more convenient , 
and , in some cases , to
make our lives more secure . 
Those are all good things , but there are risks
associated with those kinds of developments , and
establishing some norms in cyberspace is important . 
And one area where we have made some progress on this
is with regard to our relationship with China , 
where the United States has reached an agreement
with China to establish a norm that state-sponsored , 
cyber-enabled theft for commercial purposes is not
something that ' s appropriate in cyberspace . 
And you heard the intelligence officials
today indicate that they have seen a reduction in
the kind of malicious cyber activity emanating
from China targeting
U . S . businesses . 
That ' s a positive impact . 
Does that entirely solve the problem ? 
Of course not . 
But it does give us a sense of the kinds of
solutions that we need to consult to enhance our
security in cyberspace . 
And this is not something that ' s going to get solved
overnight , and this is not likely to be solved in the
term of the next President , but it ' s
something that policymakers will be
grappling with for quite some time . 
The Press : How is it not an act of war , then , to
attack democracy in this way ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , it is something that is deeply
serious , and something that the administration
takes quite seriously . 
And I think that ' s evident not just from the public
comments you ' ve seen from the intelligence
community , but that ' s also evidence from the response
that ' s been put forward . Bob . 
The Press : Hey , Josh . 
Back on the Affordable Care Act for a moment . 
How involved does the President plan to stay in
what I ' ll go so far as to say will be the
replacement process , which is probably going to
come piecemeal ? 
He was up on the Hill yesterday asking Democrats
to hold fast against any major changes to this
overall program we call Obamacare . 
How much does Barack Obama expect the Democrats to
seek his counsel or give his blessing to " this
change is good , that change isn ' t good " --
something along those lines ? 
How involved can he stay in all of this ? 
Mr . Earnest : Listen , as we discussed earlier , the
advice that President Obama had for Democrats is
that they should fight against the Republican
effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act
because of the extraordinarily negative
impact it would have on millions of Americans , 
including the 30 million Americans who would lose
health insurance , and including the 130 million
Americans with preexisting conditions who would lose
the protection against -- that prevents insurance
companies from discriminating against them . 
That only happened because of the Affordable Care
Act , and stripping that protection away would have
a negative impact on a large number of Americans . 
The argument that the President has made is that
isn ' t just bad for the American people and bad
for our economy and bad for the deficit , it ' s
also bad politics . 
So I don ' t think it ' s a foregone conclusion , and
the President certainly doesn ' t think it ' s a
foregone conclusion that Republicans will succeed
in repealing the law . 
They were only able to marshal 51 votes yesterday
in the Senate to merely instruct committees to see
if they could come up with a way to repeal the law . 
So they ' ve got a very narrow margin for error , 
particularly when you consider how
united Democrats are . 
And so that ' s the advice that President Obama had
for Democrats . 
With regard to the role that he can play in his
post-presidency , I would not expect for him to play
a large public role in this fight . 
If there are people who want to seek his counsel , 
either for policy solutions or for
particularly persuasive arguments that can be made
publicly , I wouldn ' t be surprised if he engages in
those kinds of private conversations -- not
regularly , but I wouldn ' t be surprised if something
like that occurred . 
But as I mentioned yesterday , the President ' s
expectation is that congressional Democrats
and Democrats across the country are going to have
to stand up and speak out . 
And if they do , that will serve the country well , it
will prevent Republicans from succeeding in
repealing the Affordable Care Act , and it will
provide an excellent opportunity for a new
generation of Americans , a new generation of
Democrats to step forward and begin to make their
voice heard and exercise some influence in our
political debate and , again , in a way that would
be good for the country and good for the
Democratic Party . Mark . 
The Press : Couple more in general terms about the
review the President is being briefed on now . 
I realize he ' s still getting briefed , but does
he have any initial
reaction as to what he ' s seen ? 
Does he think this report contains something
substantial and new that he hasn ' t already
been briefed on ? 
And does it contain any smoking guns that would
convince skeptics ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I haven ' t seen the report , 
so I wouldn ' t characterize it at this point about
whether or not it includes
smoking guns or other things . 
I think just the caution that I would point out is
that while the intelligence community is
committed to fulfilling the President ' s
instructions to make public as much as
possible , they ' re sharply limited in their ability
to produce a lot of information given the need
to protect sources and methods . 
So I haven ' t seen the report . 
I don ' t know what will be included in the report . 
But I do anticipate that it will be difficult to
produce something like that , but we ' ll have to
see what they come forward with . 
And ultimately , I think we ' ll -- I ' ll be making --
I ' ll be exercising some of our own judgment about
what exactly the report means . 
So since the President is getting briefed on it
right now , I haven ' t
gotten a reaction from him . 
But presumably , at some point , the President will
be asked about it and he ' ll have an opportunity
to offer up that reaction . 
The Press : Admittedly , chunks of it are not going
to be able to made public , so the public might
not be convinced . 
But obviously one recipient of the full
report is going to get briefed on it tomorrow . 
Is this report going to be convincing to that
recipient ? 
Mr . Earnest : There are a number of things that come
to mind that I could say in response to that
question , but I ' ll exercise some discretion
today and say we ' ll see . 
The Press :  ( Inaudible .  ) Mr . Earnest : I know , I
know . 
Kevin . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
I want to draw your attention to something
that was circulating online yesterday , a
beating that apparently took place on Facebook
Live involving four individuals in Chicago . 
Is the White House aware of this video ? 
Would the President himself have been aware of
this , and would he have
any comment about what happened ? 
Mr . Earnest : Kevin , I ' ve seen the video in news
coverage , and I know that local officials , law
enforcement officials are investigating this matter . 
Based on news reports that I ' ve seen , some
individuals who were likely involved
are in custody . 
So they are still conducting an
investigation about the disturbing images that we
saw in that video . 
They do demonstrate a level of depravity that is
an outrage to a lot of Americans . 
I haven ' t spoken to the President about it , but
I ' m confident that he would be angered by the
images that are depicted on that video . 
But I believe it ' s important for us to defer
to the important work that local law enforcement must
do in investigating these kinds of incidents , so I
don ' t want to say a whole lot more than that . 
But obviously this is something that ' s gotten a
lot of attention , and for good reason . 
The Press : Would this rise to the level of a hate
crime in your opinion ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think it ' s too early to tell . 
I certainly don ' t want to predict where the
investigation would lead . 
I think our expectation would be that local law
enforcement would follow the facts . 
And I wouldn ' t speculate at this point to what
degree federal officials would get involved for
considering those kinds of crimes . 
Obviously , a decision by the Department of Justice
to investigate a matter like this is something
that -- is a decision that they would have
to make alone . 
The Press : I want to piggyback on something
Justin was talking about earlier , and that is this
idea that the President gets briefed on this
report , and yet sanctions and other decisions were
doled out on the Russians prior to the completion
of the report . 
And I ' m wondering , does that mean there was
sufficient evidence in the administration ' s opinion
prior to the completion of the report that the
President is receiving a briefing on now to
make that action ? 
And if that ' s the case , why not wait until the
report itself was complete ? 
Mr . Earnest : Kevin , there was a desire on
the part of the U . S . 
government to be forceful in our response , but also
to be very precise in our response . 
And that meant that there were a variety of
agencies , including the Treasury Department and
the Department of State , and others , had to
carefully evaluate how best to use the tools that
were available to them to implement a response to
this situation , and as soon as those response
options had been considered and developed , 
that we worked to implement them quickly . 
There was no need to wait for additional evidence to
substantiate the kind of response that
was put forward . 
And again , I think based on the unprecedented
nature of the statement that was issued by the
intelligence community a month before the election , 
I think that should be a clear indication to
everybody of the depth of conviction , the high
confidence that the intelligence community had
in the conclusions that they publicized
back in October . 
The Press : Is that report , the one the President is
being briefed on , it wasn ' t completed last
week ; it was , in fact , completed very recently --
yesterday , for example ? 
Mr . Earnest : I believe that Director Clapper
indicated in his testimony today that the report was
only recently completed . 
The Press : Let me ask you about the exit statements . 
It ' s an interesting approach . 
I don ' t think I ' ve ever read exit statements like
we ' ve seen in previous administrations sort of so
publicly dispensed . 
What was the thinking behind that , and why is
that important ? 
Mr . Earnest : These are the exit memos from the
Cabinet agencies ? 
The Press : Yeah . 
Mr . Earnest : Listen , over the course of the last
year , the President has directed his team to be
focused on ensuring a smooth and effective
transition to the next administration . 
And that was a tasking that the President gave to
officials in a wide variety of agencies before
we knew the outcome of the election . 
But in that process , these agencies were compiling
material to help the incoming team hit the
ground running to understand what kinds of
issues they were likely to inherit , to understand
what kinds of strategies we had implemented , and
what kind of results we had to show for the
strategy that we implemented . 
And in developing this material , it became clear
that these memos would provide the American
people a lot of insight into the important work
that ' s been done over the last eight years , into the
progress that we ' ve made over the last eight years , 
but also in the challenges that remain . 
And the President made a decision -- and , again , I
think this is consistent with his commitment to
transparency -- he said , let ' s make these memos
public , and let ' s share with the American people
in a comprehensive fashion -- let ' s show them our
work , let ' s show them what we ' ve done , but let ' s also
be honest about the challenges that remain . 
And we ' ve talked before about what the outcome of
the election means for the country , and it means that
somebody who has promised to try governing the
country in a different way is going to get the
opportunity to do that . 
And there will be an opportunity for all of you
and for the American public to evaluate what
kind of progress they ' re making . 
We ' ve established benchmarks about the
progress that the country made in the last eight
years under President Obama ' s leadership , and
you ' ll be able to compare the progress that was made
under President Obama with the results of the
incoming administration ' s leadership . 
And I think that should inform people -- it will
inform people about the most effective way to lead
the country in the future . 
And if the incoming administration is able to
exceed these benchmarks in a whole variety of areas , 
that obviously would be a powerful endorsement of
the approach that President Trump chooses to take . 
If not , it won ' t be . 
The Press : Couple quick ones . 
First , on Gitmo , is it your expectation that
there will be a reduction in the number of detainees
again this week ? 
And can you sort of clarify the
administration ' s perspective on the
recidivism rate of those who have either gone back
into battle and have either been
re-apprehended , or not ? 
Mr . Earnest : Yes , I am not able to speak to any
specific detainee transfers between now and
January 20th other than to confirm for you that there
are likely to be some . 
And whenever those transfers take place , once
they have been completed , we announce them publicly . 
And that will continue to be our approach
through January 20th . 
And my expectation is that there will be some
additional announcements of that type . 
With regard to this question about -- The
Press : Including this week , you think ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m sorry ? 
The Press : Including this week , you think ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t speak to timing at this point . 
But certainly before January 20th . 
The Press : Okay . 
Mr . Earnest : With regard to this question about
reengagement , you ' ll recall that President
Obama , upon taking office in 2009 , ordered a
comprehensive review of the file of every single
detainee at the prison at Guantanamo Bay . 
And the purpose of that review was to determine
whether or not individuals under an appropriate set
of security requirements could be safely
transferred to another country in a way that
would not undermine U . S . 
national security . 
And the process that he established required a
variety of agencies , including the Secretary of
Defense , to certify that the appropriate security
requirements were in place before an individual was
transferred . 
This careful , specific approach was a departure
from the approach that was taken by the previous
administration , and it shows in the results . 
The percentage of those who have been confirmed of
reengaging in the fight by the intelligence community
-- these are individual who were released or
transferred from Guantanamo before 2009 , 
before President Obama took office --
is 21 percent . 
Twenty-one percent of the Gitmo detainees who were
released before President Obama took office have
been confirmed by our intelligence agency of
reengaging in the fight . 
Since President Obama took office , and since these
reforms were initiated , nine detainees have been
confirmed by the intelligence community of
reengaging in the fight . 
Considering that we have released 183 detainees
during President Obama ' s time in office , a little
back-of-the-envelope math would indicate that our
percentage is much better , and it ' s a result of the
reforms that President Obama instituted on his
first day in office . 
The Press : Does that
include now-deceased combatants ? 
Mr . Earnest : We can check on the details
for you on that . 
The Press : Okay . 
Lastly , Tuesday we were talking about the
President and the economy and having created 900 , 000
manufacturing jobs . 
We ' re doing some number-crunching and it
seems to be a little bit higher than that which
we ' ve come up with . 
Can you sort of help me square the difference ? 
I think we came at around 807 , 000 or something . 
Mr . Earnest : I think what I said was nearly 900 , 000 . 
I did overshoot the mark a little bit . 
I was just working off of memory , I didn ' t have the
numbers in front of me . 
The Press : Okay , great . 
Mr . Earnest : Ron . 
The Press : Just on this -- to follow Kevin ' s question
about this review and briefing the President is
getting , I don ' t understand what ' s new or
what ' s being learned or what was asked that moves
the whole situation past what you knew to order
sanctions and the removal diplomats to where
we are today . 
What questions are now answered ? 
And what ' s new , or what ' s the President learning
about that he didn ' t know then but already felt
confident enough that he should make these moves ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think there are a couple of
parts to this , Ron . 
The first fact is that this report is , despite
all the attention that is understandably focused on
the review of Russian involvement and Russia ' s
malicious cyber activity in the context of the 2016
election , this review will take a look at malicious
cyber activity in previous presidential elections , as
well , including by actors other than Russia . 
So it ' s a little bit broader than just
this one incident . 
The second thing is , the last time that we heard
formally from the intelligence community on
this matter was the first week in October . 
And since that time , the intelligence community has
dedicated significant resources to learning as
much as they possibly could about the Russian
malicious cyber activity and the efforts that they
undertook to undermine or raise questions about the
durability of the American democracy . 
So that ' s the material that they ' re reviewing and
including in the report . 
I can ' t say at this point exactly what that means
for the content , because I haven ' t seen the content . 
The Press : And you described a process kind
of underway of briefing there . 
Who exactly is briefing the President ? 
How many Cabinet secretaries are involved ? 
Mr . Earnest : It ' s members of his national security
team , including some of the individuals who
testified on Capitol Hill today . 
It essentially is senior officials who are
responsible for compiling the report . 
The Press : So we ' re talking about a half dozen
or more people ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think it ' s more than that , but I
don ' t have a specific manifest from the meeting
to share . 
The Press : And Director Clapper talked about the
motive and intent of it on the Hill , and he said that
there was more than one motive . 
Does this review answer the question of whether
the Russians intended to or were motivated to try
to make Donald Trump or help him become President ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t speak to the contents of the
report because I just haven ' t seen it . 
The Press : But you can tell without seeing it . 
Going into this process , or as this process was
ongoing , was that one of the questions that was
going to be answered ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , I would leave it to the
intelligence community to say what they ' re going to
include in the report . 
And I think this will be easier to discuss then . 
But look , as I said last month at some length , you
don ' t need a security clearance to know the
impact that this Russian hack-and-leak strategy had
on the campaign . 
Again , it was the DNC whose emails were hacked
and released , not the RNC ' s . 
It was John Podesta ' s emails that were hacked
and released , not Reince Priebus . 
It was the Trump campaign that had positive things
to say about President Putin ' s leadership . 
And it was the Trump campaign that raised
questions about their
ongoing commitment to NATO . 
The Press : But then why won ' t you say the Russians
tried to get Donald Trump elected ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , because we ' re going to
wait on an intelligence community assessment . 
But again , I think that there ' s certainly some
common sense that can be applied that doesn ' t
require a security clearance . 
The Press : And in talking about this , you always use
the term " high confidence .  " Is there
something higher than high confidence ? 
Is there like highest confidence
or most highest ?  
( Laughter .  ) 
Mr . Earnest : The oldest confidence or something ? 
The Press : This could actually be like a fairly
low standard high confidence , that there ' s
like ultimate and -- I hate to be -- Mr . Earnest : 
It ' s okay . 
You should probably direct this question to an expert
in the intelligence community . 
What I can assure you is it ' s not a low standard . 
It is , as the name suggests , an
extraordinarily high standard . 
It is not an -- The Press : -- been something higher ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , it is not uncommon for the
President and other decision-makers to get
analysis from the intelligence community
that is a low confidence or a moderate
confidence assessment . 
That ' s not unusual . 
That is an effort by the intelligence community to
provide as much information and as much
analysis as possible . 
So the fact that these are conclusions that have been
reached with high confidence is an
indication of their high confidence
in this information . 
The Press : Clapper said it was not a close call , this
wasn ' t tough to figure out . 
Is that true ? 
Mr . Earnest : Again , I think the best way to
interpret this is to consider the extraordinary
nature of the statement that was issued by the
intelligence community before the election . 
That is not something that ' s happened before . 
That ' s unprecedented . 
And the fact that they were not just able , but
willing , to make such a forceful statement , on the
record , in advance of the election , 
I think is telling . 
The Press : And lastly , completely different subject . 
What are the President and First Lady doing tomorrow
night , Friday night ? 
Mr . Earnest : There have been some reports about
the President and First Lady hosting a social
event here at the White House , and that ' s
something that they ' ve done in the past and it ' s
something I anticipate they ' re going to
do again tomorrow . 
The Press : Anything more about it ? 
Are you going ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t have any details about who ' s
attending , and I ' ll get back to you about my own
personal plans for Friday night . 
I don ' t know if that ' s an invitation or -- 
( laughter ) -- I ' m just teasing . 
The Press : This is a farewell party , essentially . 
Mr . Earnest : Look , over the years the President
and First Lady have on occasion , not frequently , 
but on occasion have hosted parties at the
White House for their friends . 
And I anticipate this will
be the last one that they have . 
They ' ve got some packing to do . Jordan . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
I want to ask you about a resolution that ' s being
voted on in the House this afternoon on the U . N . 
Security Council Resolution on Israeli
Settlement Activity . 
It condemns the resolution and it calls
for its repeal . 
I ' m wondering if the White House has seen that
resolution and what , if any , reaction
you have to it . 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m aware of the resolution . 
Obviously , it is not at all something that the
Obama administration agrees with . 
The action that was taken by the Obama
administration a couple of weeks ago at the United
Nations Security Council reflected the President ' s
consideration of America ' s foremost national
security interests . 
It reflected a careful considering of the policy
that the United States has pursued under Presidents
in both parties , which is the need for a two-state
solution to resolve the conflict between the
Israelis and Palestinians in the region . 
And the United States declined to veto a
resolution that expressed concern about the
accelerated pace of Israeli settlement
construction and , notably , the continued violence and
incitement that we ' ve seen in that context
of that conflict . 
Both of those things are making it harder for both
sides to come together
around a two-state solution . 
And , in fact , both of them -- both of those actions
are actually putting a two-state solution even
further out of reach . 
And the administration is
deeply concerned about that . 
The United States has long articulated our commitment
to a secure , democratic Jewish Israel living side
by side in peace and security with a
contiguous , viable Palestinian state . 
And outside of that solution is only a single
state that would force the Israeli government and the
Israeli people to choose between being Jewish and
democratic because -- given the size of the
large Palestinian population in that area . 
So this is something that --
the trend lines are not good . 
And that ' s why the Obama administration took , 
admittedly , a notable step , but a step that is
entirely consistent with the long-held bipartisan
policy of the United States of America . 
The Press : And on another topic . 
There are a number of House Democrats who have
decided to boycott the inauguration activities to
protest President-elect Trump . 
Obviously , the President is going to participate in
them , and he ' s talked about the need for a
smooth transition . 
Does the White House have any view on whether it ' s
appropriate for these members to sit on the
sidelines and protest the President-elect ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not aware of any view that the
President has expressed . 
I think the President ' s view is that members of
Congress can attend the inauguration if they ' d
like , and if they don ' t want to then I think
that ' s probably fine too . 
Mark . 
The Press : Josh , what is the President ' s thinking
in submitting , or resubmitting , 10
nominations to the Senate yesterday -- several
inspectors general , as I recall ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think the President is just
fulfilling his presidential
responsibility to continue ensuring that the federal
government is fully staffed and the
individuals , the men and women that President Obama
has put forward , are individuals with the
highest degree of integrity . 
These are accomplished professionals who are more
than qualified for these positions . 
We ' ve been disappointed that we haven ' t seen the
Republican Congress act as expeditiously as they
should have to confirm and , in some cases , even
consider some of the President ' s nominees . 
We ' ll have to see what the congressional response to
these nominees is , but obviously there ' s a short
window for them to act . 
The Press : Very short . 
Mr . Earnest : Indeed . 
The Press : Does President Obama have any expectation
that this GOP Senate will act on these nominations ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , we certainly have seen a lot
of Republican senators talk about how important
it is for highly qualified inspectors general
to be in place . 
So we certainly -- if that ' s what they actually
believe , then these individuals should be
given due consideration . 
The Press : Are these the last of his nominations ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t rule out at this point
additional nominations , but we ' ll obviously
let you know . 
The Press : I also wanted to ask whether there was
any consideration given to sneaking in a recess
appointment during the five-minute intersession
recess on Monday . 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not aware that there was -- at
least not seriously . 
I guess I can ' t speak to what everybody might have
been considering .  
( Laughter .  ) But I ' m not aware of any serious
consideration to doing that . 
The Press : Have you seen the article written by
Mike McCurry and Ari Fleischer with
recommendations to the Trump press operation ? 
One of the things they ' re recommending is no more
live TV coverage of White House briefings and
rotating in reporters into the seats
in the briefing room . 
Does that sound like
something you could endorse ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen , I don ' t think I would
endorse either of those things , but they ' re
certainly provocative ideas and they ' re not
things that I would
instinctively oppose either . 
I think -- you know , what I ' ve said publicly about
this process is that it ' s a valuable one , and that
there ' s a lot of symbolic value to a senior member
of the President ' s team being held accountable , 
and for that accountability to play out
on camera and on the record . 
I think that ' s a good thing for our democracy
and the President has actually found that to be
a useful thing for his presidency . 
But look , this is an exercise that presidential
press secretaries have engaged in for a couple
generations now , and this venue and this process has
evolved over time and it ' s not automatically a bad
thing if there are some innovations that can be
introduced that would make this kind of exchange more
fruitful and even more in line with the purpose of
giving all of you an opportunity to demand some
transparency and accountability . 
But it ' s hard to imagine that there ' s anything you
could do to make the briefing more entertaining
than it ' s been over the last couple years .  
( Laughter .  ) 
I say that facetiously . 
We ' ll do a couple more . Jared . 
The Press : Josh , what ' s your message to voters who
find the argument compelling -- this
argument pushed out by the President-elect and
certainly many of his supporters -- that
intelligence community reports are not to be
trusted because of alleged failures of intelligence
community reports in the past ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think -- my message to voters is
that the elections are quite a ways away . 
So the message --
The Press :  ( Inaudible .  ) 
Mr . Earnest : My message to citizens though -- that ' s
what I was just going to say . 
My message to citizens is a couple of things . 
The first is , there have been serious reforms that
have been put in place since the high-profile
intelligence failures around 9 / 11 , and those
reforms have addressed a range of bureaucratic
inefficiencies that prevented some
decision-makers from getting timely , 
accurate information . 
And there should be motivation internally
-- in the U . S . 
government , in the intelligence community , 
and in the White House -- to look for ways to
continue to strengthen the kind of -- to strengthen
the process by which the President and his team
receive up-to-date , accurate information . 
What I can tell you is that over the last eight
years , President Obama has been extraordinarily well
served by the timely and accurate advice that he
has received from the intelligence community . 
And so that ' s been a good thing both in terms of the
structure that ' s been in place , but also in terms
of the people who have filled the boxes in that
organizational chart . 
The Press : Just one follow-up on Isaac ' s
question about former Congressman Perriello . 
The President -- you ' ve described and he ' s
described with a lot of enthusiasm for the
prospect of the Affordable Care Act moving forward . 
Does that enthusiasm for the ACA , which obviously
was a big part of the 2010 vote that took Congressman
Perriello out of office -- does that enthusiasm for
Obamacare ' s future translate to enthusiasm
for Perriello or for a Democrat ' s chances in 2017
in the gubernatorial race in Virginia ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen , I think I already have
made the observation that if Republicans follow
through on their promise to repeal the Affordable
Care Act and take away health care for 30 million
Americans , and strip the kinds of protections that
prevent 130 million Americans with preexisting
conditions from being discriminated against , 
that doesn ' t sound like very good politics to me . 
But I think it ' s far too early to tell what sort of
impact that could have on , for example , the
Virginia governor ' s race . 
I do know that there is a unanimity of opinion among
Democrats in Virginia about how important it is
to expand Medicaid in Virginia . 
And the Republican obstruction that we have
seen that has prevented thousands of people in the
Commonwealth of Virginia from getting access to
health care , I don ' t think that ' s going to be a
political winner for them either . 
But I ' ll let the individual Democratic
candidates speak to their position on that . 
The Press : One last one . 
This is about the DNC race . 
The Mayor of South Bend , Pete Buttigieg , has
entered that race . 
Does the President know this mayor ? 
Does he have a relationship with him ? 
And this has developed during the briefing today , 
so I don ' t expect it if
you don ' t have anything today . 
Mr . Earnest : I can tell you that the President has
had an opportunity to meet him , and the President
believes that he is obviously a young man with
a very compelling story . 
He ' s already quite accomplished . 
But I ' m not aware that the President -- as I
mentioned earlier , I ' m not aware the President
intends to formally endorse in the race , but
we ' ll have to see what happens . 
Francesca , I ' ll give you the last one . 
The Press : Thanks . 
Coincidentally , I also have a question about the
Democratic National Committee race . 
You just said that the President doesn ' t intend
to formally or publicly endorse anyone , but has he
privately endorsed anyone ?  
( Laughter .  ) And has he --- no -- Mr . Earnest : Well , 
it wouldn ' t be private if I said it here .  
( Laughter .  ) The Press : No , no , no , no , no , no . 
I ' m just saying , has he privately endorsed anyone , 
and has he potentially encouraged anyone
to join the race ? 
Mr . Earnest : Listen , I ' m not going to -- you know , 
obviously there are now at least a couple of people
that are in the race that the President
knows personally . 
The President obviously thinks very highly of a
number of the people that have thrown their
hat into the ring . 
The thing that I can tell you is that the President
does believe that having a vigorous contest for a
position like this is good for the party because this
is the kind of decision that ' s not made by party
insiders in Washington , this is -- the chairman of
the DNC is elected by votes cast by DNC members
all across the country . 
And so having a vigorous debate in our party about
who should be the leader of the party and what sort
of approach that person should take to
strengthening our party and making sure that
Democrats are doing what the President suggested in
terms of being more present and more effective
advocates in communities all across the country for
the kinds of values that our party stands for . 
But ultimately , who will be entrusted with that
responsibility is a decision that will be made
by the men and women of the Democratic National
Committee , and their membership extends to
communities all across the country . 
The Press : And a quick follow-up on
one other thing . 
So it is possible , then , that he encouraged someone
behind the scenes to get into the race ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' m not going to talk about the
conversations that the President has . 
There are a number of people that the President
respects , admires , and even likes who are in the
race . 
And having a surplus of experienced , qualified , 
charismatic candidates is only a good thing for the
Democratic Party , and the President is
pleased by that . 
The Press : Sure . 
And then the last thing , we discussed earlier this
week possible details on the speech in Chicago . 
Anything else to share about that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Come back tomorrow and we ' ll
do that , okay ? 
The Press : Okay . 
Mr . Earnest : All right . 
Thanks , everybody . 
We ' ll see you then . 