At CPAC , Ukraine and Policy Take a Back Seat to Cultural Grievances
The annual gathering of American conservatives reflected the G . O . P ’ s shift away from policy issues that had traditionally animated the party . 




Former President Donald J . Trump speaking on Saturday evening to the Conservative Political Action Conference . 
Former President Donald J . Trump speaking on Saturday evening to the Conservative Political Action Conference . Credit .  .  . Scott McIntyre for The New York Times
Reid J . EpsteinAstead W . Herndon
By Reid J . Epstein and Astead W . Herndon
Feb . 26 , 2022
ORLANDO , Fla . — Russia ’ s invasion of Ukraine has much of the world transfixed and on edge . President Biden announced a new Supreme Court appointment who is unlikely to get any significant Republican support . 

But at the Conservative Political Action Conference , the annual gathering of the right wing of American politics , the news convulsing the world seemed oddly distant . Instead , the focus was on cultural grievances , former President Donald J . Trump and the widespread sense of victimization that have replaced traditional conservative issues . 

Like so many of the Republican officials who have remade themselves in his image , Mr . Trump , in a speech to the conference on Saturday night , sought to portray himself as a victim of assaults from Democrats and the news media . He said they would leave him alone if he were not a threat to seek the presidency again in 2024 .  
 
 “ If I said ‘ I ’ m not going to run ,  ’ the persecution would stop immediately ,  ” Mr . Trump said .  “ They ’ d go on to the next victim .  ” 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Mr . Trump had broad support at the event : Of those who responded , 85 percent said they would back him for the Republican nomination for president again , and 97 percent said they approved of his performance as president , according to a straw poll of CPAC attendees . Asked who should be the G . O . P . presidential nominee in 2024 , 59 percent said Mr . Trump and 28 percent said Gov . Ron DeSantis . of Florida — though Floridians made up 37 percent of CPAC attendees . 

Eight months before the midterm elections , familiar Republican themes like lower taxes and a muscular foreign policy took a back seat to the idea that America is backsliding into a woke dystopia unleashed by liberal elites . Even the G . O . P . was more than a bit suspect . 

Charlie Kirk , the founder of Turning Point USA , a pro-Trump grass-roots group focusing on millennial conservatives , denounced “ the Republican Party of old ” in his speech to the conference , known as CPAC and held in Orlando , Fla .  , this year .  
 
 “ Conservative leaders can learn something from our wonderful 45th president of the United States ,  ” Mr . Kirk said .  “ I want our leaders to care more about you and our fellow countrymen than some abstract idea or abstract G . D . P . number .  ” 

Placing cultural aggrievement at the centerpiece of their midterm campaigns comes as Republicans find themselves split on a host of issues that have typically united the party . 

Editors ’ Picks
 
 ‘ In Love ,  ’ a Novelist ’ s Powerful Memoir About a Happy Marriage and an Assisted Suicide

San Francisco ’ s D . A . Says Angry Elites Want Him Out of Office

Have We Reached Peak Plant Milk ? Not Even Close . 
Continue reading the main story
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

This week , as Russian President Vladimir V . Putin ordered the invasion of Ukraine to the near-universal condemnation of American allies , Mr . Trump on Saturday reiterated his assessment that Mr . Putin was “ smart ” to invade Ukraine for the price of economic sanctions , though he did call the war “ a catastrophic disaster .  ”  His former adviser Steve Bannon praised Mr . Putin for being “ anti-woke ” — the very theme of the CPAC gathering . 

How Donald J . Trump Still Looms
Grip on G . O . P .  : Mr . Trump remains the most powerful figure in the Republican Party . However , there are signs his control is loosening . 
Power Struggle : Led by Senator Mitch McConnell , a band of anti-Trump Republicans is maneuvering to thwart the ex-president . 
Midterms Effect : Mr . Trump has become a party kingmaker , but his involvement in state races worries many Republicans . 
Post-Presidency Profits : Mr . Trump is melding business with politics , capitalizing for personal gain . 
Just the Beginning : For many Trump supporters who marched on Jan . 6 , the day was not a disgraced insurrection but the start of a movement . 
That put them at odds with Republican elected officials , particularly congressional leaders , who have denounced Mr . Putin ’ s actions , as have Democrats and Mr . Biden . 

On Capitol Hill , Republican senators are debating whether to release an official policy agenda at all ahead of the midterms . The lack of urgency was encapsulated in a statement by Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky , the Republican leader , who dismissed a question about what Republicans would do if they took back Congress in 2022 .  “ That is a very good question ,  ” Mr . McConnell said .  “ And I ’ ll let you know when we take it back .  ” 

In lieu of a united policy , Republicans are hoping that a grab bag of grievances will motivate voters who are dissatisfied with Mr . Biden ’ s administration . At CPAC , Republicans argued that they were the real victims of Mr . Biden ’ s America , citing rising inflation , undocumented immigration at the Mexican border and liberal institutions pushing racial diversity in hiring and education . 

Every speaker emphasized personal connections to Mr . Trump , no matter how spurious , while others adopted both his aggrieved tone and patented hand gestures . 


Image
Senator Josh Hawley of Missouri at CPAC on Thursday . 
Senator Josh Hawley of Missouri at CPAC on Thursday . Credit .  .  . Scott McIntyre for The New York Times
Representative Madison Cawthorn of North Carolina praised what he called China ’ s effort to instill “ great patriotic and masculine values ” in its youth through social media . At a Mexican restaurant inside the conference hotel , Representative Billy Long of Missouri argued that he coined the phrase “ Trump Train ” on 2015 . He said he still used it as his wireless internet password . And Senator Josh Hawley of Missouri , a banker ’ s son who was educated at Stanford and Yale , sought to tie himself to alienated blue-collar workers he claimed were getting a raw deal . 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story 
 “ Rednecks and roughnecks get a lot of bad press these days ,  ” Mr . Hawley said . 

At the same time the hallways of the massive Orlando hotel hosting the event were filled with an array of Trump paraphernalia . There were two separate kiosks marketing themselves as Trump malls , a shop selling Trump hammocks and , for $35 a book , a five-volume set of every tweet Mr . Trump published as president before Twitter banned him . 


Image
MAGA shoes at CPAC . 
MAGA shoes at CPAC . Credit .  .  . Scott McIntyre for The New York Times

Image
Cardboard cutouts of former President Donald J . Trump and Melania Trump in a hallway at CPAC . 
Cardboard cutouts of former President Donald J . Trump and Melania Trump in a hallway at CPAC . Credit .  .  . Scott McIntyre for The New York Times
Speakers largely brushed off the war in Ukraine , beyond blaming Mr . Biden , and on Friday few people mentioned Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson , Mr . Biden ’ s new choice for the Supreme Court . 

John Schnatter , the pizza magnate who in 2018 resigned as chairman of the Papa John ’ s franchise after using a racial slur in a comment about Black people during a conference call , mingled among the crowd , saying he was among those unfairly canceled . Senator Rick Scott of Florida warned of “ woke , government-run everything .  ” 

And former Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii , who in 2020 ran for the Democratic presidential nomination but has adopted right-wing positions and become a darling of conservative media , labeled the government a “ secular theocracy ” because of its efforts to fight misinformation . 

Eight miles from CPAC , an even angrier right-wing gathering , the America First Political Action Conference , took place at another Orlando hotel with Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia as the main attraction and Representative Paul Gosar of Arizona appearing by video . 

The commentator Nick Fuentes , head of the group that hosted the conference , said Mr . Putin had been compared to Hilter . He laughed and added :  “ They say it ’ s not a good thing .  ” 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story
Mr . Fuentes , a white nationalist and Holocaust denier , runs what is known as the America First or “ groyper ” movement , which promotes a message that the nation is losing “ its white demographic core .  ” Last month , Mr . Fuentes was subpoenaed by congressional investigators examining the attack on the U . S . Capitol on Jan . 6 , 2021 . 

At CPAC and beyond , focusing on the negative can be strategic as well as visceral . Polls show Republican voters have a more favorable view of Mr . Putin than of Mr . Biden , and one lesson of the backlash against the party holding the White House during the last four midterm elections is that an intense distaste for a president of the opposing party is more than enough to propel sweeping victories . 

It was only seven years ago that Jeb Bush , the former Florida governor , told the CPAC crowd that “ it ’ s good to oppose the bad things , but we need to start being for things .  ” 

Just as Mr . Trump excised Bush-style conservative politics from the Republican Party , so has it been removed from the annual CPAC gathering . 

Playing to feelings of resentment and alienation is a far safer bet for Republicans than advancing a policy agenda when the party remains split on taxes , foreign policy and how much to indulge Mr . Trump ’ s lies about the 2020 election .  
 
 “ You can always cut taxes , you can always roll back regulations , you can always elect better people ,  ” Senator Marco Rubio of Florida said .  “ But when freedom is lost and it ’ s eroded , it is so hard to reclaim .  ” 

At CPAC , there was no shortage of stories about the horrors of cultural and political cancellations — though the speakers offered scant evidence of actual suffering . 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story
Representative Jim Banks of Indiana , after saying he would “ never , ever apologize for objecting ” to Mr . Biden ’ s victory on Jan . 6 , said he and Representative Jim Jordan of Ohio were victimized when they were removed from the House committee investigating that day ’ s attack on the United States Capitol in 2021 .  
 
 “ We both got canceled and kicked off the committee by Nancy Pelosi ,  ” Mr . Banks said . 

Like others at CPAC who claimed to have experienced the wounds of cancel culture , Mr . Banks has seen his profile and political standing only increase since the moment he claimed to have been canceled . 


Image
CPAC attendees cheering during a speech by Senator Rick Scott of Florida . 
CPAC attendees cheering during a speech by Senator Rick Scott of Florida . Credit .  .  . Scott McIntyre for The New York Times
Leila Centner , a founder of a Miami private school , who last year told her teachers and staff they would not be allowed to interact with students if they received a coronavirus vaccine , recounted the backlash once her anti-vaccine views made news .  
 
 “ The media was all over me , they went ballistic ,  ” she said . 

But Ms . Centner said the brouhaha turned out to be a positive thing for her and her school . She told the CPAC audience that her student enrollment went up and there was now a waiting list . She has become a personality in demand from conservative news networks , and she said in an interview that she now had a homogeneous school community that shared her views on the pandemic and the country ’ s racial history .  
 
 “ What this whole thing has done is it ’ s actually made our community more aligned ,  ” she said . 

As the incentives in conservative politics increasingly reward figures caught up in controversies that can allow them to be portrayed as victims , leading to more face time on conservative cable television , some veteran Republicans are lamenting that there is little to be gained by a focus on policy . 

Former Representative Mark Walker of North Carolina , who is running for the Senate against a Trump-endorsed candidate , can ’ t get much attention , he said , when he touts his record working for veterans during his three terms in Congress . 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story 
 “ Some of the new people entering the political world , they get 12 press secretaries and one policy person ,  ” Mr . Walker said in an interview .  “ There ’ s a problem with that , right ?  ” 