Time for Bosnia to ‘ get rid of Russian influence ’  : Analysts
There is now an opportunity for vulnerable countries like Bosnia to shake off Russian influence and take steps to join NATO , analysts say . 

An aerial view is seen of Sarajevo , Bosnia & Herzegovina
Russia has been at odds with the international community over the appointment of Schmidt as Bosnia ’ s new high representative and has been trying to shut down the UN-backed office entirely [ File : Dado Ruvic / Reuters ] 
By Mersiha Gadzo
Published On 28 Feb 2022
28 Feb 2022
The Russian invasion of Ukraine may spill over into the Western Balkans , most critically , in Bosnia and Herzegovina , a small country that has become a battleground between NATO and Moscow , officials and analysts have warned . 

Analysts told Al Jazeera the crisis in Ukraine presents “ a unique opportunity for Bosnia to deal a decisive blow to [ Russian President Vladimir ] Putin-backed separatists ” in the Balkan country . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Stocks tumble as West intensifies sanctions on Russia
list 2 of 4
Russia activates defences to shield $1 . 5 trillion economy
list 3 of 4
Fleeing Ukraine : I would ‘ have done anything to keep him with me ’ 
list 4 of 4
Several killed as Russian rockets pound Ukraine ’ s Kharkiv
end of list
On Thursday EUFOR , the EU ’ s peacekeeping force , announced the deployment of 500 additional reserve forces to Bosnia on top of the existing 600 troops amid fears the crisis in Ukraine could “ potentially cause instability in Bosnia ”  . 

A day later NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg said more support was needed for “ countries like Georgia , Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina ” to help them “ pursue the path that they have freely chosen ”  . 
 
 
 “ The Kremlin is trying to make NATO and the EU provide less support to our partners ,  ” he said . 

The EU ’ s foreign policy chief Josep Borrell echoed this concern on Monday , saying ,  “ We ’ re worried that there could be more conflicts… that something might happen again in the Balkans .  ” 

Bosnia , Kosovo and Serbia are the only countries in the Western Balkans that have not joined the NATO alliance . 


Bosnia has made it a strategic goal to join NATO and the EU , but Bosnian Serbs , led by Serb member of the presidency and Putin ally Milorad Dodik , object to joining the US-led military alliance . 

Bosniaks , Serbs and Croats make up the three main ethnicities in Bosnia . According to the latest census from 2013 , Bosniaks account for 50 . 11 percent , Bosnian Serbs 30 . 78 percent of the population , and Croats 15 . 43 percent . 

The Russian embassy in the Bosnian capital Sarajevo had warned last year that should Bosnia take steps towards joining NATO ,  “ our country will have to react to this hostile act .  ” 

The purpose of NATO is to “ fight against Russia ” and joining NATO will force Bosnia to take a side in the “ military-political confrontation ”  , it said . 

Dusanka Majkic , one of the Serb representatives in Bosnia ’ s House of Peoples and a member of Dodik ’ s nationalist SNSD party , reiterated on Friday Russia ’ s message .  
 
 “ A reminder : Moscow said in March 2021 that it would react if Bosnia and Herzegovina takes steps towards joining NATO . Don ’ t say later that you didn ’ t know ,  ” Majkic wrote on Twitter . 

Many Bosnians slammed her post , calling it a threat . 

Having already survived a war in the early 1990s , many Bosnians have been wary that their country may be the next target . 

Amid the crisis in Ukraine , the Russian embassy in Bosnia said in a Facebook post on Monday evening that Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has spoken with Dodik . 


Similar sentiments of wariness were felt in Kosovo , which achieved independence from Serbia in 2008 . 

A NATO bombing campaign in 1999 against Yugoslav and Serbian forces brought an end to the ethnic cleansing of Albanians in Kosovo , and is the reason why Serbia rejects ever joining the alliance . 

More than 100 countries including the US have recognised Kosovo , but Serbia and its allies Russia and China refuse to do so . Kosovo is still not a UN member , as Russia can use its veto in the Security Council . 

On Sunday Kosovo ’ s defence minister asked the US for a permanent military base in the country and speedier NATO membership . 

 ‘ Bosnia , an open vulnerability ’ 
Reuf Bajrovic , co-chair of the US-Europe Alliance organisation , told Al Jazeera that “ Putin ’ s proxies in the Balkans will be watching very closely the aggression against Ukraine because of the implications .  ”  
 
 “ Namely , quick Putin victory will embolden his proxies to try to use violence to reach their political goals . This is especially true in the case of Milorad Dodik and [ leader of the Bosnian Croat nationalist party HDZ ] Dragan Covic – Putin ’ s key allies in Bosnia .  ” 

A crisis has already been unravelling in Bosnia since October when secessionist leader Dodik announced the Serb-led entity of Republika Srpska will be pulling out of key state institutions and forming its own separate institutions including a Serb army . 


The move is a violation of the Dayton peace agreement , signed in December 1995 which formally ended the war with neighbouring countries Croatia and Serbia . 

High Representative Christian Schmidt , who oversees the implementation of the peace accords described the moves as “ tantamount to secession ”  . 

For years , Dodik has been threatening to break up Bosnia , saying that Republika Srpska uniting territorially with Serbia would be the “ final frame ”  . 

Covic for his part , and other nationalist Croat leaders have for years been pushing for electoral reforms which analysts have said , would result in a de facto third Croat entity and “ further entrench the country ’ s ethnoterritorial oligarchy ”  . 

Kurt Bassuener , senior associate at the Democratization Policy Council , a Berlin-based think-tank , told Al Jazeera there ’ s “ real potential for Russians to try to activate their partners , Dodik ,  [ Serbian President Aleksandar ] Vucic and let ’ s not forget Covic .  
 
 “  [ Russia ] has been very much in favour of what [ Covic ] has been trying to pull , too , but Dodik is their most valuable player in the Balkans ”  . 

 ‘ The security gap is now ’ 
In a Facebook post on Sunday , the Russian embassy in Bosnia accused Washington of “ interfering with dialogue within Bosnia and Herzegovina , pitting constituent peoples against each other and opposing the abolition of the anachronistic foreign protectorate represented by the Office of the High Representative ”  . 

Bosnian women carry placards as they attend a protest against Russia ' s attack on Ukraine in Sarajevo , Bosnia & HerzegovinaBosnian women carry placards as they attend a protest against Russia ’ s attack on Ukraine in Sarajevo , Bosnia and Herzegovina [ Fehim Demir / EPA ] 
Russia has been at odds with the international community over the appointment of Schmidt as Bosnia ’ s new high representative and has been trying to shut down the UN-backed office entirely .  
 
 “  [ Russia ] fears that a reinforced version of the institution will regain its role in safeguarding Bosnia ’ s sovereignty and supporting the constitutional reforms Bosnia requires for both EU and NATO accession ,  ” senior policy fellow Majda Ruge wrote in an analysis for the European Council on Foreign Relations . 

Bassuener told Al Jazeera that “ Bosnia has been an open vulnerability for a very long time and the West has completely within its power to make it less vulnerable .  ” 

While the new batch of EUFOR reinforcements is a positive step that many have already been calling for a long time , NATO forces need to follow as well , Bassuener said ; 5 , 000 troops are needed to meet the mandate at brigade-strength . 

The United Nations Security Council is scheduled to review Bosnia ’ s situation in November and vote on the annual extension of EUFOR .  
 
 “ Under the current circumstances , we can pretty much be guaranteed a Russian veto in November of an extension of EUFOR . The security gap is now ,  ” Bassuener said . 

 ‘ A historic opportunity ’ 
As tension builds in the Western Balkans , some have spotted opportunities for change . 

The Washington DC-based Advisory Council for Bosnia and Herzegovina noted on Twitter on Sunday that the crisis in Ukraine presents “ a unique opportunity for Bosnia to deal a decisive blow to Putin-backed separatists in Bosnia .  ” 

The council suggested “ isolation and destruction of structures that are the extended arm of the Kremlin . 
 
 
 “ Why wait for the Kremlin to use their structures in the Balkans as a lever against Europe ?  ” Ajla Delkic , head of the Advisory Council told Al Jazeera .  
 
 “ We must pre-emptively dismantle Putin ’ s ability to project power and fix the mistakes made in the 1990s that allowed bad actors to use force to carve up territory and commit genocide .  ” 

Bassuener said there is now a potential for major changes to occur as a lot of long-held policies “ are dropping ”  .  
 
 “ The velocity of policy evolution in the democratic West in the past [ few ] days is really amazing … There ’ s no doubt going from where we were to where we are is quite a big step – with the sanctions , with Germany willing to send arms , with all of that .  
 
 “ I do think that the potential to secure the Balkan front is very high … Now ’ s the time to develop a strategy ,  ” he said . 

Bajrovic agreed that Bosnia now “ has a chance to get rid of Russia ’ s influence and make the final step to NATO membership .  
 
 “ Local pro-NATO actors have to do all in their power to fulfil the criteria , but the West has to help pro-NATO forces in Bosnia to defeat the opposition to membership in Bosnia ,  ” Bajrovic said .  
 
 “ It ’ s a historic opportunity for both sides .  ” 