The Vice President : Great to be with you . 
See that woman right there ? 
Without her and the organization the President
put together , and his firm , firm , firm , and
strongly held embrace of this issue , we wouldn ' t
have made nearly the
progress we ' ve made so far . 
I want you to know that , you know , I sometimes --
as you ' ve observed -- I sometimes become a little
passionate about this issue , and I ' m often asked
-- and I really mean this -- by the press , is the
reason for my passion that my mother , or my wife , or
my sister was a victim of violence , and
the answer was no . 
I was raised by a gentleman . 
My Dad -- I ' m going to walk out here -- my Dad
was a guy who thought that the worst sin of all was
the abuse of power . 
The abuse of power . 
And the cardinal sin was for a man --
what are you doing ? 
Oh , thank you . 
I didn ' t think I needed it . 
The cardinal sin was for a man to raise his
hand to a woman . 
He would argue that there ' s no justification
under any circumstance other than self-defense . 
None , zero , none , none for a man to raise his hand to
a woman , or to abuse her mentally or physically --
I mean that sincerely . 
The time I was a kid my Dad was one of those guys
who never raised a hand to any one of his children . 
But my Dad expected us that if we saw
it , get engaged . 
Try to stop it . 
Get engaged . 
When I wrote the Violence Against Women Act , you may
recall , you may not recall -- none of you are old
enough to recall , but you may know that not a single
women ' s group in the country supported me . 
Not one single group , as some will remember . 
And the reason was not that they didn ' t think it
was important , but they were worried it would
detract from gender issues , detract from the
issue of choice , detract from other issues . 
So , what I did was I wrote the legislation , as my
sister would say , with my own little paw . 
And it was going nowhere . 
So , I went out to -- I went to two places . 
I was invited to speak with a group of providers . 
Women in the field running rape crisis shelters , and
intervention initiatives in the state of Rhode
Island , and I met with them in the capital , and
then I went to the state of Washington , and I met
with another group of women . 
And they absolutely said " No , no . 
We ' re not going to remain silent in this . 
We have a chance to begin to change the culture .  " 
And after a significant amount of time the
legislation had been written , and all of a
sudden all of the women in the congress began to
sponsor it , and Ellie Smeal deserves great
credit because we all sat around my conference
table , and I said look I ' m going to introduce this
whether you like it or not . 
There were nine organizations including
AAU , and a whole group of -- the Civil Rights
Organizations , and Ellie Smeal finally spoke and
said " Why are we supporting this ?  " 
Then everybody raised their hand , 
and we got started . 
We got started , and they made it happen . 
We got it passed with only seven votes
from the other team . 
We got it passed with only seven votes
on the other team . 
We got it reauthorized . 
We knew we didn ' t have it perfect the first time . 
We kept trying to improve it , and we improved it to
immigrant women , and Indian reservations , 
etcetera , we ' ve expanded it -- these rights . 
We did basically three things . 
We said " Number one , we were going to embarrass
police departments into organizing better to deal
with this issue .  
 " And so , we changed the law , for example , arrest
on information , because that ' s what I learned out
in the state of Washington what they did . 
So , if before -- and before this law was
written -- if you and I were standing in a corner , 
and I smacked you , and your eye was black , and a
cop saw it he ' d come and say " Do you want to swear
out a warrant against me ?  " 
And I ' m standing here , and I ' m 6 ' 1 "  , 178 pounds , and
you know I ' m going to be let out immediately , and
I ' m looking at you as the cop ' s asking -- I ' m not
joking , this is how it worked . 
I ' m invading your space . 
That ' s exactly -- no , no , but that -- 
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : -- But that ' s exactly how
it happened . 
And so , what would a woman say ? 
The same thing any man would say who
was overpowering .  
 " No , no , I ' m fine . 
I ' m fine .  
 " We changed the law ! 
I ' m standing there , and my hand was raised , and you
have a bruise , the cop can arrest on information . 
Begin to change . 
Change the burden . 
I spent more time going around , all around the
nation to every -- I ' d find -- and I did this in
front of every group that was predominantly men . 
I ' d go to the Chamber of Commerce dinners and
lunches , I ' d speak in other states , I ' d go into
the Elks clubs , be all these organizations , and
I ' d say " You guys , you think that -- " because
what happened was , it was like ,  " Well look if she ' s
getting beaten why doesn ' t she just leave ? 
Why doesn ' t she just leave ?  " 
Or if your boss , as you walk out , pats you on the
rear end ,  " Why didn ' t she just turn around and quit ? 
Why didn ' t she just tell him something ?  " 
And I ' d say ,  " How many of you guys saw the movie 
 ' Deliverance ?  " 
There ' s reruns these days . 
There ' s a scene in " Deliverance " where these
bad ass guys who are going down a river , tough guys , 
and they get dragged into the woods , and one of them
gets tied to a tree , and
raped anally by another man . 
And he goes out of the woods . 
I say ,  " What would you have done if that
happened to you ?  " 
The " Oh I ' d go get my gun , and I ' d come back , and
I ' d do whatever .  
 " Why wouldn ' t you say something ? 
Because I was embarrassed .  " 
That ' s in the days when a judge was able to say to
you before I wrote the law to change it federally 
 " How short was the skirt you were wearing ? 
What did you say to him ?  " 
Because the impression was there must
have been something . 
Something that you did to provoke this action . 
My state of Delaware , a progressive state , had a
law in the books , and we went back , and I had an
incredible staff . 
Incredible staff of women who put
this together for me . 
We did this study , a day in the life
of abused women . 
We took every day of the year , and gave real live
events of the way women were treated , and abused . 
And it had an enormous impact on the way people
looked at this . 
When we found out I ' d say to these men " Okay guys . 
You say you ' d go out and do something . 
Well , why is it you don ' t ? 
Why is it you don ' t ?  " 
Because society is going to judge you , as well as
the abuser . 
The attacker . 
So , things begin to change . 
They begin to change . 
Violence against women , and by the way , the
significant most of the violence women is by known
partners . 
People you know -- how you doing , kiddo ? 
-- people you know . 
We ' re old buddies .  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : People you know . 
And so , I thought ,  " Wow we ' re really making some
progress here .  
 " The President asked me , as the staff can tell you , 
did I have any requests when I agreed to
be Vice President ? 
I said ,  " Yeah , I want to bring the Office of
Violence Against Women into my office , 
that I control it . 
Into the Vice President ' s Office . 
Because we had a great attorney general , and we
have had two great attorney generals . 
They didn ' t -- they demurred . 
I get to appoint who ' s going to head up peace
elements in the office . 
And so , I would have people -- there ' s a woman
named Cynthia Hogan . 
She ' s the one that the NFL brought in after that
idiot dragged his wife out
by the hair out of a , you know . 
Real first-rate tough lawyer . 
So , Cynthia came on to head it up , and there ' s a
difference when the authority is inside the
White House because no one questions it , I mean
nobody in the
administration questions it . 
The President ' s -- the great thing about serving
with this great man is whatever he gives me , he
gives me the authority to do it , and everybody knows
I speak for him , and it ' s done . 
Well , I was feeling very good about the Violence
Against Women Act -- what was happening . 
So , Cynthia went over to check with the Bureau of
Justice Statistics about how things were moving . 
We found out something that was really the most
discouraging thing that ' s happened in my career . 
Not just the violence , across the board . 
Women -- girls and women between the age of 14 , and
24 , guess what . 
The violence of sexual assault and rape hadn ' t
gone down at all . 
It was still as prevalent as it was when
I wrote the legislation . 
So , I ' m short circuiting this , but I held a virtual
town meeting with thousands of young women
and men on the phone , high school , and colleges
all across America . 
And I asked them , I gave them a website and said ,  
 " What one thing would you want me to do to make you
feel safer on your campus ?  " 
Men and women . 
Women aren ' t the only ones that are abused . 
A lot of men are raped as well . 
And you know what they came back
with spontaneously ? 
The overwhelming response was ,  " Get men involved .  " 
Get men involved . 
So , I talked to the President about it , and
that ' s why he started ,  " It ' s on Us .  
 " It ' s not just men , it ' s all of us . 
Silence it complicity . Silence . 
You ' re an accessory . 
So , I started going to a lot of your campuses , and
asking people to take the pledge . 
It sounds silly . 
Take the pledge . 
They talk about all these tough guys . 
I was a pretty good athlete in high
school and college . 
By the way , I never heard the kind of talk in the
locker room that allegedly took place .  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : No I never did , by the way . 
Never did . 
That ' s assault . 
That ' s just plain assault . But here ' s the deal -- 
( applause ) 
The Vice President : -- But there ' s a lot of pressure on men . 
There ' s a lot of pressure . 
You ' re a 5 ' 7 "  , 135-pound man , and you got a
220-pound football player hitting on a girl , and
you ' re going to say ,  " Oh wait a minute , now . 
What do I do ?  " 
But you got to stand up . 
You got to stand up . 
My older son was the attorney general to the
state of Delaware . 
A decorated army veteran . 
In his second year in college , in the co-ed
dorm , he was walking up the stairs to his room , 
passing the room of a young woman , and a guy is
really hitting on her . 
Physically putting his hand up her skirt , and he
said ,  " Hey Jack what the hell are you doing ?  " 
By the time the guy turned around she opened the
door , got in , and left . 
Well , the whole lacrosse team came after him . 
But they didn ' t count on my number-two son .  
( laughter and applause ) The Vice President : He
beat the living crap out of them . 
No , you think I ' m kidding .  
( applause ) 
The Vice President : But my point is , my point is there ' s a
lot of peer pressure on young men as well
not to say something . But it ' s starting to
change because of all of you . 
As I so eloquently point out , if a fraternity
brother sees a drunk co-ed being taken upstairs , and
he doesn ' t walk up and
say ,  " Not in my house , Jack .  
 " He ' s a god damn coward . 
He ' s a coward .  
( applause ) 
The Vice President : So , guys , we can change the culture . 
I really believe it because the vast majority
of men are not abusers . 
The vast majority are not . 
Look how rapidly the culture , the domestic
culture has changed surrounding LGBT issues . 
When I got in trouble for saying I support gay
marriage , I was the only one to do that , I wouldn ' t
take any chance . 
I got back here , and I said " Oh god , what have
you done .  
 " I said " The American people are
already beyond us , man . 
58 percent of the people already support my
decision , what the hell are you doing ?  "  
( laughter and applause ) 
The Vice President : What are you doing ? 
No , I mean it . 
But here ' s the point . 
I wasn ' t taking any chance , and you ' re not
taking any chance now speaking out . 
Think what ' s happened . 
Just when I took this job , when the President and I
acquired these jobs -- it ' s been a great honor -- 
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : If you men went to a --
you had a business lunch at a fancy restaurant --
and four or five of you in a major city are having lunch , 
and a waiter comes up and says ,  
 " What would you like ?  " If one of the people
sitting said ,  " Well , let me tell you .  " 
Everybody remained silent . 
They wouldn ' t say anything . 
Today , if that happened at a luncheon the other four
guys would say " What the hell is wrong
with you , Jack ?  " 
No , I ' m serious . 
Because what ' s happened is , just like those brave
women who came and testified before my
committee , and they took enormous chances with
millions of people watching them to tell
their story . 
It takes enormous courage to do that . 
Enormous courage . 
And the reason why we ' ve made the change we have in
the LGBT community is because so many people
have the courage to come out . 
In many cases , risking their physical security
by doing it . 
What happened ? 
The rest of America looks and says ,  " Hey they ' re
just like me . 
What ' s the problem here ?  " 
And how many of you , how many of you young women
have had someone come to you in the dorm and say ,  
 " This is what just happened to me .  
 " And you weren ' t sure what to do . 
I don ' t mean you in particular , but
your colleagues . 
You didn ' t go to the RA , you didn ' t go to the
school , you didn ' t say anything , because you
didn ' t know what to do , and you weren ' t sure , and
you didn ' t want to get involved . 
I ' m using you in an editorial sense . 
Nobody wants to be involved in this dirty
little secret . 
Nobody wants to be involved . 
So , they turn their head . 
A blind eye . 
Oh I , you know , I didn ' t see that . 
I ' ll bet that every one of you have either been
abused yourself , or you know someone
personally who has . 
It ' s silence . 
Silence is a killer . 
I mean , it really is . 
And the more people speak up , the more people that
speak up , the more it ' s going to become the abuser
becomes the pariah . 
The abuser ' s the pariah , not the abused . 
Tell the President I ' m busy .  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : No I ' m only joking , 
he ' s a great friend . But if I ' m going to be
late , he ' ll understand this one .  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : Let me say it this way . 
Look , guys . 
Do you all know what -- you know , you ' ve heard the
expression lots of times " Well , the rule of thumb
on this is the following .  
 " You ' ve heard that expression , haven ' t you ? 
You know so , well the rule of thumb is you -- anybody
know where that saying came from ? 
Female Speaker : Absolutely . 
You can ' t beat your wife with anything smaller
than a thumb . 
The Vice President : That ' s right . 
Larger than your thumb . 
And it came from the 13th century . 
An English common law . 
Because women were considered chattels in our
English jurist prudential system . 
Just like the cow , not a joke , or the sheep . 
And a man had the right to chastise his wife , but too
many women were dying . 
And the common law which is not codify , the common
law develops over time , and in order to deal with
too many women dying they said no man can beat his
wife with a rod that is bigger than the
circumference of his thumb . 
As much as we think we ' re so advanced in our western
culture , this is a cultural problem . 
A cultural problem that we are making significant
inroads into changing . 
And it really is on you guys . 
You guys are smart as hell . 
You ' re engaged . 
You care . 
You have passion about this , and encourage other
people to speak out , and speak up . 
I spent time with the academies talking about
violence against women . 
Things are beginning to change because of you . 
Beginning to change because of you . 
I really do have to go , but here ' s the deal , guys . 
I ' m no longer going to be Vice President , but I ' m
going to be associated with several major
universities , and have a significant staff . 
I ' m going to be setting up a foundation . 
It ' s going to devote the rest of my life to dealing
with violence against women .  
( applause ) 
The Vice President : I mean it . I ' m going to need your
help , because what we
can ' t let happen -- We ' ve gained momentum , 
genuine momentum . 
These two women here are leaders in the community , 
and have been leaders for some time . 
I mean it sincerely . 
Major , major , major factors in dealing with
this issue . 
I ' ve never felt momentum
like this before , have you ? 
I mean it ' s real , and I hope and pray , and I ' m
making no judgement . 
I mean this sincerely . 
I ' m not sure what the next administration will do . 
I pray they will continue to make it a priority as
Barack and I have . 
But whether they do or not , we can do so much of
this as private citizens . 
And I plan on having some of the very brilliant
women , and a few men that have continued to work on
this continue to work with me full-time when I leave
in doing this . 
And so , we have to just continue to organize . 
Because look , my daughters -- I lost one , but I had
two daughters , and my four granddaughters . 
I have believed from the time I was conscious of
this issue , and the issues relating to women and men . 
Because I ' ve been surrounded by women who
are straight tough , and smarter than I have been . 
I mean that sincerely . 
Strong , strong women from my mother , my sister , my
deceased wife , my wife . 
There ' s not a single solitary thing that my
grandson , and my two sons could do , that my
daughters and my granddaughters can ' t do , 
not a single solitary thing in life . Nothing .  
( applause ) 
The Vice President : Not a single
solitary thing , and the ultimate answer in
changing this culture is we get to the point where
that is endemic to everything we think about . 
And a lot of you are part of the
millennial generation . 
You ' re the most understanding , you ' re the
most open , you ' re the most tolerant . 
It ' s not hyperbole . 
These are facts of any generation in
American history . 
So , I ' m counting on you . 
For my granddaughters . 
I ' m counting on you . 
Stay engaged . 
Stay engaged . 
And I am not allowed to announce until I ' m out of
office exactly what I ' m doing with
this foundation . 
I mean , it ' s a matter of ethical concern . 
I ' m not allowed to say this is what the
organization will be , this is where we ' ll be , this is
the money we ' ll raise and such . 
But I ' m going to be asking for your help .  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : No , no , no , 
no I ' m not being -- it ' s not a joke . 
It ' d be inappropriate for me to say I ' m going to
raise x number of dollars , and who you ' re
raising it from . 
Well , you ' re -- I can ' t do that now . 
But on January 21st , we ' re going to start , or we ' re
going to continue . 
And I ' m working very hard with this oncoming
administration to convince them that this is , in a
sense , the Civil rights issue of our time . 
It ' s the human rights issue of our time .  
( applause ) 
The Vice President : I actually
had a good speech to deliver for you . 
Hey Pal , how are you ? 
You see this man right here ? 
This man is more connected than anybody I know with
Hollywood , and one of the great things we did , I got
an opportunity to introduce a woman who made
a song famous ,  " Until it Happens to You ,  " at the
Academy Awards . 
Over 200 million people worldwide watched the
introduction that I gave to her , and to the song , 
and to the young women and who came onto the stage
afterwards with the courage to say I ' ve
been abused . 
The frightening thing was for three of them , their
parents never knew . 
Think how many women you know who got drunk , got
abused , and are more afraid to tell their
parents , than to do
something about the accuser . 
I ' m coming , okay ?  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : I better
take my note back . 
See , I never worked for anybody before this . 
You know what I mean ?  
( laughter ) 
The Vice President : But the good
news is , Barack feels as strongly as I
do about this . 
You ' re going to have a lot of people
having your backs . 
Hope you ' ll have ours . 
We can make a great deal of progress . 
My goal is that within the next five to seven years
when a mother and father drop their child off on a
campus , their least worry is whether or not they ' re
going to be raped , or whether they ' re going to
be abused .  
( applause ) 
The Vice President : I really mean
it , and by the way , hold your universities
responsible . 
I ' m about to put out a report . 
Hold your universities responsible . 
They have a moral obligation to step up . 
Thank you all very much , I love you .  
( applause ) 