State of the Union : Biden Speech Comes Amid Crises , Setbacks
A president ' s State of the Union speech is normally crammed with new proposals . 

By Associated Press 
| 
Feb . 26 , 2022 , at 8 : 27 a . m . 

Save




More
U . S . News & World Report
State of the Union : Biden Speech Comes Amid Crises , Setbacks

More
The Associated Press
FILE - President Joe Biden signs the " Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act " during an event on the South Lawn of the White House , Nov . 15 , 2021 , in Washington . Biden will deliver his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Tuesday , March 1 , 2022 .  ( AP Photo / Evan Vucci , File ) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

By CHRIS MEGERIAN , Associated Press

WASHINGTON ( AP ) — The last time President Joe Biden addressed a joint session of Congress , he said the country was “ ready for takeoff ” after a period of plague and strife . 

Recommended Videos
Powered by AnyClip
Biden To Nominate the First Black Woman To Sit on the US Supreme Court
10 . 2K
Play Video
Biden To Nominate the First Black Woman To Sit on the US Supreme CourtNOW PLAYING
Preparations ahead of President Biden ' s first State of the Union address
Biden : Freedom will prevail , amid Russia attacks on Ukraine
Biden Administration Addresses Concerns Over Threat of Nuclear War With Russia
Biden Says Putin Has ' Larger Ambitions Than Ukraine ' 
It ’ s been a more turbulent flight than expected . Biden is scheduled to deliver his first State of the Union speech on Tuesday night at a moment when he ’ has struggled to deliver on many of his original promises and as he is being forced to confront new crises . 

The gap between the two major speeches — the first one was last April — is the story of a presidency that has repeatedly needed to recalibrate its ambitions . 

Although Biden reached a bipartisan deal on an infrastructure plan , many of his other proposals have been jettisoned or left languishing with no clear path to becoming reality . He followed through on his pledge to remove U . S . forces from Afghanistan , but the chaotic withdrawal left the Taliban in control and a looming humanitarian disaster . Meanwhile the coronavirus evolved into new , more contagious variants that increased the pandemic ' s death toll despite the widespread availability of vaccines . 

Political Cartoons

View All 437 Images

And most recently , Russian President Vladimir Putin has expanded his invasion of Ukraine , plunging Europe into war and hijacking Biden ' s foreign policy agenda .  
 
 “ These speeches go through many , many drafts ,  " said Michael Waldman , president of the Brennan Center for Justice and a former chief speechwriter for President Bill Clinton .  " And I would bet they ’ re starting some new drafts right now .  ” 

He added :  “ Two weeks ago the speechwriters probably thought they knew what was in the speech . Vladimir Putin had other ideas .  ” 

Traditionally , State of the Union speeches focus on domestic issues . But Waldman said this one is a chance for Biden to outline the stakes of the crisis in Ukraine , especially as Americans remain wary of becoming involved in foreign conflicts and worry that economic ripple effects could drive up gas prices .  
 
 “ This is a really important opportunity for the president to talk about Russia ’ s appalling attack and to put it in the context of why it matters ,  " Waldman said . 

Biden is preparing his speech during one of the most consequential stretches of his presidency . In addition to the expanding invasion of Ukraine , on Friday he announced Ketanji Brown Jackson as his nominee for the Supreme Court seat being vacated by Justice Stephen Breyer , who is retiring . 

Jackson , a judge on the U . S . Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , would be the first Black woman to serve on the nation ' s highest court if she is confirmed by the Senate . The nomination kicks off a closely watched process in the Senate , where Democrats have a slim majority . 

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also released looser guidelines for when Americans should wear masks to limit the spread of the coronavirus . Instead of focusing on caseloads , which are harder to control because of the more transmissible omicron variant , the agency is setting benchmarks based on hospitalizations , a sign that it is shifting to a new phase of the pandemic where the virus is viewed as a more manageable threat . 

Michael Beschloss , a presidential historian , said that for Biden , the State of the Union speech is " going to be one of the largest audiences he has , and it happens at the confluence of historic moments .  ”  
 
 “ It ’ s one rare opportunity for a president to lift his voice above the noise ,  " Beschloss said .  " He doesn ’ t have very many of those opportunities .  ” 

Making fresh promises to American voters could be difficult when so many of Biden ' s initial proposals have stalled . Some ideas were outright abandoned , such as free community college . 

Others became mired in negotiations over the president ' s legislative agenda , known as “ Build Back Better ,  ” when Senate Democrats were unable to reach a consensus on the plan . Limits on the cost of prescription drugs , financial incentives for fighting climate change and free preschool are among the stranded proposals . 

Biden has also failed to make progress on protecting voting rights , an effort he has described as central to protecting democracy . Republicans continue to pass laws at the state level to restrict ballot access , and former President Donald Trump has refused to abandon his baseless crusade to convince Americans that the last election was fraudulent . 

Sometimes presidents have used speeches to Congress to rebound after difficult periods , such as President John F . Kennedy in 1961 . 

Days after taking office , he outlined his goals in a major speech . But within months , his administration was embarrassed by the botched Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba , and Americans were discouraged by the Soviet Union ' s successful mission to send a cosmonaut into orbit . 

So Kennedy swiftly returned to Congress to deliver another speech , where he famously pledged to put a man on the moon .  
 
 “ That was a very specific effort to turn the page ,  " Beschloss said . 

He said Kennedy hoped " it would give a second wind to his administration , which it did .  ” 

Copyright 2022 The Associated Press . All rights reserved . This material may not be published , broadcast , rewritten or redistributed . 

Tags : Associated Press , infectious diseases , health , coronavirus , lung disease

