Mr . Earnest : Happy Friday , everybody . 
Nice to see you all . 
Before we get started , as you might judge from the
monitors behind , we got a couple things we want to do
at the top before we get started . 
As all of you saw this morning , today the final
monthly jobs report of the Obama administration was
released , and I want to go over a couple of the
highlights here . 
Like many of you , I ' ve spent the first Friday morning of
each month of the last eight years anticipating the
monthly jobs data . 
At the beginning of the administration , the earliest
days of this presidency , the day that was in the minds of
many people down right terrifying , our economy was
losing hundreds of thousands of jobs a month and the
unemployment rate was climbing sharply . 
Eight years later , driven by the policies this
administration put in place and the resilience of the
American workforce , the data looks quite different and
the numbers tell a very different story about the
health of our economy . 
In December , the U . S . 
economy added a 156 , 000 jobs , extending the longest
streak of total job growth in our nation ' s history . 
U . S . 
businesses have now added 15 . 8 million jobs over the
course of the economic recovery . 
Wages are continuing to rise , and the unemployment
rate continues to be less than half of what it was
during the peak of the recession . 
Over the eight years that President Obama has been in
office , you all have held us to an extraordinarily high
standard when it comes to the economic recovery , and
we ' re proud of the progress that America has made . 
This progress shows that policy matters . 
Without the policies the President fought for , it
would not have been possible . 
And so I recount the facts today , because acknowledging
how far we have come as a country is an important part
of understanding what ' s needed to create an economy
that provides good job opportunities and generates
higher wages for all Americans who are willing to
work for them . 
The President-elect , of course , has promised a
different approach . 
His approach includes rolling back regulations
that have protected middle-class families from
having to foot the bill for Wall Street ' s risky
behavior . 
His approach includes leveling high tariffs on
foreign goods that drive up costs for consumers in the
United States and put at risk higher-paying U . S . 
jobs that are tied to exports . 
And , of course , he ' s also vowed to repeal the
Affordable Care Act which would add trillions to the
deficit . 
As you evaluate the impact of the President-elect ' s
policies over the coming years , here are some metrics
that should be used to evaluate the approach that
we have taken and compare it to the approach that ' s been
pursued by the other side . 
Since job growth turned positive in October of 2012 , 
the U . S . 
economy has added jobs for 75 straight months . 
This is , as I referred to earlier , the longest streak
of job growth on record , and it ' s actually more than two
years longer than the previous record . 
So this is quite a streak , and we ' ll see if it
continues . 
In 2016 , hourly wages increased 2 . 9 percent . 
That ' s the fastest 12-month pace since the start of the
recovery . 
Real hourly wages have grown faster over the current
business cycle than in any business cycle since the
early 1970s . 
Wages are obviously a metric that this administration has
watched closely , and we ' re pleased to see that wage
growth is accelerating and has accelerated over the
President ' s tenure in office . 
The third metric -- the unemployment rate has been
cut by more than half since its peak of 10 percent in
2009 to 4 . 7 percent in December of this year . 
As recently as 2014 , just a couple of years ago , many
economists expected the unemployment rate to remain
above 5 percent until at least 2020 . 
So we ' ve repeatedly beaten the predictions about
driving down the unemployment rate . 
Fourth , since 2010 , the United States has put more
people back to work than all the other G7 economies
combined . 
That is a strong validation of the economic strategy
that President Obama pursued . 
It does stand in contrast to the economic strategy that
was pursued by some of our closest allies , but the
results speak for themselves and it ' s why we regularly
describe the U . S . 
economy as the envy of the world . 
Finally -- and I don ' t have a chart for this -- we can
also cite a metric that we know is one that is
certainly closely watched by the incoming President ' s
economic team . 
That ' s the stock market . 
And the S & P has more than tripled since the lows that
it reached in March of 2009 within President Obama ' s
first couple of months in office . 
So we certainly set a high bar . 
It ' s a bar that we are proud of , and it ' s one that the
incoming administration will be challenged to meet . 
One other piece of news I want to share briefly this
morning before we get started is , today is the
last day for Pete Boogaard in the White House Press
Office . 
So Pete has served in the White House for a little
over a year now , and has served with distinction . 
But , notably , Pete spent a lot of time working in other
critically important agencies of the Obama
administration , including at the Department of Homeland
Security . 
And he is somebody who has time and again showed a lot
of cool under fire . 
Those of you who have worked closely with Pete understand
that -- we were reminiscing shortly before the briefing
that he ' s had some of the more challenging issues to
discuss in his portfolio , everything certainly from
questions about immigration policy , which includes a
wide bucket of issues both that are related to homeland
security and national security , but also issues
like Zika . 
And so we ' re obviously very proud of Pete ' s service . 
He showed himself to be a dedicated professional . 
And wherever he ends up next is going to be a place
that ' s extraordinarily lucky to have him . 
So , thank you , Pete , for your service . 
I appreciate it . 
So , with that , Josh , do you want to get started with
questions ? 
The Press : Sure . 
Thank you , Josh . 
And thank you , Pete , for your help and hard work over
the last several years . 
When we met here yesterday , the President was still
being briefed on the Russia hacking report . 
Now that that ' s concluded , is there anything you can
tell us about his impressions of that or what
he might have learned that moved the ball from what he
had previously known about the extent of Russian
hacking , or any preview that you can give us of the
unclassified version that Speaker Pelosi -- Minority
Leader Pelosi says will be coming out this afternoon ? 
Mr . Earnest : Josh , I don ' t have a specific presidential
reaction to share with you about the report . 
As leaders of the intelligence community
testified yesterday , they are even more certain now of
the assessment that they released back in October
about the role that Russia played in destabilizing the
U . S . 
elections and trying to cast doubt on the durability of
our political system . 
I am aware that there are reports that this review
will be released later today , but for the precise
timing of that I ' d refer you to the intelligence
community . 
I ' ll tell you that I have not seen the report , so when
the unclassified report is released , I ' ll be reading it
along with all of you . 
The Press : President-elect Trump is saying that he ' s
asking the House and Senate intelligence panels to
investigate NBC News for what he says was top-secret
information shared to them prior to his briefing that ' s
taking place as we speak . 
Can you say whether or not that information put in that
report was top secret , and whether it was leaked by the
Obama administration to a news outlet prior to
President-elect Trump receiving his briefing ? 
Mr . Earnest : Josh , what I can tell you is that I ' m not
in a position to confirm the information that was
included in that report . 
I ' d refer you to the intelligence community for
that . 
I certainly feel confident in saying that that is not
material that was leaked to the public by the White
House , but I ' d refer you to the intelligence community
to speak to it beyond that . 
The other observation I have , though , is I don ' t
frequently respond to tweets from the President-elect , 
but I certainly do read them . 
And I did read two days ago that he was tweeting a
steadfast defense of the integrity of the foreigner
who runs the leading purveyor of the improper
release of classified information retained by the
United States government . 
Two days later -- two days after defending that
person ' s integrity , the President-elect is now
expressing some concern about the possible release
of this classified information . 
The original tweet leads me to conclude that his
concerns are about something other than protecting
classified information . 
What those concerns are is something that I ' ll let him
articulate , and presumably all of you will have an
opportunity to ask about them . 
But given his track record and certainly given some of
the rhetoric that he used in praising WikiLeaks on the
campaign trail , I think it would call into question
whether or not that ' s the actual source of concern
that he is expressing today . 
The Press : Just to button that up , you ' re ruling out
that the White House leaked that information to NBC , but
you ' re not ruling out that another -- that an agency
that ' s part of the intelligence community or
another federal agency might have done so ? 
Mr . Earnest : I can ' t speak to the inner workings of the
intelligence community , particularly as it relates
to the compiling of the specific report . 
The intelligence community was charged by the President
of the United States with compiling a report . 
And as we ' ve discussed at some length over the last
couple of months here , the men and women of the United
States intelligence community are patriots . 
And these are people who serve their country . 
They set aside their own personal political views to
do the right thing for the country . 
So the President has got enormous confidence in them , 
believes that he ' s been extraordinarily well served
by them over the last eight years in providing to him
timely , accurate , specific information that was not
shaded to advance a political or ideological
agenda , but rather was oriented toward providing
him the best possible information so he could make
the best possible national security decisions . 
But for questions about how the intelligence community
has handled specific pieces of information , you should
go talk to them about that . 
The Press : And lastly , since you follow the
President-elect ' s tweets , you ' ll have seen his
comments about the IOU from Mexico that will pay us back
for building a wall . 
And I wanted to ask you about what is being
discussed in Congress about using existing authorities
to authorize building the wall , and then really just
have new appropriations to pay for it until we get paid
back . 
Does the outgoing President feel that if a border wall
is going to be built , that there should be a new
affirmative vote in Congress to say , yes , this is what we
want to do , and this is the direction we ' re going ? 
Mr . Earnest : I have to admit , Josh , I haven ' t seen
all the proposals . 
I know there are a couple versions of the tweets that
were sent , so it ' s hard to decipher exactly what the
plan is . 
What I can tell you about President Obama ' s views is
that President Obama strongly supported the
largest ever investment in border security in our
nation ' s history that was a part of the common-sense
immigration bill that this administration negotiated
with Democrats and Republicans in the United
States Senate . 
There were billions included in that bill that would have
increased security along our border -- investments in
technology , investments in physical barriers , and
investments in personnel to ensure that our border was
secure . 
Of course , that was coupled with a whole range of other
proposals that would be good for our economy , that would
be good for reducing the deficit , that would be good
for ensuring that the United States of America is living
up to our values as a nation of laws and a nation of
immigrants . 
It would have ensured that we are not ripping apart
families . 
It certainly would have ensured that we are not
seeking to deport young people who are in the United
States through no fault of their own , and young people
who are American in every way but their papers . 
That ' s the kind of proposal that President Obama put
forward . 
And it gave the millions of people who are in the United
States without proper documentation an opportunity
to get right with the law , and it would have required
them to face some accountability measures --
background checks , paying taxes and other things --
but also would have brought them out of the shadows in a
way that would be good for our economy , and in a way
that would ultimately have strengthened Social Security
and reduced the deficit . 
But , as I said , the President-elect supports a
different approach . 
The only reason that the President ' s approach didn ' t
pass is not because it didn ' t have sufficient
bipartisan support on Capitol Hill , but rather
because it was a victim of the Republican leadership
strategy to say no to everything that President
Obama was inclined to support , even if it included
policies that they themselves supported . 
That strategy was cynical , but it did have some
political benefits . 
And it does go down -- the failure of that legislation
to pass the House of Representatives , even though
it had majority support , even though it would have
passed if it had come up for a vote -- does remain one of
the most disappointing and frustrating episodes in this
administration ' s relationship with the
Republican leadership in Congress . 
Jeff . 
The Press : Josh , a couple other questions related to
the President-elect . 
First , on the intelligence briefing . 
President-elect Trump called the probe a " witch hunt .  " 
What ' s the White House ' s feeling about that ? 
Mr . Earnest : I saw the news report . 
Apparently , he had a conversation with one of
your colleagues at The New York Times today . 
I guess I would leave it to his team to characterize
exactly what that means . 
What I can tell you the President directed the
intelligence community to do is to learn as much as
possible about the kind of malicious cyber activity
that we ' ve seen in this country in the context of
the 2016 election and in the previous -- recent
presidential elections . 
And the goal was not just to look at one country , but to
look at all malicious actors in cyberspace to get to the
bottom of what has recently occurred , to understand the
trend which appears to be getting worse , and to
develop a strategy to counter it . 
There also was a desire to make sure that we ' re holding
accountable those who were engaged in some of those
nefarious acts . 
And you ' ve already heard some announcements from the
administration detailing some aspects of our
response . 
But that is the charge that the intelligence community
was supposed to fulfill , and the President is pleased
with the work that they ' ve done . 
We ' ve talked a lot about the service and sacrifice of our
men and women in the intelligence community . 
They worked through the holidays in order to put
this report together . 
And I think it ' s an indication of their deep
commitment to the national security of this country , to
fulfilling the directives of the President of the United
States . 
And they have fulfilled the President ' s expectations of
producing a conscientious report that was briefed to
him , that will be briefed to Congress , that will be
briefed to the President-elect later today
-- all at the President ' s direction . 
And the intelligence community is also prepared
to follow through on the President ' s final direction , 
which is to make as much of that report public as
possible . 
And again , you will have to check with them for the
precise timing of that , but some reports indicate that
that ' s coming later today . 
But that ' s something that they can confirm . 
The Press : On another topic , following up on Josh ' s
question , does this White House think it ' s realistic
or probable that Mexico will reimburse the United States
government for a wall built on its border ? 
Mr . Earnest : All I would point out , Jeff , is that the
Mexican government and the President of Mexico has
indicated that that ' s not going to happen . 
But I ' ll leave it to the Mexican government to
respond to this , and I ' ll let the President-elect try
to describe how his strategy would work . 
The Press : And lastly , the issue of cars and tariffs
has come up quite a bit in the last few days . 
One of the ways that President Trump has
discussed via Twitter is related to a foreign
company , Toyota , making Mexican-built cars and
importing them to the United States , that there would be
a tariff on that . 
Is that realistic ? 
And what is the Obama administration ' s response to
that issue ? 
Mr . Earnest : Jeff , I ' m not going to talk about one
specific company . 
I think what I can do is talk about what President
Obama ' s approach to this issue has been . 
He has actually -- President Obama of course is somebody
who has , over his eight years in office , learned
quite a lot about the way that the U . S . 
auto industry works , primarily because it was
poised to fail when he entered office . 
And his administration had to implement a strategy to
give them an opportunity to succeed . 
The President made a big bet on the American auto
industry , and he won because he placed his confidence in
American autoworkers and giving them a chance to
rebuild their companies , to retool their companies , that
they would come back better and stronger than ever --
and that ' s exactly what ' s happened . 
So the President has some credentials when it comes to
understanding exactly what kinds of policies are going
to benefit U . S . 
autoworkers and more than a million Americans whose jobs
depends on that auto industry . 
And the fact is that the American auto industry
actually depends on an integrated global supply
chain . 
That ' s just the way that our economy works , particularly
when you ' re talking about the production of a modern
vehicle . 
And to try to erect walls that keep out some aspects
of that global supply chain or the products that are
produced by that global supply chain is only going
to have a detrimental impact on the industry and on the
workers who rely on that industry for a job . 
So the President does not believe that that ' s a smart
approach . 
In fact , what the President believes is that the
American auto industry produces the very best
automobiles and vehicles in the world , and what we
should be looking to do is implementing a strategy that
will allow the U . S . 
auto industry to compete on a level playing field . 
And that ' s exactly the strategy that President
Obama implemented with regard to the Trans-Pacific
Partnership -- to go to countries like Japan and
Vietnam that have large economies and a growing
middle class , exactly the kinds of places where the
U . S . 
auto industry could compete very well . 
And looking for opportunities for
U . S . -produced goods to be sold around the world is
going to be good for our economy , it ' s going to be
good for American companies , but , most importantly , it ' s
going to be good for American jobs . 
I made a reference earlier to the fact that we already
know that jobs inside the United States that are tied
to exports pay , on average , somewhat higher than jobs in
the United States that aren ' t tied to exports . 
So looking for more opportunities for U . S . 
businesses to export their goods around the world , it ' s
going to be good for our economy and good for
American workers . 
But like I said , President-elect Trump wants
to try it a different way and we ' ll see if it works . 
Justin . 
The Press : Is the President , as the leader of the
Democratic Party , disappointed or upset that
the DNC refused requests from the FBI to turn over
their server in the hack investigation ? 
Mr . Earnest : It ' s not the responsibility of the
President of the United States to make those kinds
of decisions . 
He is of course the nominal head of the Democratic
Party , but the Democratic National Committee has an
elected leadership that ' s elected by the members of
the Party , and I ' ll let them speak to the way in which
they cooperated with the investigation into this
matter . 
The Press : Well , is the President , as the nominal
head of the Department of Justice for the Obama
administration , disappointed that the DNC didn ' t seem to
cooperate with FBI requests ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , again , I ' ll let the Department of
Justice speak to the level of cooperation that they
received from the DNC and other people who were a part
of this investigation . 
Obviously , this investigation was conducted
separate from any sort of White House influence . 
So it would be inappropriate for me to -- even if the
President did have concerns -- for me to express them
from here . 
The Press : Did you guys know that Theresa May was sending
top staffers to meet with the Trump administration
last month ? 
And have you or the State Department -- has Theresa
May ' s staff sought advice from you or the State
Department on her interactions with the
President-elect ? 
Mr Earnest : I can ' t speak to what staff-level
conversations may have occurred between
representatives of the United States government and
representatives of Prime Minister May ' s office . 
I can tell you that what the Obama administration has
sought to do is to work effectively with our allies
and with the President-elect ' s team to
ensure a smooth handoff in the context of the
transition , and that includes a smooth handoff of
the relationship between the United States and some of
our closest allies around the world . 
But I can ' t speak with much precision about
conversations that may have occurred in advance of those
kinds of conversations . 
The Press : Lastly , yesterday you promised some preview of
the President ' s speech next week in Chicago . 
So I ' m wondering if you could maybe talk either
about some color about how that ' s developing or what ' s
-- Mr . Earnest : What I can tell you is that I
anticipate that the President is going to be
devoting a significant portion of his weekend to
working on the address . 
I ' ve had an opportunity to review a very early draft , 
and what I can tell you is that the President is
interested in delivering a farewell address that ' s
forward-looking . 
We ' ve had ample opportunity , certainly over the last year
and over the last couple of months , to review the many
significant accomplishments of the Obama administration , 
and I ' m confident there will be a reference or two to
that progress in the speech that he ' ll deliver Tuesday
night . 
But primarily the President is hopeful about the future
of the country , particularly if our citizens are engaged
in our democracy and if our leaders draw upon the
longstanding , deeply-held views of this country to
confront the challenges ahead . 
If that happens , if both those things happen , then
the President believes that the prospects for the United
States being even more safe , and more prosperous , and
more fair are bright . 
And the President is obviously proud of the
progress that we have made and continues to be
optimistic about our future , and he ' s looking forward to
an opportunity to talk about why . 
Lana . 
The Press : So the President has obviously been spending
a lot of time talking about Obamacare and trying to
fight back against Republican efforts to repeal
without a replacement in plan -- in place , rather . 
After January 20th , is he going to continue that same
effort at that same level , or will he , as he was saying
before , become a private citizen and just a regular
citizen of the United States , and will that then
sort of fade away , or will there be a break from that ? 
Mr . Earnest : The President will be a private citizen on
January 20th . 
He will be a private citizen with deeply held views about
the most effective way to reform the health care
system in the United States . 
Many of those views and ideas have been put into
action in a way that ' s been extraordinarily beneficial
for the American people and for our economy . 
And the President is proud of that progress . 
And you could certainly expect the President to
follow these developments closely and to continue to
be thinking about how these kinds of reforms should
work . 
But there is a long tradition in our country --
and President Obama benefited from it in the
early days of his presidency -- of the outgoing President
giving the incoming President the opportunity to
succeed . 
So I would not expect President Obama to be
regularly holding conversations with Ezra
Klein and Sarah Kliff at some other house in
Washington , D . C . He did that at Blair House today as
the sitting President of the United States . 
But the President believes that other people , including
congressional Democrats , but not only congressional
Democrats , are going to have to step forward and take up
the mantle and wage this fight on behalf of the
American people . 
The prospect of Republicans repealing the Affordable
Care Act without a replacement would inject
unprecedented chaos into our health care system , which
constitutes about a fifth of the U . S . 
economy . 
It also is going to prompt up to 30 million Americans
to lose their health insurance and put at risk
many of the gains that we ' ve made in protecting the 130
million Americans that have preexisting conditions . 
If you repeal the Affordable Care Act , you take away
those protections . 
And those are protections that extend not just to
people who are purchasing health insurance through
Obamacare marketplaces , but it also includes all those
Americans that get their health insurance through
their employer . 
So the stakes are significant . 
And President Obama will remain engaged to the extent
that he ' ll be following exactly what kind of
developments occur , he ' ll continue thinking about
these issues . 
But when it comes to making the public case with this
approach , it ' s time for other people to step up . 
And the President is confident that there are
plenty of Democrats with the right values and the right
passion and the right skills to make a persuasive case
that will ultimately benefit the American public . 
The Press : Just to be clear , with all of his passion that
he feels about Obamacare and how he feels about that
issue , come January 20th we should not expect to see the
President making public speeches about it , writing
more op-eds , those sorts of things ? 
Mr . Earnest : The President has had ample opportunity
over the last eight years to regularly make speeches and
regularly write op-eds on topics that are near and
dear to his heart , including the effective implementation
of health care reform . 
So the time for him to do that on a regular basis has
passed , and so I would not expect him to do that with
much frequency at all as a former President . 
The Press : Can the White House confirm that
Obama-appointed diplomats have been asked to leave
their post by January 20th ? 
Mr . Earnest : I saw the -- I ' ve seen this news report . 
For all of the details , I ' d refer you to the State
Department . 
What I can tell you is that it is , of course , customary
for politically appointed chiefs of mission to return
back to the United States on Inauguration Day and afford
the incoming administration and the incoming President
the opportunity to select his own representatives to
advance our country ' s interests in countries
around the world . 
What I will say is this administration is
extraordinarily proud of the service of the politically
appointed ambassadors of the United States government who
have advanced our interests in countries large and small
around the world . 
In many cases , these are men and who are professionals in
a separate career . 
But they have chosen to dedicate a number of years
of their life to public service in a really
important way . 
In many of these countries where President Obama has
traveled , the U . S . 
ambassador is a prominent public face of the United
States of America . 
And the way that that person chooses to conduct
themselves and their personal lives , the way that
that person speaks publicly and advances our interests
and articulates our values in that country is
extraordinarily important . 
And many of these professionals have taken
advantage of this opportunity , and America is
better for it . 
And we certainly owe them a debt of gratitude for their
public service . 
And we certainly will be hoping that the incoming
administration will choose people as effective and as
talented and as patriotic as have served in these kinds
of positions under President Obama . 
Kevin . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
I want to ask you about race . 
The President made some comments about the state of
race relations in the country . 
It has been a difficult time , to say the least , in
the city of Chicago in the wake of that Facebook post . 
I ' m curious -- two parts to this question . 
The first part is , is it fair to describe the
President ' s optimism about the future of race relations
in this country based solely on his experience , the
trajectory of him growing up and having seen the country
in a very different way as President ? 
And does he also understand the negative perception many
have about the state of race relations in the country
today ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , Kevin , I think that the President ' s
optimism about the progress that our country has made on
the issue of race is rooted primarily in our experience
as a country , in our experience as a society . 
There are a lot of examples of this . 
And I think the most pertinent one could be
around the issue of the relationship between some
local law enforcement agencies and the African
American community that they ' re sworn to serve and
protect . 
There are some communities that have been -- where a
significant gap has been exposed . 
And the President often will cite that it was not that
long ago , 20 or 25 years ago , that you had the city
of Los Angeles that after a high-profile incident where
there were deep concerns about police brutality
against a black motorist , that that city was in
flames , and that you saw a stark racial divide emerge
immediately that was distressing to many people
in the country . 
And while that gap and that gulf in some communities
still exists , the response has been much different ; 
that there are certainly places where there have been
public demonstrations and some civil unrest , but
nothing on the scale of what we saw in Los Angeles . 
And I think what ' s also notable is that there are a
number of prominent voices of all races who are
speaking out trying to bridge that divide . 
So I think that ' s an apt illustration of the
situation that we find ourselves in , which is that
we ' ve made important progress in a way that
actually makes a difference in the lives of Americans in
communities all across the country . 
But we still got a lot of work to do if we ' re going to
solve that problem . 
And the President also feels optimistic because he has
seen the commitment that ' s been shown by young people
-- many of them African American , but not all
African American -- who are seeking to organize in their
communities , who are seeking to protest the government
and make their voice heard , and bring about the kind of
change that they would like to see in their community . 
And the President is optimistic that they ' re
going to have an impact -- a positive impact -- in
addressing those concerns and in healing some of those
divisions . 
And it ' s this younger generation of activists and
younger generation of leaders who the President
continues to be optimistic will be able to continue the
kind of progress that we ' ve made in healing the racial
divide in this country . 
The Press : I know you ' re not being ( inaudible ) and I
respect what you said , but I think there are a number of
people that feel very pessimistic when they see
incidents like what happened in that Facebook post , when
they see shootings -- motorist in South Carolina , 
the devastating attacks in Dallas . 
Is the President sensitive to that ? 
Mr . Earnest : Of course , he is . 
And I think the President himself has expressed his
own profound concerns and disappointment and , in some
cases , outrage about many of the incidents that you ' ve
described , including the Facebook video that drew so
much outrage and attention in the last couple of days . 
So the President certainly understands that we ' ve got a
lot of work to do , and there are reasons for people to
feel pessimistic that we haven ' t made as much
progress as we would like . 
But in the President ' s mind , it ' s impossible to deny that
we have , in fact , made progress . 
And the fact that you see people of a variety of races
speaking out on these issues with one voice , appealing to
the same kinds of values , gives the President a lot of
optimism that these are problems that can be
resolved , where we can make progress . 
And there certainly is work to be done . 
Look , to go back to something you raised in your
first question , there ' s no denying that the President ' s
personal journey and the personal progress that he ' s
made is one indication of the progress that we ' ve made
as a country . 
The President I think spoke very eloquently about this
at Selma a year and a half ago , where you essentially
had African Americans who were being beaten and abused
by local law enforcement with water cannons and dogs , 
trying to get -- just so they could have the right to
cast a ballot . 
And 50 years later , you have an African American
President of the United States . 
That ' s remarkable progress . 
Doesn ' t mean that all our work is done , because in too
many communities across the country we are seeing people
from the minority community being disadvantaged and
being denied the right to vote , or at least having had
their ability to vote obstructed because of
cynical partisan policies that have been put in place . 
So there ' s a whole lot more work to be done on that , but
certainly the President ' s story is one powerful
indication of the progress that we ' ve made , but it ' s
far from the only one . 
The Press : I want to ask you about detainee transfers . 
We talked a bit about the dwindling number of
detainees that are still housed at the facility at
Guantanamo . 
Can you give an update on that and whether or not that
will continue to be the trajectory as we wind down
the last 14 days ? 
Mr . Earnest : Kevin , I know you ' ve been following this
closely , so I know that you saw the announcement from
the Department of Defense yesterday about the transfer
of four Yemeni nationals from the detention facility
at Guantanamo Bay to Saudi Arabia . 
That transfer was effectuated after the 30-day
notification was provided to Congress , and after a
comprehensive review was conducted by the U . S . 
-- by the President ' s national security team , 
including a number of agencies , including the
intelligence community , about these individuals
being safe to transfer to Saudi Arabia under a set of
security restrictions that would limit their ability to
threaten the United States . 
This does bring the prison population -- or the
population at Guantanamo Bay to 55 . 
And when President Obama took office , the detainee
population at Gitmo was 242 . 
And in that time , we ' ve move 183 detainees to 42
countries . 
And that certainly is an indication of the progress
that we have made in reducing the prison
population . 
But the President does continue to be concerned
principally about two things . 
One is , as the Gitmo facility continues to remain
in operation , it continues to serve as a recruiting
tool for extremists who hold that up as an example of the
United States not living up to the kinds of values that
we claim to be fighting for . 
And to continue to operate that facility is to continue
to give terrorist recruiters a valuable tool . 
Secondly , the President is also concerned about the
highly inefficient waste of taxpayer dollars . 
The cost of operating the facility at Gitmo is
significantly higher than the cost of operating a
similar facility that would effectively safeguard our
national security by housing them here in the United
States . 
And there has been no good reasonable explanation put
forward about why Congress is intent on preventing that
from happening . 
The Press : Can I get a cost-per-detainee sort of
analysis maybe ? 
Mr . Earnest : We ' ll see if we can get you some metrics to
put some numbers around that cost-benefit analysis . 
Ron . 
The Press : On the economy , the President is also going
to leave office I believe with the distinction of
being the first President since Herbert Hoover not to
experience a year of growth at 3 percent GDP . 
That ' s correct , right ? 
Mr . Earnest : I hadn ' t heard that statistic , but we can
certainly look into it to confirm it for you . 
The Press : That ' s what I ' ve read , that -- Mr . Earnest : 
Okay . 
We ' ll look into it . 
The Press : Assuming that is the truth , does the
President accept responsibility for that , as
well ? 
And how do you explain that -- you know sluggish growth
has been a problem throughout the eight years . 
How do you explain that -- how do you square that with
this historic job growth and so on and so forth ? 
And I think -- the other thing is that some would
argue that slow growth is in part what ' s contributed to
this feeling of anxiety in the country that things
aren ' t getting better , and that , in fact , may be one of
the crucial variables that just won the election , if
you want to keep on going down this road . 
The question is , how much responsibility does the
President accept for the sluggish growth thing ? 
Because I think you ' re going to say , well , look where we
started and look at what Congress did and didn ' t do , 
so on and so forth . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' ll say a couple things about that . 
The first is , the President of the United States is
somebody who takes responsibility for what
happens in this country while he ' s President , and
President Obama has certainly done that in a
variety of settings . 
Many observers have indicated the important role
that the private sector plays in driving our
economy , and President Obama has been the first to
acknowledge that . 
He himself gives credit to the private sector driving
our recovery . 
And that recovery has been historic . 
The President himself has also frequently made the
observation that the financial crisis that the
United States encountered was not just significant , it
was historic -- the largest recession in our nation ' s
history since the Great Depression . 
And all that occurred right as President Obama was
taking office . 
And so we were digging out of a historically large
hole , certainly the largest hole that any President
faced dating back to the early stages of the 20th
century . 
The Press : Just on this -- so how long does the
argument last of " look at the hole we started in "  ? 
For example , how long is that a valid argument into
the next administration ? 
You ' re seven years into it now . 
You see the point ? 
How long is that a valid explanation for why growth
has been so slow ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , let me say one other thing and then
I ' ll get to that question , which is -- and you alluded
to this , but it ' s relevant -- during the President ' s
first two years in office , he was able to work
effectively with Democratic majorities in the House and
Senate to put in place the economic policies that did
lay the groundwork for our recovery , everything from
the Recovery Act , including the Affordable Care Act . 
These are policies that were beneficial to the economy , 
and they led to the kind of growth and progress that is
the envy of the world . 
Since then , even the kinds of proposals that have
typically enjoyed bipartisan support , that the President
has put forward , have not gotten them --
infrastructure investments , immigration reform , even the
Trans-Pacific Partnership . 
All of those are things that would have had a tangible , 
positive impact on the economy and on job creation . 
So the President is proud of his economic record , and the
progress that we ' ve made is historic . 
And there is no other President that can cite the
kind of job creation streak that President Obama can
cite based on what ' s happened in the economy
while he ' s been President . 
But there certainly is more that the President believes
that we could have done and should have done . 
But that was not possible because of the obstruction
that we ran in to once Republicans took control of
the United States Congress . 
With regard to this question about how do Presidents put
into context what they did with their time in office , 
the President makes what I think is a pretty
common-sense illustration of this , which is that he ' s a
better runner in a relay race , and he took the baton
from President George W . 
Bush . 
And when he took the baton , our economy was at the
bottom of a deep hole -- was plunging to the bottom of a
deep hole . 
And he had a lot of uphill running to do while he was
holding that baton . 
That ' s not a situation that President Trump will face . 
President Trump , not for the first time in his life , will
inherit a much more financially beneficial
situation . 
And he ' ll have an opportunity to build on that
momentum . 
So I think you can make a strong case that the
standard that he should be held to is even higher . 
He ' s got many more advantages . 
He ' s got the wind at his back . 
He ' s got a stable financial system . 
He ' s got an economy that ' s built up momentum , when you
evaluate economic growth , when you evaluate job
creation , when you evaluate wage growth . 
And what he does with all of those advantages that he ' s
inherited is up to him , and he ' ll face -- we ' ll have an
opportunity to evaluate his performance . 
The Press : To follow up on this intelligence briefing
matter , back-and-forth , and given that the President and
the President-elect have some rapport and have this
handful of exchanges by phone and then otherwise , 
would you expect that there might be a conversation
between the two of them about this briefing and what
it means , and this particular issue because
it ' s so prominent and because I would imagine the
President feels so passionately about it ? 
Mr . Earnest : There is not plan for the President to
call the President-elect . 
That ' s not on his schedule today . 
So I suppose if the President-elect were to call
him , he ' d return the call . 
He ' s been doing that -- done that a number of times since
the election . 
But , look , as our intelligence leaders
testified yesterday , there ' s not a lot of ambiguity in
this situation . 
They ' re not expressing a lot of ambiguity in their public
statements . 
Certainly , their October statement was not ambiguous . 
Their testimony yesterday before Congress was not
ambiguous . 
I ' ll let them speak to what ' s included in the
report , and we ' ll have an opportunity to take a look
at the unclassified report when it ' s released . 
I ' d be surprised if there ' s anything in there that ' s
particularly ambiguous . 
If there is , it may be because of the need to
protect sources and methods . 
But -- The Press : And because of the lack of
ambiguity , as you point out and others have , and because
this is a matter of national security , is it reasonable
to expect that the President of the United States might
call up the President-elect and say , look , you need to
think about this differently ? 
I mean , it would just seem like a natural thing to do
if , in fact , the President is so concerned about this , 
as he rightfully perhaps should be and has said that
he is . 
Mr . Earnest : Listen , I think what I can tell you is I
certainly wouldn ' t rule out that this is an issue that
they ' ve discussed previously . 
Now , I ' m going to protect their ability to have
private conversations , so I can ' t sort of catalogue the
conversations that they ' ve had . 
But I think common sense would lead you to conclude
that this an issue that they ' ve talked about before . 
And given the significance of this incident and given
the unambiguous nature of the intelligence community ' s
work , I suspect that this is an issue that will continue
to be discussed both publicly and privately . 
Certainly , we ' ve seen leaders on Capitol Hill , 
including Republicans , indicate their commitment to
continuing to investigate this matter and learn as
much as they can about it , and begin to take steps to
prevent the kind of negative impact we saw from happening
again . 
So I guess I wouldn ' t rule out future conversations , 
but I do not anticipate a telephone call between the
President and the President-elect on this
specific topic today . 
But of course , if the President-elect calls the
President of the United States , he ' ll call him back . 
The Press : There could be other communications
methods . 
Mr . Earnest : There could be . 
So that ' s part of our commitment to the
transition . 
The Press : Just using my common sense , as you ' ve
suggested , it would seem logical , then , that the
President has talked to him about this , and yet the
President-elect has still expressed publicly so much
skepticism about the intelligence findings . 
Mr . Earnest : Well , they obviously disagree on a lot
of things . 
The Press : And just on this whole matter of tweeting --
Mr . Earnest : Maybe that ' s the understatement of the
day , huh ?  
( Laughter .  ) The Press : O this matter on -- you made a
reference to tweeting earlier , that you read all
of them but you don ' t -- Mr . Earnest : I try to . 
It ' s hard to keep up sometimes . 
The Press : What does the President think about that ? 
The fact that he does this -- not necessarily the
content , but the fact that the President-elect is
communicating in this manner . 
Mr . Earnest : I think you can tell from the President ' s
communication style that he believes that communicating
in a different way plays to his strengths , and I think
in some ways that contrast was quite stark . 
Even just this morning , the President was engaged in a
serious , detailed , long discussion of the
intricacies of health care policy . 
Those are the kinds of arguments and facts and
presentations that don ' t lend themselves to
140-character limits . 
But obviously , the President-elect has a
different communication style and it certainly
contributed to some of his success in building support
for his campaign . 
Whether that ' s a style that he believes will benefit him
once he has assumed all of the awesome responsibilities
of the President of the United States is something
that I think we ' ll all just have to wait to find out . 
The Press : And given all these awesome
responsibilities , does the President think , as others
have said , that this method of communication is
dangerous ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I guess I should also clarify , 
President Obama has a Twitter feed too . 
He ' s got tens of millions of supporters and followers on
Twitter -- or presumably they aren ' t all supporters . 
I ' m sure they ' re not . 
But he ' s got a lot of followers on Twitter . 
It can be an effective method of communication , but
when every word and the meaning of every utterance
is so closely scrutinized to try to detect its precise
impact on global events , sometimes the 140- character
limit has some downsides . 
Sometimes it requires some more explanation to make
sure people understand exactly what you mean . 
And when you ' re President of the United States , it ' s
important for people in this country and around the world
to understand exactly what you mean . 
The Press : And lastly , in other news , you said you
might have some details about the party tonight . 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t have additional details about the
party tonight . 
The Press : Or any details . 
Mr . Earnest : As I mentioned earlier , the President and
First Lady are hosting a party here at the White
House tonight . 
It will be an opportunity for them to spend some time
with their friends , and I suspect it will be the last
opportunity for them to be able to host such an event
before they leave the White House . 
The Press : Any names on the guest list ? 
Mr . Earnest : No names that I have to release from here . 
The Press : Hundreds of people ? 
Millions of people ? 
Mr . Earnest : It will not be millions of people .  
( Laughter .  ) It will be smaller than that . 
But the President and First Lady are looking forward to
it , and this is something that they ' ve done before , 
and it ' s one of the things that they will miss about
the White House in terms of their personal life and
being able to share some of the -- how special that is
with their friends in the way that millions of
Americans have gotten a glimpse of the specialness
of the White House through White House tours . 
The Press : Are you going ? 
Mr . Earnest : I ' ll keep you posted on my Friday night
plans . 
Mark . 
The Press : By any chance did you ask President Obama
about what Vice President Biden said yesterday -- that
Donald Trump ought to grow up when it comes to some of
his tweets and name-calling ? 
Mr . Earnest : I did not speak to President Obama about it . 
I can give you my reaction , if you care , which is just
simply that Vice President Biden is somebody who , 
through his four-decade career here in Washington , 
has developed a reputation for an avuncular
communication style . 
The Press : Avuncular ?  
( Laughter .  ) Mr . Earnest : Yeah . 
It seems to generate headlines sometimes , but I
think what many people have found is that they have
benefitted from following the advice of Vice President
Biden . 
The Press : Would a comment like that be in the spirit
of the smooth and seamless transition that President
Obama wanted ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen , I think the Vice President , 
just like everybody else in this administration , has in
words and deeds demonstrated a clear commitment and
extended courtesies to the incoming President ' s team . 
And I know that that is certainly true of the Vice
President ' s staff , but I also know that that ' s true
of the Vice President himself . 
Earlier this week , he happened to be walking the
halls at the same time that somebody on our team was
showing my successor around the West Wing , and the Vice
President graciously invited Mr . Spicer into this office
and spent some time talking to him about how special it
is to work at the White House . 
And I think that ' s a pretty clear indication of the Vice
President ' s commitment to ensuring that all of us --
including the Vice President -- are committed to the kind
of smooth and effective transition that President
Obama directed . 
The Press : And earlier in an answer to Ron , you said the
President is proud of his economic record . 
How does that statement relate to the national debt , 
an issue that we rarely hear on in this room or from the
President , a national debt that is nearing $20
trillion , an 87 percent increase over what it was
when he took office ? 
Certainly -- well , would you regard that as a blot on his
economic record ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , Mark , I think certainly the
President ' s record when it comes to fiscal
responsibility is quite strong . 
The deficit has been reduced by two-thirds since
President Obama took office . 
And the reason that that ' s important is if we can get
the deficit-to-GDP ratio down around 3 percent , 
that ' s going to allow us to stabilize the debt as a
percentage of GDP . 
And that ' s the metric that economists look at . 
And there has been a lot of progress made in terms of
asking those at the top of the income scale to pay a
little bit more , in terms of strengthening the economy
and raising the amount of tax revenue that ' s coming
into the U . S . 
government . 
There have also been some cuts to government spending , 
some of which were fashioned in a different way than
President Obama would have preferred , but yet resulted
in the kind of deficit reduction that ' s been good
for the country and good for our economy . 
But there is more work that needs to be done to address
the medium- and long-term consequences of the nation ' s
fiscal picture . 
And that will certainly be something that the incoming
President and the Republican leadership in Congress will
have to address . 
We certainly have heard a lot from congressional
Republicans about their desire to reduce the
deficit . 
And we ' ll see if they have the same success that
President Obama has had in reducing the deficit by
two-thirds over the next eight years . 
Dave . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
We ' re talking a lot about domestic policy today . 
Will the President in his speech in Chicago discuss
foreign policy at all ? 
Mr . Earnest : I would anticipate that the
President will talk a little bit about the work that is
necessary to advance our interests and to keep
America safe . 
But I would not anticipate that that will be the focus
of his farewell address . 
The Press : What do you say to people who argue that
given the continued problems in the Middle East and Syria
and in Iraq , the inability to defeat ISIS completely , 
the growing tensions and years-long problems with
Russia that seem to be increasing , even the
problems in Europe that seem to be growing with
democracies , people losing power , and allies facing new
challenges -- what do you say to people who would
argue that the President has not left the country in a
stronger position in foreign affairs for Trump ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I ' d say a couple things about that , 
and I appreciate you giving me the opportunity to do
that . 
The first is that when President Obama took office , 
there were 180 , 000 U . S . 
servicemembers in Iraq and Afghanistan , and today that
number is down below 15 , 000 , I believe . 
And I think that is an indication of the important
progress that President Obama has made . 
Each President is going to face unique challenges and a
unique set of circumstances in the international
community . 
And what President Obama has sought to do is to
strengthen our relationships with our closest allies . 
And the President feels good about the progress that
we ' ve made in strengthening our relationship with
countries who are part of our NATO Alliance . 
The incoming President indicated that he might try
to do something a little bit different . 
This President certainly hopes that he won ' t , but
we ' ll have to see how he chooses to manage those
relationships . 
President Obama is proud of the way that we have
overhauled and strengthened the relationship that the
United States has with countries throughout the
Western Hemisphere , and some of that is because of the
policy change that we made with regard to Cuba . 
That certainly has created ample opportunities for the
United States to strengthen our relationship with
countries throughout Latin America . 
Obviously , the President had the opportunity to visit
Argentina in 2016 . 
That was a good example of some of the improvements
that we ' ve made . 
I will say that the President is disappointed
that Congress didn ' t act to ratify the Trans-Pacific
Partnership . 
That certainly had the potential to strengthen our
security and economic relationships throughout the
Asia Pacific . 
That was a missed opportunity , but I don ' t
think that ' s one that you can pin on the President of
the United States , because he did the hard work of
negotiating the kind of an agreement that would have
advanced our interests , and it didn ' t move forward
because of Congress ' s failure to act . 
The last thing I ' ll say is when President Obama took
office , the number-one threat that was identified
by the United States and our allies around the world was
the risk that Iran would develop a nuclear weapon . 
That would be extraordinarily
destabilizing to not just the Middle East , but to the
world . 
It would be extraordinarily concerning to our closest
ally , Israel . 
And it would pose a threat to our allies in Europe that
are within range of some of Iran ' s missile capabilities . 
But because of the principled , hardnosed
diplomacy of this administration , the United
States succeeded in reaching an international agreement
to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon . 
And the international community can now verify
that Iran does not have a nuclear weapon , and is now
farther away from being able to get a nuclear weapon than
they have been in some time , and there are restrictions
in place to make sure that that timeframe is not
shortened . 
And if it is , the international community will
know about it and will be able to react . 
But all of that was accomplished without
deploying a single soldier or firing a single shot . 
And that certainly is a testament to the President ' s
success in addressing some of the most significant
threats facing the United States . 
And then I ' ll end just by mentioning the fact that
President Obama took office with Osama bin Laden
continuing to try to menace the United States . 
He no longer is in a position to do that . 
Michelle . 
The Press : While we ' ve been sitting here , there ' s been a
shooting at Fort Lauderdale Airport in a baggage claim
area , and it seems like multiple people have been
shot and multiple people have been killed . 
Given that we don ' t know what the motive is , do you
know at this point , or do any of you know if the
President has been notified ? 
Mr . Earnest : I don ' t know if the President ' s has been
notified but we can certainly look into that for
you . 
Obviously these are the kinds of events that we see
all too often here in the United States . 
And our thoughts and prayers right now are with those who
are potentially affected , and certainly with the first
responders in south Florida who right now are surely
putting themselves in harm ' s way to try to protect
innocent people . 
And so we ' re thinking about them right now , and we ' ll
President getting updated on this situation . 
And we ' ll let you know as soon as we can . 
The Press : Okay , and what do you think of the
President-elect asking Congress now -- and he says
he ' s going to ask congressional committees --
to investigate the leaking of information to -- NBC
News is the only one he named . 
What ' s your reaction to that , especially given that
this administration prosecuted leakers multiple
times ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , listen , as I mentioned to Josh , just
two days ago on his Twitter feed the President-elect was
defending the integrity of the foreigner who is the
leading purveyor of government secrets
maintained by the United States that we ' d prefer not
be released . 
These are secrets that have made the United States -- by
virtue of their release , has made the United States less
safe and has put our men and women in uniform and our men
and women in the intelligence community at
greater risk . 
Why he ' s defending his integrity , I do not know . 
But it would lead me to conclude that the tweet that
he sent today about NBC was prompted by something other
than his concern about the inappropriate release of
classified information . 
The Press : So would you disagree with calling for an
investigation on this particular leak ? 
Mr . Earnest : Listen , obviously he called on
Congress to take a look at it , and I ' ll defer to
members of Congress about how they want to use their
investigative authorities . 
The one thing I think I would point out is that the
Department of Justice with regard to the way that they
interact , the way that they conduct leak investigations , 
and the way that they interact with reporters and
protect the First Amendment rights of reporters , they
have made clear and codified that journalists should not
face punishment just for doing their job . 
And that is a principle that has been established and
strengthened and codified by the Obama administration . 
And hopefully that ' s something that Mr . Sessions
will continue , if and when he is confirmed to be the
next leader of the Department of Justice . 
The Press : Okay , and the President said something
interesting today during that Vox interview . 
He said that he would support a repeal of
Obamacare if the replacement was something better . 
And that ' s a lot different than what we ' ve been talking
about in here that you said Democrats shouldn ' t even
work with Republicans if repeal is a method they
choose . 
So do you think the President was saying
something different here ? 
Or was that just his way of saying in his view there ' s
no way that anything is going to be better ? 
Mr . Earnest : I think what he was -- he was actually
giving voice to the same argument that I was making , 
which is simply that if Republicans are willing to
sit down and look for ways to improve the health care
system , improve upon Obamacare , and are willing
to work with Democrats to do that , then the President
believes that Democrats should work with them . 
And it sounded to me like today he volunteered to be
one of them . 
The Press : But even if they want to repeal it ? 
It sounds like he ' s saying something different than --
Mr . Earnest : The President is simply saying that if
Republicans have ideas that will be better for the
American people , better for our economy -- and we ' ve got
a way to judge , right , based on the people that -- based
on the way that access to health care has dramatically
expanded under the Affordable Care Act , based
on the consumer protections that are in place , based on
the way that the deficit has been reduced , based on the
way that the Medicare trust fund has been strengthened . 
If Republicans have a plan to meet all of that criteria
and they can do it , and it cover even more people or do
it for even less money , then President Obama -- I guess
the point the President is making is there ' s no pride
of authorship here . 
And I think that should have been evident from the
beginning as the President invited Republicans to take
the pen and to put forward their own ideas . 
And in fact , the President has willingly shared credit
with the Heritage Foundation , who originally
conceived of some of the key aspects of this plan . 
He has readily shared credit with people like Mitt
Romney , whose health care plan in Massachusetts served
as a template for the Affordable Care Act . 
He didn ' t do that because he ' s good buddies with Mitt
Romney -- he ' s not . 
Mitt Romney ran against him in 2012 , but yet President
Obama was willing to use the template that he developed
because it was a good idea , and it worked in
Massachusetts and it ' s worked for the United States
of America . 
So the President is basically making the point
there ' s no pride of authorship here . 
If Republicans have ideas that are actually going to
make the health care system better , the President will
help them and encourage them and support them as they try
to implement it . 
The problem has been that for seven years , Republicans
have insisted on simply voting to repeal the law
without ever putting forward any sort of realistic plan
to replace it . 
And some of the ideas that they have floated would not
make the health care system in this country better or
cheaper or cover more people ; it would make many
of those problems worse . 
And that ' s the tension . 
As long as Republicans are only focused on throwing our
health care system into chaos , I don ' t think they ' re
going to find much support at all from Democrats . 
And I think they ' re going to have trouble maintaining
support among a lot of Republicans who are
concerned about the impact that chaos would have on
families and businesses in their home states . 
Let ' s see -- Olivier . 
The Press : Thanks , Josh . 
Over the last eight years we ' ve seen a series of
spectacular cyber intrusions , whether by the
United States or against the United States . 
I ' m wondering under what circumstances the President
thinks either an act of hacking or an act of cyber
sabotage becomes an act of war . 
Mr . Earnest : I haven ' t asked this policy question of the
President or our experts . 
With regard to the Russian involvement in malicious
cyber activity that was aimed at trying to
destabilize our election , the President believed that
that was a very serious incident . 
That ' s what led to the extraordinary statement from
the intelligence community . 
That ' s what led to the serious response that was
publicized by the administration last week . 
That ' s what led the President of the United
States to raise these issues directly with President
Putin when they saw one another in Asia this past
fall . 
And I think that ' s why -- I know that ' s why the
President also directed the intelligence community to
produce a comprehensive report that could be shared
not just with this administration but with the
incoming administration , with members of Congress in
both parties , and with the public about what exactly
happened . 
Getting to the bottom of this is important because
what happened is so serious . 
But I will say that I ' d want you to talk to somebody with
a little bit more expertise in this policy area before I
took on the hypothetical question about what kind of
malicious cyber activity would genuinely constitute
an act of war . 
The Press : I ask because this morning at a breakfast
with reporters , Senator Bob Corker , the Chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee , suggested that
the question of intent here was paramount , saying that
the collection of information is not an act of
war , but perhaps the use of that information might be . 
And that ' s why I ' m asking sort of what the President ' s
criteria are -- not so much hypothetical -- what are
they . 
Mr . Earnest : Without having thought through a lot of
that , I think that certainly is a reasonable statement
from Senator Corker that intent of the malicious
actor is not irrelevant . 
And I know that the intelligence community , as
we previously stated , has done a lot of work to try to
understand not just what Russia did and how they did
it , but also to try to get some insight into what their
motivation may have been and what their goal may have
been . 
We know at least one of their goals was to raise
some doubts about the integrity of our system of
democracy and the ability of the United States government
to execute an election . 
But if there were additional motivations , we ' ll have to
see what the intelligence community has been able to
learn . 
John , I ' ll give you the last one , then we ' ll do the week
ahead . 
The Press : Thank you very much , Josh . 
You ' ve said repeatedly , including just a few minutes
ago , that the Republicans in Congress have no alternative
to the Affordable Health Care Act if it ' s repealed , 
and yet in 2015 , when the Supreme Court looked again
at its constitutionality , Senator Cassidy of
Louisiana , himself a doctor , unveiled a detailed plan
with -- keeping some aspects of the previous plan , but
offering new ones . 
Today , Republicans on Capitol Hill say they have
seven plans that are on the table , including Senator
Cassidy ' s . 
Why is there sort of a difference in your view and
what they ' re saying on the Hill , and in particular in
the case of one senator who did put forth a plan ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , I think , John , right now it ' s a
pretty simple situation that we have , which is if
Republicans had a plan that they had confidence in , that
they believed measured up to the Affordable Care Act , 
that they believed would garner sufficient political
support among Republicans on Capitol Hill , then why
wouldn ' t they put it forward ? 
But even the Speaker of the House himself is saying
they ' ll get around to putting forward a
replacement at some point , hopefully later this year . 
If there are so many plans that they ' ve been talking
about for so long , why aren ' t they prepared to put
them forward and use them as the replacement for the
Affordable Care Act ? 
So they ' ll have -- because the truth is , John -- this
is the other part of it that I think is relevant . 
It is new that Republicans for the first time are in
charge of the White House , but it ' s not new that
Republicans are in charge of the Congress for the first
time . 
They had congressional majorities last year and the
year before that . 
And I ' m not aware of those Republicans using their
majority to pass an Obamacare alternative . 
They didn ' t . 
So that ' s why I doubt that there actually is a plan
that they ' re willing to put forward , that they ' re
willing to stand behind , that they ' re willing to
evaluate in comparison to all of the benefits of the
Affordable Care Act that the American people have been
enjoying for years now . 
The Press : The other question that I had was , 
there was a number , 1 , 030 -- 1 , 030 -- that I ' m sure
you ' ve seen that ' s been in numerous articles from
Christmas to January . 
Mr . Earnest : You ' re laying it on thick here , John . 
The Press : All right . 
I ' m just telling you . 
Mr . Earnest : Okay . 
The Press : That is the number of Democratic
senators , governors , U . S . 
representatives , and state legislators who have lost
their seats to Republicans in the last eight years
under President Obama . 
As the leader of the Democratic Party , a position
you mentioned earlier , has he ever expressed any
thoughts about these losses , which I believe are the
biggest for an incumbent President since Herbert
Hoover was President during the Depression ? 
Mr . Earnest : Well , John , I think it ' s always important
to evaluate the context of those numbers . 
And one important piece of context is simply that there
was an historic wave that entered office at the end of
2008 and the beginning of 2009 of Democratic elected
officials who benefitted from President Obama being
at the top of the ballot in 2008 . 
So when we ' re talking about those kinds of numbers , it ' s
important to recognize that those numbers got built up
in the first place because of President Obama ' s
political success in winning the White House the first
time . 
That said , the President is the leader of the Democratic
Party . 
And he has been disappointed , particularly
with regard to this most recent election , that a lot
of good Democratic elected officials , public servants
didn ' t succeed at the ballot box . 
And the President has expressed his view about why
that is . 
It includes the need for Democratic activists and
Democratic voters to express their view persuasively in
communities all across the country , and that certainly
is part of the challenge that President Obama is
going to spend some time thinking about as a former
President . 
And this will certainly be the challenge that the
incoming Democratic Party chairman will take on in
taking office and making sure that Democrats are
showing up and competing in communities all across the
country . 
We ' ve got the values right , we ' ve got the policy
prescriptions right , but we just need to go and make the
argument . 
And the President is confident that if and when
Democrats do that , there are important gains for the
party and for the country that lie ahead . 
Let me just run through the week ahead real quick . 
On Saturday , the President will travel to Jacksonville , 
Florida to attend the wedding ceremony of a White
House staffer . 
There will be no media coverage of the event . 
This is just a private event and the President is looking
forward to it . 
On Monday , the President will attend meetings at the
White House . 
On Tuesday , the President will travel to Chicago , 
Illinois , as we ' ve discussed , to deliver his
farewell address to the American people . 
In the address , he will thank his supporters , 
celebrate the ways the country has changed these
past eight years , and offer some thoughts on where the
country will go from here . 
The First Lady , the Vice President , and Dr . Biden
will also attend . 
Through the rest of the week , the President intends
to attend meetings at the White House and it should be
an interesting week . 
Thanks , everybody , have a great weekend . 
The Press : Can you tell us the staffer ' s name or --
Mr . Earnest : We ' ll follow up with you on that tomorrow . 
Thanks , everybody