Will escalating sanctions shift Fortress Russia ? It ’ s not a given
Sanction resilience and understanding the West ’ s pain points are part of Putin ’ s long-term calculus . 

Ukrainian military service members guard a road that leads to a government block in Kyiv , Ukraine
Russian President Vladimir Putin has ordered nuclear deterrent forces on high alert and has continued missile attacks on key Ukrainian cities [ File : Umit Bektas / Reuters ] 
By Tatiana Serafin 
Published On 28 Feb 2022
28 Feb 2022
New York , United States–Even as Western allies unleash new economic pressures on Russia with businesses announcing market pullouts , and an intensification of cyberattacks against Russian government entities , experts warn that these measures may not be enough to curb President Vladimir Putin ’ s escalating war on Ukraine .  
 
 “ New sanctions are designed to bog Russia down in the long-term ,  ” says Dr Nikolas Gvosdev , Russia expert and editor of world affairs journal Orbis ,  “ but not to impose enough pain for Putin to pull out of Ukraine .  ” 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Ukraine lodges case against Russia at UN ’ s top court
list 2 of 4
 ‘ We are going to defend ourselves ’  : Ukrainians join war front
list 3 of 4
Russian ex-official : Putin ’ s plan is full victory by March 2
list 4 of 4
More than 2 , 000 arrested at anti-war protests in Russia
end of list
While Ukraine ’ s yellow and blue flag has waved in protest from New York to St Petersburg , Putin has so far responded by ordering nuclear deterrent forces on high alert and continuing missile attacks on key Ukrainian cities . 

Sanction resilience has been part of Putin ’ s long-term calculus , along with his understanding of the West ’ s pain points if sanctions boomerang . Experts agree little will change as long as the goal is to “ minimize the impact on the United States and our Allies ” as United States President Joe Biden stated when he announced stricter sanctions on Thursday .  “ Putin feels emboldened by the West ’ s trepidation ,  ” says Gvosdev . 

Since 2014 when Russia forcibly annexed Crimea , Western governments focused on deterrence over restraint to prevent further Russian encroachment into Ukraine . Sanctions were meant to convince Russia it was not in the country ’ s interest to be an aggressor . Pain points were identified – certain banks and specific individuals operating in the regions of contention were called out . They stung , but had little lasting effect . 

 ‘ Workarounds ’ 
Over time , Putin was able to find “ workarounds ”  , says Rachel Ziemba , adjunct senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security who has written extensively on sanctions . 

One of the workarounds was Putin ’ s decision to pursue “ selective de-globalization ”  , she says .  “ Even at its most open , Russia was closed off to foreign capital .  ” 

The country created barriers to trade by imposing high import tariffs and barriers to communication by launching its own alternative to the internet in 2019 . Putin has also pivoted away from the West to Asia by decreasing dollar reserves , increasing bilateral trade with China , and working on an alternative international payments system to the US-dominated SWIFT . These moves were meant to shield the economy from external shocks like the harsh sanctions playing out now . 

Putin ’ s other gamble was to forego growth of the Russian economy , says Ziemba . By putting off investments and maintaining a tight monetary policy , Russia ’ s balance sheet ( including $630bn in foreign currency reserves ) looked strong in the lead up to the Ukraine invasion , providing it with an early buffer for any upcoming economic pain . 

INTERACTIVE - Nord stream 2 gas pipeline halted

These external and internal fortification measures may be one reason why Putin was not swayed by sanctions threats Western governments waived at him earlier this year . By the time Putin recognized two Ukrainian regions as independent and Western allies began to escalate sanctions , he felt emboldened , says Gvosdev . 

So much so that Germany ’ s decision to stop certification of Nord Stream 2 was more symbolic than substantive , according to Capital Economics analyst William Jackson . Because Russia had already slowed European gas sales , losing Nord Stream did not hit as hard as the West wanted . 

Putin ’ s inner circle has also been bracing itself , says Ziemba . The list of sanctioned individuals appears to grow daily , but many have been moving assets from places like the US , where they can be frozen , and hiding them in offshore accounts where they can be retrieved at will . 

Some pain
This next tranche of sanctions may have more teeth , but it remains unclear if they will be enough to get Putin to leave Ukraine . 

On Sunday , the G7 announced certain , as yet unnamed Russian banks , would be barred from the global inter-banking communications system , SWIFT , with a transatlantic task force to coordinate next steps . However , the difference between real effect and more lives lost in Ukraine will depend on which banks are affected , how long these sanctions take to implement , and if they continue to exempt oil and gas exports . In other words , unless the sanctions are really very strong , it will not reduce the loss of Ukrainian lives . 

INTERACTIVE - Sanctions on Russia SWIFT payment network

That said , Russia has started to feel some pain , says Ziemba . In the past few days , Russian entities have had problems receiving letters of credit , making commodities trading difficult . Even Chinese banks , despite the Putin-Xi partnership , are restricting financing . Physical chokepoints like closed ports and compromised infrastructure are also starting to add to trading costs . Western countries are beginning to seize Russian ships , and many have announced they are closing off airspace to Russian carriers . And late Friday , the US announced it would join allies in sanctioning Putin , Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov , and members of Russia ’ s national security team . 

But it will be the long-term effects of sanctions that will hurt Russia most , says Govsdev . 

Cutting off more than 50 percent of Russia ’ s high-tech imports for example will affect innovation in the military sector and its military effectiveness over time . Severing Russia from international banking and finance will also spread the pain across its economy . Ancillary effects such as a declining Russian stock market and weakening rouble will cause business disruptions and consumer hardship . 

And when sanctions hit the Russian doorstep , expect there to be problems , adds Gvosdev . If the rouble precipitously declines and inflation soars , Gvosdev expects pensioners might be the first to protest . In 2018 , Russian pensioners marched against pension reforms that would have raised retirement ages . Putin ’ s popularity plummeted and he made concessions . Since then , Putin has tightened the noose on dissent , silencing political opponents like Alexei Navalny and clamping down on independent media . 

Still , says Gvosdev , if economic pain gets too great , pensioners have the least to lose and will take the fight to the streets . Protests are already taking place across Russia against the Ukraine invasion – thousands have been arrested and more protests are planned . These protests may serve as the nexus for change if people continue to come out in greater numbers . 

How much pain is the West willing to take with pandemic malaise and inflation already causing domestic turmoil ? Analysts agree that sanctioning Russia ’ s oil and gas sectors will have severe ramifications for Russia ’ s economy . Companies like energy giant BP , which Sunday announced it was exiting its shareholding in Russia ’ s Rosneft , may be a prelude to more energy penalties down the line . But sanctions that boomerang and raise oil and gas prices in the West and lead to greater inflationary pressures may never be on the table . In the US , where President Biden faces mid-term elections and the potential loss of Congress and his legislative agenda , the political will for extreme sanctions is low . 

The threat of retaliatory sanctions also looms large , says Ziemba . Putin may counter by weaponizing any number of sectors from gas to oil to grain to fertilizer .  “ That would be bad for Russia , bad for the Russian people and bad for the global economy ,  ” says Ziemba . 