Prime Minister Abe: President Obama, Commander
Harris, ladies and gentlemen, and all
American citizens: I stand here at Pearl Harbor as
the Prime Minister of Japan.
If we listen closely, we can make out the sound of
restless waves breaking and then retreating again.
The calm inlet of brilliant blue is radiant
with the gentle sparkle of the warm sun.
Behind me, a striking white form atop the azure,
is the USS Arizona Memorial.
Together, with President Obama, I paid a visit to
that memorial, the resting place for many souls.
It's a place which brought utter silence to me.
Inscribed there are the names of the servicemen
who lost their lives.
Sailors and Marines hailing from California
and New York, Michigan and Texas, and various other
places, serving to uphold their noble duty of
protecting the homeland they loved, lost their
lives amidst searing flames that day, when
aerial bombing tore the USS Arizona in two.
Even 75 years later, the USS Arizona, now at rest
atop the seabed, is the final resting place for a
tremendous number of sailors and Marines.
Listening again as I focus my senses, alongside the
song of the breeze and the rumble of the rolling
waves, I can almost discern the voices of
those crewmen.
Voices of lively conversation, upbeat and
at ease, on that day, on a Sunday morning.
Voices of young servicemen talking to each other
about their future and dreams; voices calling out
names of loved ones in their very final moments;
voices praying for the happiness of children
still unborn.
Each and every one of those servicemen had a mother
and a father anxious about his safety.
Many had wives and girlfriends they loved,
and many must have had children they would have
loved watch grow up.
All of that was brought to an end.
When I contemplate that solemn reality I am
rendered entirely speechless.
"Rest in peace, precious souls of the fallen."
With that overwhelming sentiment, I cast flowers,
on behalf of Japanese people, upon the waters
where those sailors and Marines sleep.
President Obama, the people of the United
States of America, and the people around the world,
as the Prime Minister of Japan, I offer my sincere
and everlasting condolences to the souls
of those who lost their lives here, as well as to
the spirits of all the brave men and women whose
lives were taken by a war that commenced in this
very place, and also to the souls of the countless
innocent people who became the victims of the war.
We must never repeat the horrors of war again.
This is the solemn vow we, the people of Japan,
have taken.
Since the war, we have created a free and
democratic country that values the rule of law,
and has resolutely upheld our vow never
again to wage war.
We, the people of Japan, will continue to uphold
this unwavering principle while harboring quiet
pride in the path we have walked as a peace-loving
nation over these 70 years since the war ended.
To the souls of the servicemen who lie in
eternal rest aboard the USS Arizona, to the
American people, and to all peoples around the
world, I pledge that unwavering vow here as the
Prime Minister of Japan.
Yesterday, at the Marine Corps Base Hawaii in
Kaneohe Bay, I visited the memorial marker for an
Imperial Japanese Navy officer.
He was a fighter pilot by the name of Commander
Fusata Iida, who was hit during the attack on Pearl
Harbor, and gave up on returning to his
aircraft carrier.
He went back instead, and died.
It was not Japanese who erected a marker at the
site that Iida's fighter plane crashed; it was U.S.
servicemen who had been on the receiving
end of his attack.
Applauding the bravery of the dead pilot, they
erected this stone marker.
On the marker, his rank at that time is inscribed:
Lieutenant, Imperial Japanese Navy -- showing
the respect to a serviceman who gave his
life for his country.
"The brave respect the brave."
So wrote Ambrose Bierce in a famous poem.
Showing respect even to an enemy they fought against,
trying to understand even an enemy that they hated.
Therein lies the spirit of tolerance embraced by
the American people.
When the war ended, and Japan was a nation in
burnt-out ruins as far as the eye could see,
suffering under abject poverty, it was the United
States and its good people that unstintingly sent us
food to eat and clothes to wear.
The Japanese people managed to survive and
make their way toward the future, thanks to the
sweaters and milk sent by the American people.
And it was the United States that opened up the
path for Japan to return to the international
community once more after the war.
Under the leadership of the United States, Japan,
as a member of the free world, was able to enjoy
peace and prosperity.
The goodwill and assistance you extended to
us Japanese -- the enemy you had fought so
furiously -- together with the tremendous spirit of
tolerance, were etched deeply into the hearts and
minds of our grandfathers and mothers.
We also remember them.
Our children and grandchildren will also
continue to pass these memories down and
never forget what you did for us.
The words pass through my mind -- those words
described on the wall at the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington, D.C., where I visited with President
Obama: "With malice toward none, with charity for
all, let us strive on to do all which may achieve
and cherish a lasting peace among ourselves and
with all nations."
These are the words of Abraham Lincoln.
On behalf of the Japanese people, I hereby wish to
express once again my heartfelt gratitude to the
United States and to the world for the tolerance
extended to Japan.
It has now been 75 years since that Pearl Harbor.
Japan and the United States, which fought a
fierce war that will go down in the annals of
human history, have become allies, with deep and
strong ties rarely found anywhere in history.
We are allies that will tackle together to an even
greater degree than ever before the many challenges
covering the globe.
Ours is an alliance of hope that will lead
us to the future.
What has binded us together is the hope of
reconciliation made possible through the
spirit, the tolerance.
What I want to appeal to the people of the world
here at Pearl Harbor, together with President
Obama, is this power of reconciliation.
Even today, the horrors of war have not been
eradicated from the surface of the world.
There is no end to the spiral where
hatred creates hatred.
The world needs the spirit of tolerance and the power
of reconciliation now, and especially now.
Japan and the United States, which have
eradicated hatred and cultivated friendship and
trust on the basis of common values, are now --
and especially now -- taking responsibility for
appealing to the world about the importance of
tolerance and the power of reconciliation.
That is precisely why the Japan-U.S.
alliance is an alliance of hope.
The inlet gazing at us is tranquil as far as
the eye can see.
Pearl Harbor.
It is precisely this inlet, flowing like
shimmering pearls, that is a symbol of tolerance
and reconciliation.
It is my wish that our Japanese children and --
President Obama, your American children, and,
indeed, their children and grandchildren -- and
people all around the world will continue to
remember Pearl Harbor as a symbol of reconciliation.
We will spare no efforts to continue our
endeavors to make that wish a reality.
Together with President Obama, I hereby make my
steadfast pledge.
Thank you very much.
(applause)
President Obama: Prime Minister Abe, on behalf of
the American people, thank you for your gracious words.
Thank you for your presence here today -- an
historic gesture that speaks to the power of
reconciliation and the alliance between the
American and Japanese peoples; a reminder that
even the deepest wounds of war can give way to
friendship and lasting peace.
Distinguished guests, members of our armed
forces -- and most of all, survivors of
Pearl Harbor and their loved ones -- aloha.
Audience: Aloha.
President Obama: To Americans -- especially to
those of us who call Hawaii home -- this harbor
is a sacred place.
As we lay a wreath or toss flowers into waters that
still weep, we think of the more than 2,400
American patriots -- fathers and husbands,
wives and daughters -- manning Heaven's rails
for all eternity.
We salute the defenders of Oahu who pull themselves a
little straighter every December 7th, and we
reflect on the heroism that shone here 75 years ago.
As dawn broke that December day, paradise
never seemed so sweet.
The water was warm and impossibly blue.
Sailors ate in the mess hall, or readied
themselves for church, dressed in crisp white
shorts and t-shirts.
In the harbor, ships at anchor floated in neat
rows: the California, the Maryland and the Oklahoma,
the Tennessee, the West Virginia and the Nevada.
On the deck of the Arizona, the Navy
band was tuning up.
That morning, the ranks on men's shoulders defined
them less than the courage in their hearts.
Across the island, Americans defended
themselves however they could -- firing training
shells, working old bolt-action rifles.
An African-American mess steward, who would
typically be confined to cleaning duties, carried
his commander to safety, and then fired an
anti-aircraft gun until he ran out of ammo.
We honor Americans like Jim Downing -- a gunner's
mate first class on the West Virginia.
Before he raced to the harbor, his new bride
pressed into his hand a verse of Scripture: "The
eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms."
As Jim fought to save his ship, he simultaneously
gathered the names of the fallen so that he
could give closure to their families.
He said, "It was just something you do."
We remember Americans like Harry Pang -- a fireman
from Honolulu who, in the face of withering fire,
worked to douse burning planes until he gave his
last full measure of devotion
-- one of the only civilian firefighters
ever to receive the Purple Heart.
We salute Americans like Chief Petty Officer
John Finn, who manned a .
50-caliber machine gun for more than two hours and
was wounded more than 20 times, earning him our
nation's highest military decoration, the
Medal of Honor.
And it is here that we reflect on how war tests
our most enduring values -- how, even as Japanese
Americans were deprived of their own liberty during
the war, one of the most decorated military units
in the history of the United States was the
442nd Infantry Regiment and its 100th Infantry
Battalion -- the Japanese-American Nisei.
In that 442nd served my friend and proud Hawaiian,
Daniel Inouye -- a man who was a senator from Hawaii
for most of my life and with whom I would find
myself proud to serve in the Senate chamber; a man
who was not only a recipient of the Medal of
Honor and the Presidential Medal of Freedom, but was
one of the most distinguished statesmen of
his generation as well.
Here at Pearl Harbor, America's first battle of
the Second World War roused a nation.
Here, in so many ways, America came of age.
A generation of Americans -- including my
grandparents -- the Greatest Generation --
they did not seek war, but they refused to
shrink from it.
And they all did their part on fronts
and in factories.
And while, 75 years later, the proud ranks of Pearl
Harbor survivors have thinned with time, the
bravery we recall here is forever etched in
our national heart.
I would ask all our Pearl Harbor and World War II
veterans who are able to, to please stand or raise
your hands -- because a grateful nation thanks you.
(applause)
The character of nations is tested in war, but it
is defined in peace.
After one of the most horrific chapters in human
history -- one that took not tens of thousands, but
tens of millions of lives -- with ferocious fighting
across this ocean -- the United States and
Japan chose friendship and peace.
Over the decades, our alliance has made both
of our nations more successful.
It has helped underwrite an international order
that has prevented another World War and that has
lifted more than a billion people out of extreme poverty.
And today, the alliance between the United States
and Japan -- bound not only by shared interests,
but also rooted in common values -- stands as the
cornerstone of peace and stability in the Asia
Pacific and a force for progress around the globe.
Our alliance has never been stronger.
In good times and in bad, we are there for each other.
Recall five years ago, when a wall of water bore
down on Japan and reactors in Fukushima melted,
America's men and women in uniform were there to help
our Japanese friends.
Across the globe, the United States and Japan
work shoulder-to-shoulder to strengthen the security
of the Asia Pacific and the world -- turning back
piracy, combating disease, slowing the spread of
nuclear weapons, keeping the peace in war-torn lands.
Earlier this year, near Pearl Harbor, Japan joined
with two dozen nations in the world's
largest maritime military exercise.
That included our forces from U.S.
Pacific Command, led by Admiral Harry Harris, the
son of an American Naval officer and a Japanese mother.
Harry was born in Yokosuka, but you wouldn't
know it from his Tennessee twang.
(laughter)
Thank you, Harry, for your outstanding leadership.
(applause)
In this sense, our presence here today -- the
connections not just between our governments,
but between our people, the presence of Prime
Minister Abe here today -- remind us of what is
possible between nations and between peoples.
Wars can end.
The most bitter of adversaries can become the
strongest of allies.
The fruits of peace always outweigh the plunder of war.
This is the enduring truth of this hallowed harbor.
It is here that we remember that even when
hatred burns hottest, even when the tug of tribalism
is at its most primal, we must resist the
urge to turn inward.
We must resist the urge to demonize those
who are different.
The sacrifice made here, the anguish of war,
reminds us to seek the divine spark that is
common to all humanity.
It insists that we strive to be what our Japanese
friends call otagai no tame ni -- "with
and for each other."
That's the lesson of Captain William Callaghan
of the Missouri.
Even after an attack on his ship, he ordered that
the Japanese pilot be laid to rest with military
honors, wrapped in a Japanese flag sewn by
American sailors.
It's the lesson, in turn, of the Japanese pilot who,
years later, returned to this harbor, befriended an
old Marine bugler and asked him to play taps and
lay two roses at this memorial every month --
one for America's fallen and one for Japan's.
It's a lesson our two peoples learn every day,
in the most ordinary of ways -- whether it's
Americans studying in Tokyo, young Japanese
studying across America; scientists from our two
nations together unraveling the mysteries
of cancer, or combating climate change,
exploring the stars.
It's a baseball player like Ichiro lighting up a
stadium in Miami, buoyed by the shared pride of two
peoples, both American and Japanese, united in
peace and friendship.
As nations, and as people, we cannot choose the
history that we inherit.
But we can choose what lessons to draw from it,
and use those lessons to chart our own futures.
Prime Minister Abe, I welcome you here in the
spirit of friendship, as the people of Japan
have always welcomed me.
I hope that together, we send a message to the
world that there is more to be won in peace than in
war; that reconciliation carries more rewards
than retribution.
Here in this quiet harbor, we honor those we lost,
and we give thanks for all that our two nations have
won -- together, as friends.
May God hold the fallen in His everlasting arms.
May He watch over our veterans and all who stand
guard on our behalf.
May God bless us all.
Thank you.
(applause)