Russia faces sporting fallout over invasion of Ukraine
The consequences of the war are rippling through the sports world , as athletes and fans express solidarity with Ukraine . 

Napoli and Barcelona players display a ' Stop War ' banner
Napoli and FC Barcelona players display a ' Stop War ' banner before a Europa League match [ Ciro De Luca / Reuters ] 
By John Duerden
Published On 27 Feb 2022
27 Feb 2022
In 2018 , Russian football basked in international sporting acclaim – hosting a World Cup that was admired off the pitch and was successful on it as the national team reached the quarter-finals for the first time in post-Soviet history . 

However , following Russia ’ s invasion of Ukraine on February 24 , European football clubs are now cutting ties with Russian companies , sporting organisations are moving events out of the country , and players and fans around the world are sending messages of support for Ukraine . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Poland , Sweden refuse to play World Cup qualifier with Russia
list 2 of 4
 ‘ It was hell ’  : Long lines of Ukrainian refugees at Poland border
list 3 of 4
Romania on edge as Russia invades Ukraine
list 4 of 4
Ukraine : A view from a city ‘ frozen in horror ’ 
end of list
As long as the war continues , there are likely to be more consequences for Russian sport , both in the short and long terms . 

On Saturday , Poland and Sweden announced their refusal to play Russia in March ’ s final playoff qualifiers for the 2022 Qatar World Cup . 


Polish President Andrzej Duda agreed with the decision , writing on social media :  “ You don ’ t play with bandits !  ” 

There is now growing pressure on world football ’ s governing body , FIFA , and the European regulator , UEFA , to ban Russia and its clubs from international competitions . 

It is a far cry from 2018 when Russian President Vladimir Putin was pictured smiling at World Cup games alongside world leaders and FIFA President Gianni Infantino .  
 
 “ We also know that many people left Russia thinking ‘ what a great place and what a great country ’ and that is illustrative of how Putin has used sport to manipulate people ’ s perceptions of the country ,  ” Simon Chadwick , professor of Eurasian sport at the Emlyon Business School , told Al Jazeera . 

Since Putin took power in 1999 , Russia has increasingly invested in the sports industry , hosting several major international events and competitions . Russian companies have signed significant sporting sponsorship deals and Russian businessmen have invested heavily in football clubs . 


James Corbett , senior correspondent with football finance website Off The Pitch , said while the invasion of Ukraine has triggered widespread condemnation , he was doubtful that Russia would be banned from major sporting events .  
 
 “ Russia invaded Crimea four years out from hosting a World Cup and no one batted an eyelid ,  ” Corbett told Al Jazeera .  
 
 “ Likewise ,  [ Russia ] brought the Olympics to its knees reputationally through horrendous cheating , but was still allowed to compete ,  ” he added , referring to a state-run doping programme . 

Corbett also believes there is some hypocrisy involved in the calls to banish Russia .  
 
 “ For example , Britain was in an illegal occupation of Iraq when it was awarded [ in 2005 ] the London Olympics .  ” 


The situation may be a headache for FIFA but , in general , the sporting world has been quick to react to Russia ’ s aggression and to cut or reduce links with business partners and sponsors . 

A day after Aeroflot was banned from the United Kingdom ’ s airspace , Manchester United announced that they were ending their deal with Russia ’ s largest airline . 

German team Schalke removed the name of Russian state-owned gas giant Gazprom from their shirts , UEFA switched May ’ s Champions League final from St Petersburg ’ s Gazprom Arena to Paris , Formula One has taken its Grand Prix away from Russia , and one of its teams , Haas , has removed all livery from potash producer Uralkali from its cars . 

In addition , the International Olympic Committee has urged all sporting organisations to relocate their events from Russia . 

However , Chadwick says that reversing years of Moscow ’ s investment and involvement in sport will be difficult .  
 
 “ There is this interdependency with Russia , and not just in football , that has been established over the last two decades that will be difficult for European sports organisations to remove themselves from ,  ” Chadwick said .  
 
 “ UEFA learned during the pandemic that it is straightforward to move games , so it made a statement in moving the final that came at relatively low cost ,  ” added Chadwick , but it would cost UEFA $45m a year if it decided to terminate its sponsorship deal with Gazprom .  
 
 “ If UEFA is really serious about its position on Russia , we should expect them to terminate that Gazprom deal in the coming weeks ,  ” Chadwick said . 


Meanwhile , Corbett says Russian companies wishing to sponsor major international events or European teams in the future may find it more difficult “ because they ’ re part of a pariah state and clubs and events won ’ t want to be associated ”  .  
 
 “ For the companies themselves , they usually don ’ t sell anything to the public – it ’ s about getting legitimacy . The old joke ‘ Let ’ s go and buy some Gazprom ’ after watching a Champions League game has some credence . Who buys Gazprom or USM [ a sponsor of English Premier League club Everton ] or chooses Aeroflot over other brands ? Whatever they do in the future , they ’ re going to have questions hanging over them .  ” 

For European champions Chelsea , the relationship with Russia goes much deeper than sponsorship . The English Premier League team is the highest-profile sporting asset owned by a Russian in Europe . After taking over at Stamford Bridge in 2003 , owner Roman Abramovich ’ s massive investment has turned Chelsea into one of the most successful in the world . 

On the day of the invasion , British MP Chris Byrant suggested to Parliament that the UK should seize Abramovich ’ s assets and bar him from owning the London club . Two days later , Abramovich announced that he was transferring the running of Chelsea to the trustees of its charitable foundation , although he will remain the club ’ s owner .  
 
 “ This is significant in terms of Abramovich ’ s investment in Chelsea but it ’ s not just about him , there is also [ Chelsea ’ s Russian-Canadian director ] Marina Granovskaia who is really pivotal in Chelsea ’ s strategy in signing players ,  ” said Chadwick . 

Stronger sanctions could affect how the club does business .  
 
 “ You could find these people being monitored , movements restricted and visas denied , freezes being out on movement of assets across boundaries that could involve transfer fees ,  ” he said . 

One potential sanction that is being discussed is cutting Russia off from SWIFT , a global payments system . 

Iranian football has struggled to operate outside the system – an Iranian national federation official told Al Jazeera that the organisation has had difficulties collecting money owed by FIFA and the Asian Football Confederation , while clubs have faced problems in receiving transfer fees from overseas . 

Russian footballers and athletes will be waiting to see what happens in the coming weeks and months as European sporting teams , organisations and players decide how to respond to the war .  
 
 “ It all comes down to how you see money and politics and what you think the trade-off is ,  ” said Chadwick .  “ You might have to sacrifice economically but politically and maybe even morally , you can make a point .  ” 

The initial reaction from the sport in Europe may have been rapid but there is a long way to go .  
 
 “ It remains to be seen if Europe can sustain this ,  ” said Chadwick .  “ But if this is the long-term trajectory then Russian football will find itself increasingly isolated and could be in trouble .  ” 