The Commanders : NFL team in Washington , DC gets new name
Washington joins other major professional sports teams to drop names Indigenous people say are racist . 

New Commanders sign
Native American activists and advocacy organisations have long campaigned to get the Washington NFL team to drop its previous name [ Patrick Semansky / AP Photo ] 
Published On 2 Feb 2022
2 Feb 2022
The National Football League ( NFL ) team in Washington , DC will now be called the Commanders , after a lengthy review on how to replace the franchise ’ s previous name , which Indigenous people said was racist . 

The American football team ’ s new name was unveiled on Wednesday , after a public pressure campaign led by Native Americans as well as a threatened loss of sponsors forced the squad to drop its previous name in 2020 . 

KEEP READING
list of 3 items
list 1 of 3
Foreign investors eye takeover of two Brazilian football clubs
list 2 of 3
Football World Cup : Which teams have qualified for Qatar 2022 ? 
list 3 of 3
Washington , DC sues Proud Boys , Oath Keepers over January 6 riot
end of list
The organisation also committed to avoiding Native American imagery in its rebrand after being called the Washington Football Team during the past two seasons .  
 
 “ As an organization , we are excited to rally and rise together as one under our new identity while paying homage to our local roots and what it means to represent the nation ’ s capital ,  ” team co-owner Dan Snyder said in a statement . 

Dan and Tanya SnyderThe organisation also committed to avoiding Native American imagery in its rebrand [ Patrick Semansky / AP Photo ] 
Snyder , who bought the franchise in 1999 , had long fought off public pressure to rebrand and went as far to say the club would never change its name . 

But Native American advocacy groups had campaigned for years to get the team to drop its previous name , and that pressure ramped up amid a nationwide reckoning on racism and police brutality triggered by the 2020 police killing of George Floyd . 

Snyder eventually changed his stance after FedEx Corp , which owns the naming rights to the team ’ s suburban stadium in Landover , Maryland , urged the club to rebrand . PepsiCo and Nike both followed FedEx ’ s lead and said they welcomed the call for a review of the name . 

Ray Halbritter , a representative of the Oneida Indian Nation and leader of the Change the Mascot campaign , said Wednesday ’ s announcement signalled an “ historic development for Native Americans , civil rights advocates , sports fans , and most importantly , our future generations ”  .  
 
 “ This is a victory for all of those around the world seeking to advance inclusivity and respect in our societies ,  ” Halbritter said in a statement ( PDF )  .  
 
 “ While the official changing of the name is cause for celebration , today ’ s announcement by the Washington NFL team should not be treated as a simple rebranding … It is important we never forget what it took to get to this moment , and recognize how social change like this is possible . We must not erase from history the damages done by a dictionary defined slur — nor the lack of formal apology from this organization or the NFL for its use .  ” 


The Commanders name was the result of an 18-month process that the team said included more than 40 , 000 fan submissions , countless surveys , focus groups and meetings . 

The Washington team has won three Super Bowls and is one of the NFL ’ s marquee franchises , ranked by Forbes last August as the league ’ s fifth most valuable franchise at $4 . 2bn . 

Many professional and collegiate sports teams have names on Native American themes , and the push to have those organisations change their names continues .  
 
 “ While we continue the push to educate society on what respect for Tribal Nations calls for , we invite all sports leagues , schools , and corporations to participate in this long-overdue movement for change ,  ” the National Congress of American Indians said on Twitter on Tuesday , using the hashtag # NotYourMascot . 

Major League Baseball ’ s ( MLB ) Atlanta Braves and the National Hockey League ’ s Chicago Blackhawks have defended keeping their names . 


MLB ’ s Cleveland franchise said last July that it would change its name to the Guardians after the 2021 season , a move that drew praise from Native American groups who had long viewed the team ’ s old name as disparaging . 

In Canada , the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) team in Edmonton , Alberta , officially rebranded as the Elks last year after facing similar pressure to change its previous name . 

New team merchandiseThe Commanders name was selected after an 18-month rebrand process [ Patrick Semansky / AP Photo ] 