How Beijing residents are taking a ‘ closed-loop ’ Winter Olympics
Beijing residents lament the ban on overseas fans but say the Winter Games ambience is still there . 

People queue to enter a Beijing Winter Olympics souvenir store at Wangfujing shopping mall complex in Beijing [ Noel Celis / AFP ] 
People queue to enter a Beijing Winter Olympics souvenir store at Wangfujing shopping mall complex in Beijing [ File : Noel Celis / AFP ] 
By Kyle Mullin
Published On 14 Feb 2022
14 Feb 2022
The Beijing Winter Games are halfway through and the mood in the host city , the first to have hosted both a Summer and Winter Olympics , is mixed for most residents who cannot attend the competitions held in a rigidly pandemic-preventative “ closed loop ”  . 

Alex Acker , an expat in Beijing for both Games , is showing the event at his Jing-A craft brewery branches but he says the 2008 Beijing Summer Games had felt like “ a huge party ” and saw the Chinese capital “ really coming into its own ”  . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Beijing Olympics 2 . 0 : China ’ s soft power push
list 2 of 4
Winter Olympics : China stirs controversy with Uighur torchbearer
list 3 of 4
Winter Olympics : Which world leaders are attending Beijing 2022 ? 
list 4 of 4
At Winter Olympics , Beijing tries to sell world on digital yuan
end of list
He believes that while Beijing residents are still excited for the Winter Games , it is “ obviously muted due to COVID and not being able to go to events or mix with fans and athletes from around the world ”  . 

Mathieu Herout , who owns a sports bar , was more downbeat , saying that while he had a “ good crowd ” for the opening ceremony , only a “ handful of people come and watch the competitions ”  . 

There is “ no comparison ” between 2008 and 2022 , he said , adding that many of his employees remember “ foreign spectators , staff , crews and athletes would come and party ” 14 years ago .  
 
 “ We have none of this this year , given the health and safety measures ,  ” added Herout . 

The mood between the two events is “ starkly different ”  , said Asher Gillespie , who owns a pizza place near some of Beijing ’ s top ice rinks , where he spent years in Beijing ’ s evolving hockey scene as a local recreational league player . 

Gillespie recalled throngs of tourists and staff descending on Beijing in 2008 for sightseeing , watching the events , dining and enjoying the nightlife . 

For many who did not have tickets to attend the Bird ’ s Nest , Water Cube or other Olympic venues , sports bars and restaurants were an alternative , and Gillespie said many in his industry hoped 2022 would be similar .  
 
 “ Obviously everything changed with COVID ,  ” Gillespie said . 

Play Video
Video Duration 02 minutes 46 seconds
02 : 46
Beijing Olympics : US-born Chinese athletes face pressure
Mark Dreyer , founder of China Sports Insider , TV commentator , and author of Sporting Superpower : An Insider ’ s View on China ’ s Quest to Be the Best , said a number of factors have “ dampened the mood ” during the 2022 Games . 

Along with the ban on international spectators , Dreyer says the chilly February weather meant there were fewer outdoor festivities than in the summer of 2008 . 

However , he saw hope in the social media and retail clamour around the Games ’ mascot , though Dreyer remembers a bigger and far earlier buildup for that in 2008 . 

Chinese state media ran a number of highly positive interviews with Beijing residents , which ran counter to international news about diplomatic boycotts and the strict anti-COVID protocols for Olympians , staff , volunteers and media within the “ closed loop ”  . 

Businesses near the Olympic bubble gave Al Jazeera a different view . 

Wang manages a hotel a few blocks east of the Bird ’ s Nest , and he said he feels “ very safe ” despite the influx of athletes from around the world amid the Omicron surge . 

He also restrictions had not affected traffic to the hotel . 

Restaurateurs , like Wu who manages an eatery a few blocks south of the Bird ’ s Nest , share that “ business as usual ” sentiment . 

Fiona Yao said little of a diplomatic boycott mattered to her as the Games inspired her and her young daughter to lace up and skate on Beijing ’ s outdoor ponds for the first time this winter . 

And while the Olympic bubble has left Yao feeling “ unfortunate that we can ’ t go see any events like in 2008 ”  , she does feel protected by those procedures , and says “ we are still very happy [ the Games ] could actually happen in our city ”  . 

Play Video
Video Duration 24 minutes 54 seconds
24 : 54
Athlete activism : Reviving a long defiant tradition | UpFront
Dastine Huang , a skiing fan , said the 2022 Games are an “ unprecedented opportunity to enlighten ” uninitiated Chinese viewers about the virtues of skiing slopes and skating rinks . 

He also says young Chinese viewers have been inspired by athletes like Chinese snowboarders Cai Xuetong and Su Yiming , and especially freestyle skier Eileen Gu winning gold for China . 


Watching such Olympic skiers and snowboarders has made recreational snowboarder Guo “ Anna ” Na even more motivated than usual to take to the slopes . 

For her , the infrastructure boost , from the high-speed rail that can whisk her and her snowboarding friends to slopes in hours , to the greater quality and number of resorts as the Games approached has been a plus . 

That enthusiasm for China ’ s would-be winter sports potential is shared by Canadian Justin Downes who , as president of IMG Ski Resort Management & Axis Leisure Management , has consulted for years to help develop China ’ s skiing industries . 

He said the country ’ s ski and snowboard population has not already quadrupled since Beijing won the 2022 Winter Games bid but is on track to double once more before 2025 , which would make China the world ’ s biggest ski population by nation .  
 
 
 “ Tourism numbers to winter sport destinations around the country have seen unprecedented growth – coupled with the Chinese population ’ s quest for a happier , healthier and more balanced way of life – the ski and snow venues around the country are significant beneficiaries of this .  ” 