Sporting world reacts to Russia ' s invasion of Ukraine
Sport is insignificant in the face of Russia ' s invasion of Ukraine . However , those connected with it have been making their voices heard . On Friday evening , Bayern Munich ' s Allianz Arena lit up in the Ukrainian colors .  


The Allianz Arena in Munich lit up in the colors of Ukraine
Blue and yellow : The Allianz Arena in Munich lit up in the colors of Ukraine

Allianz Arena lights up , Lewandowski urges solidarity with Ukraine
Formula 1 cancels Russia race
Tennis No . 1 Medvedev speaks out
IOC condemns Russia for violating Olympic truce
Allianz Arena lights up , Lewandowski urges solidarity with Ukraine
The Allianz Arena , home of Bundesliga champions Bayern Munich , was illuminated in the blue and yellow colors of the Ukrainian flag , on Friday evening . 

Bayern Munich striker and Poland captain Robert Lewandowski also released a statement on Friday , urging for solidarity with Ukraine . 

He also vowed to take a leading role in the negotiations around Poland ' s upcoming World Cup qualifier against Russia , due to be played in Moscow on March 24 .  



Formula 1 cancels Russia Grand Prix
Following UEFA ' s decision to strip Russia of the Champions League hosting rights , F1 has announced that the Russia Grand Prix in Sochi , due to take place on September 25th , has been scrapped following Russia ’ s invasion of Ukraine .  
 
 " The FIA Formula One World Championship visits countries all over the world with a positive vision to unite people , bringing nations together . We are watching the developments in Ukraine with sadness and shock and hope for a swift and peaceful resolution to the present situation ,  " F1 said in a statement .  
 
 " On Thursday evening Formula One , the FIA , and the teams discussed the position of our sport , and the conclusion is , including the view of all relevant stakeholders , that it is impossible to hold the Russian Grand Prix in the current circumstances .  " 

Tennis No1 Medvedev ' all for peace ' 
Russia tennis star Daniil Medvedev experienced a " roller coaster day " of mixed emotions emotions as he was named the World No . 1 men ' s player on the same day his country began an invasion of Ukraine .  " At this stage , you understand that tennis is sometimes not so important ,  " said Medvedev after winning his quarterfinal match in the Acapulco Open .  
 
 " I woke up ( Thursday ) with a lot of emotion swirling inside me . As a tennis player I want to promote peace all over the world . We play in so many different countries . I ' ve been in so many different countries as a junior and as a pro . It ' s just not easy to hear all this news . I ' m all for peace .  " 

IOC " strongly condemns " Russia for violating Olympic Truce 
 " The International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) strongly condemns the breach of the Olympic Truce by the Russian government ,  " the organization said in a statement released on Friday . 

The truce , a resolution adopted by the United Nations General Assembly , began seven days before the start of the Beijing Olympics and ends seven days after the closing of the Paralympic Games , which are slated to take place March 4-13 . 

It calls " upon all Member States to cooperate with the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee in their efforts to use sport as a tool to promote peace , dialogue and reconciliation in areas of conflict during and beyond the period of the Olympic and Paralympic Games .  " 

Leipzig draw Spartak Moscow in Europa League
UEFA have announced that " Russian and Ukrainian clubs and national teams competing in UEFA competitions will be required to play their home matches at neutral venues until further notice .  " 

This ruling will affect Bundesliga side RB Leipzig , who were drawn against Spartak Moscow in the Europa League round of 16 on Friday . Elsewhere , Bayer Leverkusen and Eintracht Frankfurt will face Atalanta and Real Betis respectively . 

Klitschko brothers ready to take up arms
Former heavyweight boxing champion Vitali Klitschko said he would take up arms alongside his brother and fellow Hall of Famer Wladimir Klitschko for Ukraine . 

Wladimir recently enlisted in Ukraine ' s reserve army citing his love for his country , while Vitali has been acting as mayor of the capital , Kyiv , since 2014 .  
 
 " I don ’ t have another choice , I have to do that . I ’ ll be fighting ,  " Vitali told British broadcasters .  " I believe in Ukraine , I believe in my country and I believe in my people .  " 

Russia stripped of Champions League final
UEFA ' s Executive Commitee has decided to move the 2022 Champions League final from Saint Petersburg to Saint Denis , France as the scale of Vladimir Putin ' s invasion increases . 

Jokerit withdraw from Gagarin Cup
Finnish ice hockey team HC Jokerit have informed the Russian Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) of their decision to withdraw from the league ' s playoffs for the Gagarin Cup .  
 
 " We ' re very sorry to lose Jokerit , an excellent and vibrant team ,  " said KHL President Alexei Morozov in a statement .  
 
 " Jokerit plays in our league since the 2014-2015 season and has constantly reached the playoff . It ' s very unfortunate that the Jokerit ' s departure is due not to sporting reasons , but to political ones .  " 

Sporting world reacts to Russia ' s invasion of Ukraine : February 24th

Edited by Chuck Penfold . 