Arnold Clark Cup : Players and coaches laud tournament but attendance worrying for Euros
England beat Germany in a dramatic finale to the Arnold Clark Cup on Wednesday . Though the pre-Euro 2022 tournament was a useful experience on the pitch , it showed that there is a lot of work to do off it .  


Ellen White celebrates after scoring for England against Germany
Ellen White opened the scoring for England on Wednesday

It ended how the hosts hoped it would , with a five-figure crowd watching England lift the trophy , after a pair of late goals from Millie Bright ( 84 '  ) and Fran Kirby ( 90 '  + 3 ) saw them past Germany . 

It wasn ' t the Euros , but , for Bright , Wednesday night ' s Arnold Clark Cup win had real significance .  
 
 " It ’ s massive . It keeps our momentum ,  " the Chelsea defender , pressed into emergency service up front late on , told broadcaster ITV after the 3-1 win saw them edge Spain on goal difference .  
 
 " Coming to this tournament was about developing , people getting minutes and getting exposure against top teams ,  " Bright said .  " I think we ’ ve done that while getting the win . We always want to win — that ’ s why we participate in the game . We ’ ve developed and taken our game to another level .  " 


Those two decisive late goals were as many had been scored in any of the previous five matches of this slow-burning tournament , which saw four of the top 10 sides in the women ' s game compete in the country , though not at any of the venues , where the Women ' s Euros are to be played in July .  
 
 " We played a team that ' s probably going to go and win the Euros in one of the three teams we ' ve played ,  " said Canada coach Bev Priestman . 

Hosts prove sole attraction
Though an absorbing final game , which also featured a stunning free kick from Germany ' s Lina Magull , caught the imagination of the 13 , 463 watching on at Molineux , home of men ' s Premier League outfit Wolverhampton Wanderers , it ' s fair to say that hasn ' t always been the case . 

Hours earlier , at the same ground , only a handful of spectators watched FIFA ' s best women ' s player in the world , Alexia Putellas , sweep home at the end of a flowing Spanish move and put her side in pole position , until England took control later in the evening . 


Though England ' s games drew decent crowds ( 8 , 769 and 14 , 284 for the first two )  , only 249 attended Germany ' s opener , a 1-1 draw against Spain in Middlesborough , and just 119 watched as Martina Voss-Tecklenburg ' s team lost 1-0 to Canada in Norwich . Though this is an invitational tournament played largely in inclement weather conditions , such low turnout will surely be a cause for concern ahead of the summer showpiece . 

For the teams , this was about the chance to test themselves against the sort of quality opponents they will need to overcome to lift the trophy at Wembley on July 31 . Sara Däbritz , who captained Germany in the two games she started , told DW that a young squad — a result of a number of COVID and injury withdrawals — learned a lot during the tournament .  
 
 " It ' s important to get some high-level opponents before we play the Euros , and playing world-class teams helps us progress ,  " she said .  
 
 " These games can help us see what are we doing well , what are we doing not so well ,  " Däbritz said .  " And after those games you have a lot of material to watch and to work on .  " 

Changing circumstances
There ' s little doubt that these tight contests against similar-caliber opponents , even in a somewhat contrived context such as this , offer something to coaches and players . Especially compared the kind of blowouts often seen in recent qualifiers .  
 
 " I think it ’ s been a very positive tournament overall — it ' s been useful for us in terms of preparing for the Euros , which has been our main target ,  " said Spanish head coach Jorge Vilda after his team ' s win on Wednesday . 

For as much as the tournament might have been helpful on the pitch and to the hosting team ' s morale , the English Football Association ( FA ) will surely have taken note of the paltry attendances for matches involving high-class visiting teams . 

Though its status as a major tournament , a lack of competing male football simultaneously and ticket prices starting at £5 ( €6 , $6 . 75 ) should ensure fuller stands than have been seen in recent days , not every side who will visit in the summer have a star like Kirby , Däbritz or Putellas to draw the neutral in . 

Organizers and people with an interest in the growth of the women ' s game will hope that fewer travel restrictions , warmer weather , and significantly more PR and press coverage will encourage more traveling fans come July and create atmospheres similar to that seen when Germany beat England in front of a full house at Wembley in 2019 . 

With the obvious exception of Canada , every player and coach who has traveled across England in the last week will be hoping their work in recent days will be rewarded with a trip back to the northwest London landmark . And a trophy . 

Edited by Chuck Penfold