FIFA Suspends Russia , Ejecting It From World Cup Qualifying
Tariq Panja
Feb . 28 , 2022 , 11 : 45 a . m . ETFeb . 28 , 2022
Feb . 28 , 2022
Tariq Panja

Russia ' s national teams and Russian clubs are barred from all competitions . 
Russia ' s national teams and Russian clubs are barred from all competitions . Credit .  .  . Antonio Bronic / Reuters
World soccer ’ s global governing body suspended Russia and its teams from all competitions on Monday , ejecting the country from qualifying for the 2022 World Cup only weeks before it was to play for one of Europe ’ s final places in this year ’ s tournament in Qatar . 

The suspension , which was announced Monday evening in coordination with European soccer ’ s governing body , also barred Russian club teams from international competitions . The decision came a day after FIFA was heavily criticized for not going far enough in punishing Russia for its invasion of Ukraine , and amid mounting demands from national federations for stronger action . 

The initial pressure for an outright ban of Russia came from soccer officials in Poland , Sweden and the Czech Republic , whose national team faced the prospect of games against Russia in a World Cup playoff in March . Other countries and officials , including the federations representing France , England and the United States , quickly said they would not play Russia under any circumstances . 


FIFA and its European counterpart , UEFA , said the ban on Russia would be in place “ until further notice .  ” 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story 
 
 “ Football is fully united here and in full solidarity with all the people affected in Ukraine ,  ” FIFA said in a statement . Ukraine ’ s team , which is set to play Scotland in its own World Cup playoff in March , will remain in the competition . 

UEFA then went a step further in breaking its deep ties to Russia : It announced that it had ended a sponsorship agreement with the Russian energy giant Gazprom . The deal was worth a reported $50 million a year to European soccer . 

UEFA had last week stripped St . Petersburg , the home of Gazprom , of this year ’ s Champions League final . The game will be played in France instead . 


Image
Ukraine will take part in the playoffs for the final European World Cup places next month . Russia , now , will not . 
Ukraine will take part in the playoffs for the final European World Cup places next month . Russia , now , will not . Credit .  .  . Fehim Demir / EPA , via Shutterstock
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

FIFA and UEFA decided to bar Russia only hours after the International Olympic Committee called for international sports federations to prohibit Russian athletes and teams from all global sporting events where possible . The Olympic officials said Russia had breached a commitment — known as the Olympic Truce , and signed before the start of the Beijing Winter Games and scheduled to run through the Paralympics that open this week — when it invaded Ukraine . 

The immediate consequence of soccer ’ s ban on Russia is that it will lose its place in a four-team group for one of Europe ’ s final places for the World Cup . Poland , which was scheduled to play Russia in March in Moscow , had said flatly that it would refuse to take the field for the game , a stance it repeated after FIFA announced its initial slate of penalties on Sunday night . 

Cezary Kulesza , the president of Poland ’ s soccer federation , called FIFA ’ s initial decision not to eject Russia “ totally unacceptable .  ” In a post on Twitter , he added :  “ We are not interested in participating in this game of appearances . Our stance remains intact : Polish National Team will NOT PLAY with Russia , no matter what the name of the team is .  ” 

Sweden and the Czech Republic , the teams that could have met Russia — also in Moscow — if the Russians beat Poland , said that they , too , would refuse to play , even at a neutral site . 

Understand Russia ’ s Attack on Ukraine
Card 1 of 7
What is at the root of this invasion ? Russia considers Ukraine within its natural sphere of influence , and it has grown unnerved at Ukraine ’ s closeness with the West and the prospect that the country might join NATO or the European Union . While Ukraine is part of neither , it receives financial and military aid from the United States and Europe . 

Are these tensions just starting now ? Antagonism between the two nations has been simmering since 2014 , when the Russian military crossed into Ukrainian territory , after an uprising in Ukraine replaced their Russia-friendly president with a pro-Western government . Then , Russia annexed Crimea and inspired a separatist movement in the east . A cease-fire was negotiated in 2015 , but fighting has continued . 

How did this invasion unfold ? After amassing a military presence near the Ukrainian border for months , on Feb . 21 , President Vladimir V . Putin of Russia signed decrees recognizing two pro-Russian breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine . On Feb . 23 , he declared the start of a “ special military operation ” in Ukraine . Several attacks on cities around the country have since unfolded . 

What has Mr . Putin said about the attacks ? Mr . Putin said he was acting after receiving a plea for assistance from the leaders of the Russian-backed separatist territories of Donetsk and Luhansk , citing the false accusation that Ukrainian forces had been carrying out ethnic cleansing there and arguing that the very idea of Ukrainian statehood was a fiction . 

How has Ukraine responded ? On Feb . 23 , Ukraine declared a 30-day state of emergency as cyberattacks knocked out government institutions . Following the beginning of the attacks , Volodymyr Zelensky , Ukraine ’ s president , declared martial law . The foreign minister called the attacks “ a full-scale invasion ” and called on the world to “ stop Putin .  ” 

How has the rest of the world reacted ? The United States , the European Union and others have condemned Russia ’ s aggression and begun issuing economic sanctions against Russia . Germany announced on Feb . 23 that it would halt certification of a gas pipeline linking it with Russia . China refused to call the attack an “ invasion ,  ” but did call for dialogue . 

How could this affect the economy ? Russia controls vast global resources — natural gas , oil , wheat , palladium and nickel in particular — so the conflict could have far-reaching consequences , prompting spikes in energy and food prices and spooking investors . Global banks are also bracing for the effects of sanctions . 

The indefinite ban on Russia also extends to its club teams , meaning that Spartak Moscow , its last remaining participant in a continental competition , will no longer be able to compete in its Europa League knockout game against Germany ’ s RB Leipzig . That match was in doubt before Monday ’ s decision , with officials unsure how the Russian team could travel after the European Union issued a blanket ban on Russian flights into the 27-member bloc . 

It remains unclear if the decision to exclude Russia will face a challenge in the courts . Russia , as well as some of its athletes , has in recent years successfully fought exclusion from other events , including the Olympic Games , by getting punishments watered down through appeals to the Court of Arbitration for Sport . 

The Russian Football Union , known as the R . F . U .  , called the ban discriminatory , and said it was considering its legal options .  “ Such actions split the international sports community , which has always adhered to the principles of equality , mutual respect and independence from politics ,  ” the F . R . U . said .  “ We reserve the right to challenge the decision of FIFA and UEFA in accordance with international sports law .  ” 

Editors ’ Picks

San Francisco ’ s D . A . Says Angry Elites Want Him Out of Office

Have We Reached Peak Plant Milk ? Not Even Close . 

 ‘ In Love ,  ’ a Novelist ’ s Powerful Memoir About a Happy Marriage and an Assisted Suicide
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Soccer ’ s largest players ’ union , FIFPro , had earlier demanded Russia be thrown out , saying it backed all the nations that had called for the country ’ s expulsion from global soccer .  “ Today must mark a turning point for how sport engages with society , how it stands for democracy and human rights ,  ” said the union , which represents 65 , 000 players worldwide .  “ A new approach , consistently applied , that rests on sport ’ s proclaimed values is urgently needed .  ” 