Indian teenager Praggnanandhaa beats world chess champion Carlsen
Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa , who in 2016 became the youngest international master in history at 10 , beats Carlsen in online championship . 

Indian chess prodigy Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa
Indian chess prodigy Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa poses for a photograph on his arrival at an airport in Chennai after becoming the world ' s second youngest chess grandmaster ever [ File : Arun Sankar / AFP ] 
Published On 22 Feb 2022
22 Feb 2022
India ’ s teenage chess grandmaster Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa has won praise for a stunning victory over world number one Magnus Carlsen in an online championship . 

Praggnanandhaa , 16 , who in 2016 became the youngest international master in history at age 10 , beat Carlsen late on Monday at the Airthings Masters rapid chess tournament . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Carlsen beats Caruana to retain World Chess crown
list 2 of 4
Q & A : Iranian chess player Sara Khadem
list 3 of 4
Garry Kasparov talks chess , politics and Putin
list 4 of 4
Chennai : India ’ s chess capital
end of list 
 “ It ’ s about time to go to bed as I don ’ t think I will have dinner at 2 . 30 in the morning ,  ” a visibly calm Praggnanandhaa said after the 39-move victory playing black . 

Others have beaten Carlsen – including Indians Viswanathan Anand and Pentala Harikrishna – but Praggnanandhaa is the youngest since the Norwegian became world champion in 2013 . 

Anand , a five-time world champion and acclaimed as the greatest chess player India has produced , tweeted :  “ Always proud of our talents ! Very good day for @ rpragchess .  ” 

Indian cricket superstar Sachin Tendulkar also joined in the praise for Chennai-born Praggnanandhaa , widely regarded as a future world title challenger .  
 
 “ What a wonderful feeling it must be for Pragg . All of 16 , and to have beaten the experienced & decorated Magnus Carlsen , and that too while playing black , is magical !  ,  ” Tendulkar wrote on Twitter .  
 
 “ Best wishes on a long & successful chess career ahead . You ’ ve made India proud !  ” 


Carlsen , 31 , appeared to blunder in the Meltwater Champions Chess Tour event for a total prize pool of more than $1 . 5m . 

On Monday , Carlsen had said he was still feeling the after-effects of a recent coronavirus infection .  
 
 “ It was better today , but the first couple of days , I was feeling like I am okay but I don ’ t have any energy and it was kind of hard to focus ,  ” Carlsen said . 

Carlsen won his fifth straight world chess title in December , overcoming Ian Nepomniachtchi in a contest that saw the Russian lose his nerve after losing an epic eight-hour game , the longest ever played at a world championship . 

The teenager ’ s victory follows an underwhelming performance in the tournament so far where his previous victory came in the eighth round over grandmaster Levon Aronian .  
 
 “ His results in the past six months has swung between extremes ,  ” Praggnanandhaa ’ s coach RB Ramesh was quoted as saying on ESPN .  
 
 “ The fluctuation can be worrying and needs to be stabilised . This win against Magnus is important . Beating one of the strongest players in chess history is a huge moment for him .  ” 