Cricket : Australia arrive in Pakistan for first tour in 24 years
Australian team begins first tour of the South Asian country in nearly quarter of a century amid tight security for their six-week stay . 

Vehicles carrying Australian cricket team pass by in Islamabad , 
Vehicles carrying Australian cricket team pass by in Pakistani capital , Islamabad [ Waseem Khan / Reuters ] 
Published On 27 Feb 2022
27 Feb 2022
Australia ’ s cricket team has flown into Pakistan on their first tour of the country in nearly a quarter of a century – and into a security bubble that will envelop them throughout their six-week stay . 

Pakistan have struggled to attract visiting sides since a fatal terror attack on the visiting Sri Lanka team ’ s bus in 2009 . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Shaheen Shah Afridi : From Landi Kotal to top of cricketing world
list 2 of 4
Tariq Saeed , the man reviving Urdu cricket commentary in Pakistan
list 3 of 4
Cricket : New Zealand to tour Pakistan twice next season
list 4 of 4
Cricket : Pakistan fears becoming a no-go area again after NZ snub
end of list
Australia pulled out of a tour five years earlier after a suicide blast at a Lahore church . 

They last played in Pakistan in 1998 , winning a three-Test series 1-0 and blanking the hosts in the three one-day internationals .  
 
 “ They have landed ,  ” a Pakistani security official said while Australia batsman Steve Smith posted a picture on Twitter saying the team had arrived . 



Australia will play three Tests , three one-day internationals , and one Twenty20 match before leaving on April 6 . 

Having been forced to play their home games abroad – mainly in the United Arab Emirates – Pakistan appeared to have reassured international cricket authorities last year , with both New Zealand and England scheduled to tour . 

But the Black Caps hastily departed in September just minutes before their first match was due to start , citing security fears . England postponed tours by their men ’ s and women ’ s teams soon after . 

The decisions incensed Pakistan cricket authorities , who felt they had done everything possible to ensure safety and security . 

They say they are again leaving nothing to chance , with nearly 4 , 000 police and military personnel guarding the team hotel in Islamabad and the cricket stadium in the nearby garrison city of Rawalpindi . 

 ‘ Head of state-level ’ protection 
 “ The squad will be given ‘ head of state-level security ’  ,  ” a spokesman for Pakistan ’ s interior ministry told the AFP news agency .  
 
 “ Such arrangements are only made for high-level foreign delegations ,  [ and ] the president and prime minister of Pakistan .  ” 

Roads will be blocked off when the Australians make the 15km ( 9-mile ) commute , with their team bus shadowed by army helicopters . 

Snipers will be positioned on buildings surrounding the stadium , while nearby shops and offices have been ordered to close on match days , the interior ministry said . 

Similar arrangements will be in place for matches in Karachi and Lahore . 

The Australians will be confined to quarters for 24 hours after arrival for COVID-19 tests , before intense training ahead of the first Test starting March 4 .  
 
 “ We ’ ve got to a place where everyone hopping on the plane is comfortable with where it ’ s all sitting ,  ” Australian skipper Pat Cummins said ahead of the team ’ s departure from Sydney .  
 
 “ It ’ s been a really thorough body of work that the security and the logistics teams have worked through .  ” 

Almost half of Pakistan ’ s 220 million people were not even born the last time Australia toured , but stadiums are expected to be packed as the country emerges relatively unscathed from the Omicron stage of the COVID-19 pandemic . 

Pakistan are due to host eight Tests , 11 ODIs and 13 Twenty20 internationals in the next 13 months . 