Russia Faces Global Sports Crackdown After Invasion of Ukraine

Feb . 28 , 2022 , 10 : 12 a . m . ETFeb . 28 , 2022
Feb . 28 , 2022
Alan Blinder and Tariq Panja

Russian athletes at the Winter Olympics in Beijing this month competed under a neutral flag because of a longtime doping scandal . 
Russian athletes at the Winter Olympics in Beijing this month competed under a neutral flag because of a longtime doping scandal . Credit .  .  . James Hill for The New York Times
An article of faith in global sports — that athletes should not be punished for the actions of their governments — crumbled on Monday , when executives worldwide moved to banish Russians from competitions and deepen the country ’ s isolation for its invasion of Ukraine . 

The International Olympic Committee recommended that athletes from Russia and Belarus , which has allowed Russian troops to use its territory , be barred from events . FIFA , soccer ’ s international governing body , effectively blocked Russia from qualifying for this year ’ s men ’ s World Cup . And the International Ice Hockey Federation said Russian and Belarusian teams would be forbidden at its competitions , including this year ’ s world championships , and the National Hockey League suspended its business dealings in Russia . 

Although there were scattered loopholes and uncertainties , the penalties amounted to a bracing rebuke of Moscow and Minsk by a sports world that has long labored furiously , if sometimes unconvincingly , to depict competition as separate from politics . 

The International Paralympic Committee is expected to decide on Wednesday whether to allow Russian and Belarusian athletes to compete in the Paralympic Games , which are scheduled to open in Beijing on Friday . 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

But the day ’ s events left little doubt that Russia and Belarus , which had already drawn scrutiny for doping violations and oppression , would become further separated from the wider athletic world .  
 
 “ This will continue to be a contest of two different visions of what sport is and who is allowed to participate in and control sport ,  ” said Andrés Martinez , a research scholar at Arizona State University ’ s Global Sport Institute .  “ I think this is a bit of a reset , though , in that it does set an important precedent and a standard that sporting federations cannot continue to act with impunity and just let the highest bidder dictate what happens in sport , oblivious to other considerations , including the behavior of those highest bidders .  ” 


The most potentially far-reaching consequence on Monday came from the I . O . C .  , which cited “ the integrity of global sports competitions ” and “ the safety of all the participants ” when it recommended that Russian and Belarusian athletes be blocked from competitions .  
 
 “ While athletes from Russia and Belarus would be able to continue to participate in sports events , many athletes from Ukraine are prevented from doing so because of the attack on their country ,  ” the I . O . C . said in a statement , which noted that it issued its recommendation “ with a heavy heart .  ” 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

It will fall to event organizers and the federations that administer individual sports to decide how , or if , to adopt the I . O . C .  ’ s recommendation , which the committee suggested might not be enforced “ on short notice for organizational or legal reasons .  ” 

That qualifier appeared to be a nod to the imminence of the Paralympic Games , which have been expected to draw more than 70 athletes from Russia and about a dozen from Belarus . 

The International Paralympic Committee did not immediately respond to a request for comment , nor did Belarusian officials or the Russian Paralympic Committee . But Stanislav Pozdnyakov , the president of the Russian Olympic Committee , said in a statement that he and other Russian officials “ strongly ” objected to the I . O . C . recommendation , which he said contradicted “ the spirit of the Olympic movement , which should unite and not divide .  ” 


FIFA Suspends Russia , Ejecting It From World Cup Qualifying
The decision to bar Russian clubs and national teams came a day after FIFA was criticized for not going far enough to punish Russia for invading Ukraine . 
Feb . 28 , 2022
The I . O . C .  ’ s recommendation came hours before FIFA announced that it had suspended Russia and its teams from all competitions and ejected the country from qualifying for the 2022 World Cup only weeks before it was to play for one of Europe ’ s final places in this year ’ s tournament . 

Sign up for the Sports Newsletter Get our most ambitious projects , stories and analysis delivered to your inbox every week . Get it sent to your inbox . 
FIFA , which had come under pressure for its initial hesitance to bar Russia from competition , and its European counterpart , UEFA , said the ban on Russia would be in place “ until further notice .  ”  
 
 “ Football is fully united here and in full solidarity with all the people affected in Ukraine ,  ” FIFA said in a statement . Ukraine ’ s team , which is set to play Scotland in its own World Cup playoff in March , will remain in the competition . 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

UEFA , which has decided to move this year ’ s Champions League final to St . -Denis , France , from St . Petersburg , Russia , then went a step further in breaking its deep ties to Russia : It announced that it had ended a sponsorship agreement with the Russian energy giant Gazprom . The deal was worth a reported $50 million a year to European soccer . 

It was unclear whether FIFA ’ s decision to bar Russia would face a court challenge . Russia and some its athletes have successfully fought exclusion from other events , including the Olympic Games , by getting punishments watered down through appeals to the Court of Arbitration for Sport . 

Any efforts to keep Russian athletes out of other competitions could also spark legal battles . Pozdnyakov , the Russian Olympic Committee chairman , said Russian officials intended to “ consistently defend the rights and interests of Russian athletes and provide all necessary assistance to our national sports federations to challenge discriminatory decisions .  ” 

Some penalties could be harder to fight than others . 

Hockey executives in the Czech Republic , Finland and Sweden said Monday that Russia would not be allowed to participate in this year ’ s Euro Hockey Tour , and executives signaled that they were looking to replace Russia permanently . 

That decision turned out to be just one blow to Russia , which won the silver medal in men ’ s hockey in Beijing . By day ’ s end , the hockey federation announced an indefinite ban on Russian and Belarusian squads and said it would not stage its junior world championship in Russia starting later this year . 

Understand Russia ’ s Attack on Ukraine
Card 1 of 7
What is at the root of this invasion ? Russia considers Ukraine within its natural sphere of influence , and it has grown unnerved at Ukraine ’ s closeness with the West and the prospect that the country might join NATO or the European Union . While Ukraine is part of neither , it receives financial and military aid from the United States and Europe . 

Are these tensions just starting now ? Antagonism between the two nations has been simmering since 2014 , when the Russian military crossed into Ukrainian territory , after an uprising in Ukraine replaced their Russia-friendly president with a pro-Western government . Then , Russia annexed Crimea and inspired a separatist movement in the east . A cease-fire was negotiated in 2015 , but fighting has continued . 

How did this invasion unfold ? After amassing a military presence near the Ukrainian border for months , on Feb . 21 , President Vladimir V . Putin of Russia signed decrees recognizing two pro-Russian breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine . On Feb . 23 , he declared the start of a “ special military operation ” in Ukraine . Several attacks on cities around the country have since unfolded . 

What has Mr . Putin said about the attacks ? Mr . Putin said he was acting after receiving a plea for assistance from the leaders of the Russian-backed separatist territories of Donetsk and Luhansk , citing the false accusation that Ukrainian forces had been carrying out ethnic cleansing there and arguing that the very idea of Ukrainian statehood was a fiction . 

How has Ukraine responded ? On Feb . 23 , Ukraine declared a 30-day state of emergency as cyberattacks knocked out government institutions . Following the beginning of the attacks , Volodymyr Zelensky , Ukraine ’ s president , declared martial law . The foreign minister called the attacks “ a full-scale invasion ” and called on the world to “ stop Putin .  ” 

How has the rest of the world reacted ? The United States , the European Union and others have condemned Russia ’ s aggression and begun issuing economic sanctions against Russia . Germany announced on Feb . 23 that it would halt certification of a gas pipeline linking it with Russia . China refused to call the attack an “ invasion ,  ” but did call for dialogue . 

How could this affect the economy ? Russia controls vast global resources — natural gas , oil , wheat , palladium and nickel in particular — so the conflict could have far-reaching consequences , prompting spikes in energy and food prices and spooking investors . Global banks are also bracing for the effects of sanctions . 

Soon after , the N . H . L . said it had paused its ties with business partners in Russia and halted its online presence in the Russian language . It also said it would not consider Russia as a prospective host “ for any future competitions involving the N . H . L .  ” 

Federations around the world were also grappling with how to apply the I . O . C .  ’ s recommendation in individual sports and competitions in which athletes compete more for themselves than for their nations . 

Editors ’ Picks

 ‘ In Love ,  ’ a Novelist ’ s Powerful Memoir About a Happy Marriage and an Assisted Suicide

San Francisco ’ s D . A . Says Angry Elites Want Him Out of Office

Have We Reached Peak Plant Milk ? Not Even Close . 
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

In cross-country skiing , Natalia Nepryaeva of Russia holds the top spot in the World Cup standings but could lose that ranking if she cannot participate in several coming races . 

Tennis has the complexity of seven ruling organizations . On the same day the I . O . C . recommended the ban , Daniil Medvedev , a Russian , took over the top sport in the men ’ s world rankings . 

The ATP Tour heralded the achievement on its website with a picture of Medvedev next to the Russian flag . However , Medvedev moved to Monaco years ago and has campaigned for peace on his social media channels . 

The ATP Tour made no immediate announcement about whether it would follow the I . O . C . recommendation , nor did the WTA , which manages the women ’ s professional tour and has three players from Russia and Belarus in the top 20 , including Victoria Azarenka , who is on the organization ’ s board . 

On Monday , Elina Svitolina , a top player from Ukraine and the top seed this week in a tournament in Mexico , announced on Twitter that she will not play her first-round match against Anastasia Potapova of Russia unless the governing bodies of tennis follow the I . O . C .  ’ s guidance . 

Although Monday ’ s maneuvers against Russia were particularly forceful , the country has clashed with sports executives in recent years over its reliance on a state-run doping operation . Still , Russian athletes and teams had faced the most marginal of consequences . At the Beijing Olympics , which ended Feb . 20 , Russian athletes appeared as members of the “ Russian Olympic Committee ,  ” and did not formally compete under the Russian tricolor flag or hear the Russian national anthem at medal ceremonies . 

And Olympic officials previously barred the Belarusian president , Alexander Lukashenko , from I . O . C . events , including the Beijing Games . Olympic officials complained then that Belarusian athletes were “ not appropriately protected ” from what they described as “ political discrimination .  ” 

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Monday ’ s wave of condemnation , though , was far broader and came after days of swelling anger among sports executives and demands from political leaders and athletes alike . Last week , Olympic executives pressed federations to cancel or move competitions from Belarus and Russia . 

Vladimir V . Putin , the president of Russia , who has long heralded the role of sports in his own life and the role of athletics in his country ’ s ambitions , has also increasingly come under personal pressure . The International Judo Federation recently suspended him from his role as its honorary president , and World Taekwondo rescinded the honorary black belt it gave him in 2013 . 

On Monday , the I . O . C . withdrew its highest honor from Putin , who received it in 2001 . He attended the opening ceremony of the Beijing Games on Feb . 4 , when his forces were massing at the Ukrainian border ahead of their invasion . 

Matthew Futterman contributed reporting . 

Correction : Feb . 28 , 2022
An earlier version of this article misidentified the year in which the Belarusian president , Alexander Lukashenko , was barred from I . O . C . events . Olympic officials barred Lukashenko in December 2020 , not December 2021 . 