Ranji Trophy 2022 : Vidarbha ’ s Ganesh Satish revels in double ton
Satish shared his feelings about playing his 100th first-class match and scoring a double century .  " It feels great and honestly it does not feel any different from any other game . 



Written by Ashish Satyam | 
Updated : February 28 , 2022 1 : 51 : 35 pm
Ganesh Satish , ranji trophy , Ganesh Satish ranji trophy , ranji trophy Ganesh Satish , sports news , indian expressSatish started playing cricket at the age of five . His parents have been supportive of him all through his journey .  ( File ) 
Ganesh Satish has hit a double century in the ongoing Ranji Trophy match against Maharashtra . Satish ’ s magnificent 275 has put Vidarbha in the driver ’ s seat . 

If you haven ’ t already , click here to subscribe and get Sandeep Dwivedi ’ s newsletter straight in your inbox

This double century is all the more special for Satish as it coincides with his 100th first-class match . On this special occasion , Satish made it even more memorable , registering his best individual score to date . His previous best , 237 , was against Andhra in the 2019-20 season .  



 
 
 “ Ranji Trophy is the biggest opportunity for domestic cricketers to showcase their talent . It is the livelihood of more than 600 players . All the greats of Indian cricket come up from the Ranji trophy and it is also a matter of pride to say I ’ m a Ranji Cricketer .  ” Satish said . 

Talking to The Indian Express , Satish shared his feelings about playing his 100th first-class match and scoring a double century .  “ It feels great and honestly it does not feel any different from any other game . I just take it game by game . The first game or 100th game was not going to change the way I approached it . It ’ s just great and obviously , I feel proud to have played so many games . I am really happy that I contributed with the bat for my team .  ” 



 ‘ Nagpur is my second home ’ 

Satish played a vast chunk of his cricket for Karnataka before migrating to Vidarbha .  “ I won the Ranji Trophy with Karnataka and I scored a century in the final . After a while , I had a difference of opinion with the selectors there and the team think-tank . I decided to shift base and join a team where I would get stability and game-time ,  ” Satish said . 

Expressing his feelings about the Vidarbha team , he said :  “ I think , all of us get along very well . It is a small region in Maharashtra but everyone gets along really well . We play as a team and I think that ’ s the best part . Ever since I moved from Karnataka to Vidarbha , I have never felt like I am an outsider . I always felt like Nagpur is my second home . This is my eighth year with Vidarbha and we won the Ranji trophy twice . It has been a fantastic journey .  ” 

Early days

Born to doctor parents , Satish started playing cricket at the age of five . His parents have been supportive of him all through his journey . His father ’ s love for cricket made him encourage his son to play cricket . Satish said :  “ I started playing leather ball cricket when I was five . My dad took me to the Brijesh Patel cricket academy . He saw some talent in me . That ’ s how I started my journey . My dad is a huge cricket lover and my parents are doctors . They encouraged me to play cricket . Until the 12th standard , until I played for India U-19 , studies always came first at home , but then slowly they saw that I had the potential to play highest-level cricket . They always encouraged me to follow my passion . That ’ s when cricket took precedence . I represented Karnataka at U-12 and U-14 age groups . Then I played all the age-group tournaments for Karnataka . At the age of 20 , I made my debut for the Karnataka senior squad .  ” 

Playing for India is the biggest motivation

The 33-year-old wicketkeeper-batsman acknowledges that age is a factor when it comes to professional cricketers but he does not want it to become an impediment . He said :  “ I know obviously , it gets tough once you cross 30 , but my dream is to play Test cricket . This is what motivates me to perform better every time I go out there in the middle . I won ’ t give up on my dream until I stop playing . I will continue to strive for it .  ” 

There are times when a player is unable to perform to the best of his ability . According to Satish , the key is to be consistent . He confessed :  “ I have been through tough times but you have to believe in yourself . The support system is very important and I am lucky to have my parents , my brother and my wife to support me during my tough times . When I made the decision to leave Karnataka , they stood by me . My coach Rajesh Kamath has been with me since my childhood . He helped me shape my batting throughout .  ” 



Talking about winning the Ranji Trophy twice while playing for Vidarbha , he said :  “ I think the first time , nobody expected us to win the trophy . But we always believed that we have the talent and we can win . Everyone put their hands up in the crucial moments . We had that experience since Wasim Jaffer was there with the side . We have a team of fighters . Since you are the champions , people will be more aware and wanted to prove that it is not a one-time affair . So the second year also , we played brilliantly and won the title .  ” 