Kupp , Donald star as Rams down Bengals to win Super Bowl
The Rams came back from 20-13 down early in the third quarter to claim a second Super Bowl title . 

LA Rams players celebrate with the trophy after winning Super Bowl LVI against the Cincinnati Bengals [ Frederic J . Brown / AFP ] 
LA Rams players celebrate with the trophy after winning Super Bowl LVI against the Cincinnati Bengals [ Frederic J . Brown / AFP ] 
Published On 14 Feb 2022
14 Feb 2022
Cooper Kupp scored two touchdowns and Aaron Donald spearheaded a fearsome defensive display as the Los Angeles Rams defeated the Cincinnati Bengals 23-20 to win the Super Bowl . 

Kupp scored a decisive touchdown with less than 90 seconds remaining to give the Rams the lead at SoFi Stadium before Donald grabbed the Rams ’ record-breaking eighth sack of Bengals quarterback Joe Burrow to effectively seal the victory . 

KEEP READING
list of 3 items
list 1 of 3
Back to the future : Super Bowl ads bet on nostalgia , escapism
list 2 of 3
Race lawsuit brings NFL reckoning before Super Bowl kickoff
list 3 of 3
22 seasons , 7 Super Bowl wins : NFL quarterback Tom Brady retires
end of list
Donald ’ s sack of Burrow was the dramatic final act of a gripping contest between the star-studded Rams and the Bengals , whose bid to win a maiden Vince Lombardi Trophy fell agonisingly short .  
 
 “ I ’ m just so happy ,  ” said Donald .  “ I wanted this so bad . I dreamed this . 
 
 
 “ One play and we ’ re world champs ,  ” Donald added of his crucial late sack .  “ Any way to get to him . We made it .  ” 

Rams quarterback Matthew Stafford , meanwhile , paid tribute to his team ’ s never-say-die approach .  
 
 “ I ’ m so proud of this team ,  ” Stafford said .  “ There are so many guys on our team that deserve this , so many guys who gave their heart and soul to this team .  
 
 “ That game today is the story of our season . It ’ s up and down it ’ s tough . We ’ re a tough team . We showed up late and got it done .  ” 

The Bengals had stormed into a 20-13 lead early in the second half after a controversial Tee Higgins touchdown and an Evan McPherson field goal . 

But the Rams , who had struggled to build momentum on offence after a game-ending injury to Odell Beckham Jr , clawed their way back thanks to their rampant defence led by Donald . 

Burrow was sacked repeatedly at key moments to prevent the Bengals from extending their lead . 

Matthew Stafford of the Los Angeles Rams celebrates after winning the Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium on February 13 , 2022 in Inglewood , California [ Katelyn Mulcahy / Getty Images via AFP ] Matthew Stafford of the Los Angeles Rams celebrates after winning the Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium on February 13 , in Inglewood , California [ Katelyn Mulcahy / Getty Images via AFP ] 
Matt Gay ’ s field goal pulled the Rams back to 20-16 heading into the fourth quarter . 

Stafford then led a 15-play , 79-yard drive that benefitted from three crucial Bengals penalties near the goal line before Kupp plucked a one-yard pass in the end zone for the go-ahead touchdown . 

The defeat was brutal on Bengals quarterback Burrow , the 25-year-old rising star who has helped transform Cincinnati ’ s fortunes this season . 

Burrow finished with 263 passing yards and one touchdown but was buffeted all night and sacked eight times , a record for a Super Bowl . 

Stafford , meanwhile , finished with 283 yards and two touchdowns with two interceptions . 


It was the Rams second franchise Super Bowl victory and their first since returning to Los Angeles from St . Louis in 2016 . Their previous win came in 2000 . 

It was the third Super Bowl defeat in as many appearances for the Bengals , who lost the decider in 1982 and 1989 . 

Fans react during Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium [ Katelyn Mulcahy / Getty Images via AFP ] Fans react during Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium [ Katelyn Mulcahy / Getty Images via AFP ] 