Jason Roy pulls out of IPL 2022 citing bubble fatigue
The development is a big blow to the Gujarat franchise as Roy was the only specialist opener picked by them apart from young Shubman Gill . 



By : PTI | New Delhi | 
March 1 , 2022 4 : 51 : 53 pm
Jason RoyJason Roy .  ( Twitter / Pakistan Super League ) 
England ’ s flamboyant batter Jason Roy on Tuesday pulled out of the upcoming IPL citing extended stay in the tournament bubble , dealing a blow to his new franchise Gujarat Titans weeks before the event gets going . 

The 31-year-old South African-born English cricketer was signed by Gujarat Titans for his base price of Rs 2 crore at the mega auction .  
 
 “ It ’ s with a heavy heart I have decided to pull out of this year ’ s tournament . I want to thank the management and the captain Hardik for putting your faith in me and picking me in the auction ,  ” Roy wrote on his Twitter handle on Tuesday .  
 
 
 “ However , with everything going on in the world over the last 3 years it ’ s added up and taken it ’ s toll on me . I feel it ’ s only right I spend some quality time with my family .  
 
 “ As well as spending time working on myself and my game over the next couple of months leading into a very busy year . I will be following each game of the Titans and backing them to lift the trophy in their first year of the tournament .  ” 

IPL 2022 . pic . twitter . com / fZ0LofBgSE

— Jason Roy (  @ JasonRoy20 ) March 1 , 2022

The development is a big blow to the Gujarat franchise as Roy was the only specialist opener picked by them apart from young Shubman Gill . 

This is the second time the English player is pulling out of the IPL . He had earlier withdrawn from the 2020 edition due to personal reasons after being picked up by the Delhi Capitals for Rs 1 . 5 crore . 

The 15th edition of the IPL is scheduled to begin on March 26 and will conclude in the last week of May . 

Last season , Roy had represented Sunrisers Hyderabad and played a few decent knocks before carrying his form to the Pakistan Super League this year , where he turned out for the Quetta Gladiators . 

The PSL too was played in a bio-secure bubble . 

He played only six matches for the franchise and still ended up as their highest run-scorer with 303 runs at an average of 50 . 50 and a strike-rate of 170 . 22 . 

Notably , Roy was blessed with his second child in January . 

The IPL 2022 will be a 10-team event and will take place in Mumbai and Pune . 