 ‘ Major step ’  : US women ’ s football reaches agreement on equal pay
The 2019 lawsuit cited a discrepancy in World Cup prize money payments to the men ’ s and women ’ s teams in 2014 and 2015 . 

Megan Rapinoe kisses a trophy
The lawsuit accused the federation of ' stubbornly refusing ' to pay its male and female players equally [ File : Johannes Eisele / AFP ] 
Published On 22 Feb 2022
22 Feb 2022
The United States national women ’ s team has won a $24m payout and a pledge from US Soccer to equalise pay for the men ’ s and women ’ s national teams in all competitions , in a landmark settlement that ends a six-year legal battle over equal pay .  
 
 “ U . S . Soccer has committed to providing an equal rate of pay going forward for the Women ’ s and Men ’ s National Teams in all friendlies and tournaments , including the World Cup ,  ” according to a joint statement on Tuesday . 

KEEP READING
list of 3 items
list 1 of 3
Football-loving Cameroon counts down to first AFCON in 50 years
list 2 of 3
Football : The 11 players to watch at AFCON 2021
list 3 of 3
Foreign investors eye takeover of two Brazilian football clubs
end of list
The question of World Cup prize money had formed a prominent part of the lawsuit filed by the US women ’ s soccer team three years ago , which accused the federation of “ stubbornly refusing ” to pay its male and female players equally .  
 
 “ I think we ’ re going look back on this day and say this is the moment that , you know , US Soccer changed for the better ,  ” women ’ s star Megan Rapinoe said in an interview with ABC after the deal was announced .  
 
 “ Obviously , we can ’ t go back and undo the injustices that we faced but … we know that something like this is never gonna happen again ,  ” she continued , adding she hopes that they can now “ move forward ” with “ setting up the next generation so much better than we ever had it . So it ’ s a great day .  ” 



The settlement was a major victory for the players . Five American stars led by Rapinoe and Alex Morgan began the challenge with a complaint to the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission back in April 2016 . Women sued three years later , seeking damages under the federal Equal Pay Act and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act . 

The 2019 lawsuit cited the discrepancy in World Cup prize money payments paid to the two teams in 2014 and 2015 . The US men received $5 . 375m for reaching the round of 16 at the 2014 World Cup , while the women received $1 . 725m for winning the 2015 tournament . 

The US women ’ s team has won four World Cups since the programme ’ s start in 1985 , while the men ’ s has not reached a semifinal since 1930 . 

The US Soccer Federation had argued that its hands were tied because the prize money is set by FIFA , which awarded $38m to France for winning the 2018 men ’ s World Cup in Russia , but only $4m to the American women for winning the 2019 Women ’ s World Cup . 

U . S . women soccer players pose for a picture with the Trophy for the FIFA Women ' s World CupUS women ’ s teams have won four World Cups since 1985 , while the men have not reached a semifinal since 1930 [ File : Eduardo Munoz / Reuters ] 
In May 2020 , a US district court judge in California threw out the players ’ claims for equal pay but allowed their claims about playing conditions to go forward . 

The players reached a settlement on the conditions part of the lawsuit and had appealed against the wage decision portion . 

Tuesday ’ s agreement stipulates that $22m will be distributed to the players , while $2m will go into an account to benefit them “ in their post-career goals and charitable efforts related to women ’ s and girl ’ s soccer ”  . 

The settlement is contingent on a new collective bargaining agreement , which needs to be ratified before the deal can be finally approved by a court . 

US Soccer President Cindy Parlow Cone , a former player who became head of the federation in March 2020 , said the settlement was a “ major step ” forward for the governing body and women ’ s sport in general .  
 
 “ This is a win for everyone ,  ” Cone told The Athletic .  
 
 “ I ’ ve said it many times before , resolving this litigation is a top priority of mine . It took me a lot longer to accomplish it than I was hoping for , but we ’ ve done it and it ’ s time to move forward .  ” 