The ex-NFL coach , his disgraced assistant and how to ruin a reputation in 72 hours
Ex-NFL coach Hue Jackson ' s attempt to hire Art Briles , a disgraced former college boss , ended poorly for all involved . 
Ex-NFL coach Hue Jackson ' s attempt to hire Art Briles , a disgraced former college boss , ended poorly for all involved . 
Source : FOX SPORTS
Max Laughton
Max Laughton from Fox Sports 
@ maxlaughton
March 1st , 2022 5 : 49 pm
It should ’ ve been the easiest positive story of the college football off-season . 

Hue Jackson , the former head coach of the NFL ’ s Oakland Raiders and Cleveland Browns , has taken over as coach at Grambling State University . 

That matters because Jackson , one of just 24 black head coaches in NFL history , was stepping into the big chair at a black college football powerhouse - right at the time when Historically Black Colleges and Universities ( HBCUs ) are having a sporting resurgence . 

Stream Over 50 Sports Live & On-Demand with Kayo . New to Kayo ? Try 14-Days Free Now > 

Super Bowl
Bet365
NFL
Feb 14 10 : 30am AEST
FT
Bengals
Bengals
20
Rams
Rams
23
MATCH CENTRE 
* Odds are current as of 1st March 2022 , 5 : 51pm AEST
VIEW ALL SCORES
HBCUs - schools established for overwhelmingly black student bodies before the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which finally outlawed racial segregation - have a proud history of giving marginalised athletes a chance to compete and show their talents before an NFL career . 

Some of the greatest players of all-time , like Walter Payton and Jerry Rice , plus modern champions like Michael Strahan and Steve McNair , played at HBCUs . 

Grambling State , home to four Pro Football Hall of Famers , hired Jackson last December . It marks a continued trend in big-name ex-coaches and players taking jobs at HBCUs . 


For example , high-profile NFL great Deion Sanders ’ recent work at Jackson State has seen the school get more attention than ever , including landing the No . 1 recruit in all of college football - an absurd feat given Jackson State doesn ’ t even play at the top level of the sport . 

Grambling State , an HBCU in Louisiana , plays at the second level of college football known as FCS and primarily against fellow HBCUs .  ( Photo by Jennifer Stewart / Getty Images ) 
Grambling State , an HBCU in Louisiana , plays at the second level of college football known as FCS and primarily against fellow HBCUs .  ( Photo by Jennifer Stewart / Getty Images ) 
Source : Getty Images
So how did Jackson ruin everything in the space of around 72 hours ? 

His name is Art Briles , and he was the man at the helm of one of college football ’ s most disgraceful sagas in the modern age .  ( Trigger warning for sexual assault .  ) 

Briles is a great offensive mind , which is why Jackson attempted to hire him as his offensive co-ordinator late last week . He led the University of Baylor to unprecedented success , with two Big 12 conference championships over eight years after a period of utter nothingness . His quarterback Robert Griffin III won the Heisman Trophy as college football ’ s best player in 2011 , then going No . 2 in the NFL Draft . 

It ’ s that resume that had Jackson willing to hire Briles - despite the enormous sexual assault scandal under his watch . 


Briles was fired in 2016 after an investigation found there was “ no culture of accountability for misconduct ”  , with “ significant concerns about the tone and culture within Baylor ’ s football program ”  . 

A lawsuit filed in 2017 alleged that at least 52 rapes by more than 30 football players happened over four years , and Baylor team officials chose not to report “ sexual and dating violence ”  . 

It was alleged Briles and Baylor officials knew about “ a serial sexual assault assailant ” as early as 2011 . 

An NCAA committee report found Briles ’  “ incurious attitude toward potential criminal conduct by his student-athletes was deeply troubling to the panel ”  .  
 
 “ The head coach failed to meet even the most basic expectations of how a person should react to the kind of conduct at issue in this case . Furthermore , as a campus leader , the head coach is held to an even higher standard . He completely failed to meet this standard .  ” 

Art Briles ’ high-powered offences at Baylor won him acclaim , and helped Robert Griffin III win the Heisman , but he was sacked in disgrace .  ( Photo by Jeff Zelevansky / Getty Images ) 
Art Briles ’ high-powered offences at Baylor won him acclaim , and helped Robert Griffin III win the Heisman , but he was sacked in disgrace .  ( Photo by Jeff Zelevansky / Getty Images ) 
Source : Getty Images
These investigations show Briles allowing this culture to fester at the university because the players involved were talented enough to help him win football games . In turn , the safety of women at the school was threatened . 

To be clear , Briles has admitted wrongdoing .  “ I made some mistakes . I was wrong . I ’ m sorry . I ’ m gonna learn . I ’ m gonna do better ,  ” he told ESPN in 2016 . 

Briles has been exiled from coaching by almost everyone - but he has certainly tried his best to return . 

In 2017 , Briles was hired by a Canadian Football League team for several hours before public and league pressure forced them to backflip . He found a job in Italy for the 2018 season , before shockingly being hired as a high school coach in Mount Vernon , Texas ; as you may be aware if you ’ ve seen Friday Night Lights , they care a hell of a lot about football there . 

A top-level college , Southern Miss , interviewed Briles for a position in 2019 but the mooted move was shouted down . 

So it ’ s unclear what Jackson saw in that record that made him think bringing Briles back to college football would be acceptable . 
 
 
 “ It ’ s not ( a lack of ) due diligence ( that is the problem )  . It ’ s assuming you ’ ll get away with it — as long as you ride out a brief wave of bad publicity ,  ” The Athletic ’ s Nicole Auerbach tweeted .  
 
 “ These schools / organisations always claim they ’ ve vetted him and done their due diligence . Which means they listen to him and folks around him claim he ’ s a scapegoat who didn ’ t do anything wrong .  ” 

Hue Jackson went 3-36-1 as Cleveland ’ s head coach , including overseeing their 0-16 campaign in 2017 .  ( Photo by Joe Robbins / Getty Images ) 
Hue Jackson went 3-36-1 as Cleveland ’ s head coach , including overseeing their 0-16 campaign in 2017 .  ( Photo by Joe Robbins / Getty Images ) 
Source : Getty Images
Grambling did not announce the move late last week ; it came out via media reports in the area . Coincidentally , the Russian invasion of Ukraine had just gotten underway - not that we ’ re suggesting they were trying to hide the announcement .  
 
 “ You know , you report what you know . We did the best we felt at the time . Apparently , it wasn ’ t good enough ,  ” Briles told KTAL Sports . 



An enormous outpouring of anger , much like with Briles ’ previous bids to get back into pro-level coaching , followed . Yet the school tried to hold strong . 

They weren ’ t helped by the Twitter account for the Hue Jackson Foundation , a small charity set up by the coach to work against human trafficking . 

The foundation released a statement suggesting that Briles ’ hiring would actually teach people about how to handle sexual assault cases , and shockingly claiming we shouldn ’ t bring up his past because it would “ retraumatise and revictimise ” those involved . 

This went down poorly and things got worse when an ESPN writer pointed out that the foundation took in $US158 , 000 in 2019 and spent just $US4 , 000 of that on grants for the charity ’ s stated cause . 



In return the foundation conceded that its main source of funding was Hue Jackson and the foundation ’ s sole worker ’ s incomes - which had many questioning the tax and legal implications of the whole situation . 




Still , that was a mere sideshow to the whole Briles decision , and on Tuesday morning ( AEDT ) Briles “ resigned ” from the school , feeling he would be “ a distraction ”  . 

In the end , the saga has reduced two reputations to tatters ; Jackson ’ s , for being the clear driver behind the hire , and Grambling ’ s , for allowing him to make the call . 

Sports Illustrated ’ s Richard Johnson , pointing to a legendary Grambling head coach who led the football team for a remarkable 56 years , summed it up on ESPN Radio .  
 
 “ Eddie Robinson is turning in his grave ,  ” Johnson said .  
 
 “ This is a program that should have a level of pride to not do something like this and they have lowered themselves .  ” 