Mane converts decisive penalty as Senegal win AFCON final
Mane , voted tournament ’ s best player , missed a penalty but converted another to seal the win over Egypt . 

Senegal ' s players celebrate with the trophy after winning the Africa Cup of Nations 2021 final at Stade d ' Olembe in Yaounde . 
Senegal ' s players celebrate with the trophy after winning the Africa Cup of Nations [ Charly Triballeau / AFP ] 
Published On 6 Feb 2022
6 Feb 2022
Sadio Mane scored the winning spot-kick – after missing one in the opening minutes of the game – as Senegal claimed their first Africa Cup of Nations title with a 4-2 penalty shoot-out victory over seven-time winners Egypt . 

Mane stepped up to make history for the West African nation on Sunday at the Olembe Stadium in Cameroon ’ s Yaounde , and banished the memories of the team ’ s 2019 failure when they lost the final to Algeria . 

KEEP READING
list of 3 items
list 1 of 3
Online abuse , death threats for Nigeria players after AFCON exit
list 2 of 3 
 ‘ She was my everything ’  : Cameroon mourns AFCON stampede victims
list 3 of 3
AFCON : How The Gambia was at home among Africa ’ s best
end of list
Goalkeeper Edouard Mendy saved from Mohanad Lasheen in the shoot-out to allow Mane the chance to seal the win and gain just reward for Senegal , who had been by far the better side in the final but spurned numerous opportunities to win the game . 

Egypt had their goalkeeper Mohamed Abo Gabal to thank for getting them into the shoot-out as he was outstanding in keeping Senegal at bay in what was the fourth time in as many games they had played extra time in energy-sapping conditions . 

mo salahEgypt ’ s Mohamed Elneny looks dejected after losing the Africa Cup of Nations [ Mohamed Abd El Ghany / Reuters ] 
There may be some poetic justice for Senegal coach Aliou Cisse , who was captain of the side in 2002 when they lost the final on penalties to Cameroon after a goalless draw , having missed his kick in the shoot-out . 

Egypt , who had to do without suspended coach Carlos Queiroz in the dug-out , battled to get into the game and created only half-chances , with their talisman Mohamed Salah largely ineffective . 

Salah was in tears at the end , having also lost the 2017 final to Cameroon and seeing his Liverpool teammate Mane seal his fate this time around . 

Senegal fluffed the chance for an early lead when Mohamed Abdelmonem ’ s late , reckless challenge brought down left back Saliou Ciss . 

Salah had a lengthy conversation with Gabal before Mane stepped up to take the spot-kick . 

The latter went for power straight down the middle of the goal but his effort was saved , the 10th penalty miss in the tournament . 

Senegal coach Aliou Cisse celebrates after winning the Africa Cup of Nations Senegal coach Aliou Cisse [ Mohamed Abd El Ghany / Reuters ] 
Ismaila Sarr ’ s trickery down the right wing caused more early problems for Egypt and his low cross was narrowly missed by Mane at the back post on two occasions . 

Egypt finally caused some alarm in the Senegal box when Salah cut inside off the right and forced a good save from Mendy . 

The pattern of play continued in the second half with Senegal doing most of the attacking and both Famara Diedhiou and Mane were denied by Gabal in quick succession . 

Marwan Hamdi flashed a header wide at the other end , while in the first half of extra time , Gabal again made a fine stop to deny substitute Bamba Dieng . 

But Senegal found the net when it mattered to take home the trophy . 