‘Bat on, you idiot’: Inside the 2am torture that cemented Aussie great’s ‘miracle’ 334
Australia set for historic Pakistan tour
Australia set for historic Pakistan tour | 02:12

Jacob Polychronis
Jacob Polychronis from Fox Sports
@j_polychronis
March 1st, 2022 8:17 am
When Australia last toured Pakistan in 1998, one of the few home comforts the team could enjoy was a beer and pizza away from the public.

The British High Commission would put on drinks for Australia’s Test stars while, in Peshawar, the American Club became a place for the players to mix with touring US officials.

It was at the American Club, after day two of the second Test, that Australia’s captain Mark Taylor sipped a Budweiser while mulling a decision that would ultimately shape his image forever.

Watch Australia’s Tour of Pakistan on Kayo. Every Test, ODI and T20 Live & On-Demand. New to Kayo? Start your free trial now >

Taylor had reached stumps on 334 not out.

It was an individual total remarkable for its sheer size, particularly in foreign conditions, but more so for the fact it was also the highest score ever made by the greatest batter of all time, Sir Donald Bradman.

Nearly 70 years had passed and the only other Australians to score more than 270 runs in a Test innings were Bob Simpson (311 vs England in 1964) and Bob Cowper (307 vs England in 1966).


Bradman scored 270 or more four times in his career, including his 334 at Headingley in July 1930.

It was astonishing that Taylor came to this position, pensively drinking his mid-Test beer while mulling a declaration, at all.

Taylor of Australia after his record score innings in the Second Test against Pakistan. Ben Radford /Allsport
Taylor of Australia after his record score innings in the Second Test against Pakistan. Ben Radford /Allsport
Source: Getty Images
READ MORE

REVEALED: The shocking death threat sent to Aussie star on eve of historic Test series

‘THE BEST TEST CATCH EVER SEEN’: Catch stuns as SA sets NZ record chase

SELECTION STATE OF PLAY: Aussies’ unthinkable call; Cummins hint in Test shootout

Taylor wasn’t out of form, but wasn’t in it either having averaged 32 in four away Tests since the end of the 1997-98 summer.

The then 34-year-old, who was undoubtedly nearing the end of his Test career, had failed to pass 20 in six of his past eight innings. His only 50-plus score was an unbeaten 102 in a comfortable dead rubber win against India in March 1998.

He then started the series against Pakistan being dismissed for 3 in Rawalpindi, where Australia claimed an innings victory to take a 1-0 lead to Peshawar. The single-digit score took Taylor’s average in Pakistan at the time down to 21.80.

Taylor was a great batter and an even better leader, but of Bradman proportions, he was not.

He won the toss and elected to bat first before clawing his way to a scrappy half-century that was not suggestive of the greatness that lay ahead.

“If you watched him bat in the first hour you wouldn’t have been banking on him getting 334,” remembered Mark Waugh, who made 42 from 107 balls in Australia’s first innings.

“I remember Shoaib Akhtar was bowling pretty quick in the first session and it was sort of throwing around a bit. So it certainly wasn’t easy.

“He started off slowly but obviously as the innings grew and he kept going – I guess you never think someone is going to get 334 but it was just a great innings against a pretty good bowling attack on a good batting pitch, but it definitely wasn’t easy for our batting in the first session.”

Both Waugh and Taylor’s long-term wicketkeeper, Ian Healy, said that there was no indication from the middle, or in the dressing rooms, that their captain was in the early stages of what would be one of the most memorable Australian Test innings.

“No sense of it whatsoever,” Healy told foxsports.com.au. “And I think that would be the same of any great innings.

“We’re all out there trying to get this game won and you don’t really understand the impact on history in those moments …. At the end of it, we certainly did.


“The first 50 was really shaky. Shoaib Akhtar was steaming in and he had been put down a couple of times in the first 50, but from then on, absolutely faultless and relentless. He just kept going.”

Cummins to favour quicks in Pakistan?
Cummins to favour quicks in Pakistan? | 01:02

‘THIS IS A MIRACLE’

It took an inside edge off Akhtar that narrowly missed his stumps for Taylor to get off the mark, while he was dropped twice on 18 and 27.

But as the movement faded for Akhtar and the Pakistan quicks tired, Taylor found his rhythm and suddenly became unstoppable.

He reached stumps at 112 not out and still felt fresh having undertaken a rigorous fitness regimen in the months leading up to the tour.

Taylor then blasted a century within the elongated first session of day two and didn’t start to feel fatigued until he neared 300.

But the opener could still summon just enough mental and physical strength as each delivery was being bowled, taking his score past 300.

Then past Cowper’s 307. Then past Simpson’s 311.

Suddenly, all that was left in Australian cricket was Bradman’s 334. Ahead of it, only West Indies legend Brian Lara’s 375 against England in 1994.

“They made it pretty hard for him with field placings and the like to score freely. But he just kept doing it,” Healy said.

“A lot of us on the balcony were saying ‘this is a miracle, how good’s this? This is unbelievable, there’s hope for us all!’

“His form in the lead up to that, I don’t think he had been making many runs and here he was … he had a bit of luck but also got through some hard yards.

“Michael Slater didn’t get through those hard yards and he’s the one sitting there going ‘oh, I missed a picnic here’. Tubby really got some great batting conditions to enjoy and got himself into that state of mind.”

It was at this point that Taylor admits to two things that could have changed the entire make-up of this legendary tale.

The first is that he considered forgetting about the Bradman mark and declaring late on day two. The second is that he tried to break it.

In the end, neither happened.

Taylor in Peshawar.
Taylor in Peshawar.
Source: Getty Images
Taylor held off declaring and was on strike on 334 with two balls left in the day.

“My thinking was, ‘It’s a game of Test cricket. I know the Don’s score is 334, I’m not going to do anything different’. I tried to hit them into the deep,” Taylor wrote this week in a column for the Sydney Morning Herald.

Taylor then hit a full toss straight to Ijaz Ahmed at mid-wicket, while the last ball was expertly fielded forward of square leg to stop the single and keep the Australian on 334 overnight.

“I think Pakistan were pretty much aware of it (the Bradman record) too,” Waugh said. “They started lifting and stopping runs.

“There’s no doubt that he (Taylor) was looking to break the record that evening and it just didn’t happen. Originally he would have been happy to take the score past Bradman on that day.”

‘BAT ON, YOU IDIOT’

Taylor had just endured several hours of torture in the Peshawar heat but was about to endure several more, despite enjoying some rare socialising outside of the team hotel.

He wrote that he didn’t get to sleep until 2am the following morning as he toyed with the “agonising” decision.

Taylor only confided in a few individuals and was met with mixed responses.

Healy was among the few Taylor spoke to, and he recalls the pair reaching a consensus of sorts.

“I do remember speaking with him very briefly and we certainly were both of the same opinion that we need to get bowling,” Healy said.

“And again it wasn’t about him so much, but (I said) ‘do what you like, but as you know we need to get bowling’.

“As it turns out we couldn’t bowl them out twice.

“He was undecided when I spoke to him.”

Asked if he thought the declaration could have come late on day two, Healy said: “Yeah. Maybe ‘get your 300 and go’. That was when we didn’t know the history.”

After leaving the American Club, Taylor called his family which was of a different opinion.

“My sister and eldest son Will said to me, ‘Bat on, you idiot’. Everyone said I needed to make the call and, eventually, it dawned on me that declaring was the right decision.”

As Australia arrived at the ground the following morning, only Taylor knew what he was going to do.


Waugh said he expected Taylor to bat on, while Healy said he wasn’t surprised that the captain didn’t.

Taylor declared on 334, remembered today as an ultimate act as respect that typified Taylor as a leader, and forever linked his name to Bradman’s.

“I did consider grinding Pakistan into the dirt by batting another 20 minutes in a seventh session,” Taylor wrote for SMH.

“That’s when the significance of Bradman’s 334 at Headingley in 1930 hit me. I thought people may think if I didn’t declare, it was to deliberately go past Bradman’s score.”

Healy said that it would have taken too long for Taylor to hunt down Lara’s world record mark – a total that Taylor insists didn’t cross his mind.

“We knew how difficult their skipper was going to make it with field placings and defending and taking time out of the game for him to get that record,” Healy said.

“He’s not one to be selfish and cost the game just for himself. So he declared, it was a nice touch, eh?

“The Pakistanis wouldn’t have just given it up to him.”

Taylor is clapped off the field in Peshawar.
Taylor is clapped off the field in Peshawar.
Source: Getty Images
As it turned out, it’s unlikely that an earlier declaration would have changed anything.

Pakistan embarked on a marathon innings of its own, reaching 9-580 declared in response to Australia’s 4-599.

Unsurprisingly, the Test ended as a draw.

A forgotten note is that Taylor made 92 in the second innings in Peshawar, giving him 426 for the Test which remains the second-most ever, 30 runs behind Graham Gooch’s 456 against India in 1990.

Australia didn’t find runs hard to come by in Pakistan, and once again batted Pakistan out of the Test in Karachi.

Waugh’s 117 from 229 balls in the second innings set up a big 419-run lead for Australia, who fell five wickets short of victory. Nonetheless, Taylor’s side won the series 1-0.

While Australia was already the greatest Test team in the world, losing an away series to India 1-0 earlier in the year raised questions about its ability in Asia.

The conditions faced in Pakistan were different, but Australia’s series win went a long way to holding off those concerns until it claimed its greatest Test victory in India in 2004.

Taylor ended the Pakistan series as Australia’s top batter with an average of 128.25, while Stuart MacGill – filling in for Shane Warne who had had shoulder surgery - was the nation’s leading wicket-taker with 15 at 27.46.

On returning to Australia, Bradman invited Taylor to his Adelaide home where they compared notes on their 334s.

Head and Australia prepping for Pakistan
Head and Australia prepping for Pakistan | 02:29

‘WE ALL ATE LIKE WARNIE’

Few expected that it would take until this week for an Australian touring party to arrive on Pakistan soil once more.

Today, it’s said to be easier to get a beer in Pakistan – although it’s unlikely the Australians will have an experience vastly different to their predecessors due to security measures.

Australia is in a high-security bubble for the six-week tour, which is the nation’s first since 1998, and since a fatal terror attack on Sri Lanka’s team bus in 2009. Five years earlier, Australia pulled out of a tour after a suicide bomb in Lahore.


Not much was different in 1998 when touring Pakistan was considered the most gruelling of all overseas assignments due to the team’s isolation.

“The security was very strict when we toured there,” Waugh said. “We couldn’t get out and about too much.

“We might have had the odd game of golf and go to the British High Commission there in Rawalpindi. But it was pretty low key because of the security. You didn’t go out and about as much as you did on other tours.”

Healy remembers pizza and beer at the High Commission but players would otherwise cycle between the ground, their hotel room, and the hotel restaurant where they would eat uninspiring diets.

“What I remember is repetition,” he said. “Eating at the same restaurant in the hotel every night for seven weeks.

“There was nowhere to go out and there was no alcohol consumed outside anything other than a team room on the night of a Test. We’d get a couple of cartons of beer from the embassy each night of the Test but not the tour games or anything like that. It was more difficult than you get anywhere else.”

He added: “Traditionally, we would stay away from fruit and vegetables and salads because of the water supply. All those foods retain water. And that’s not a great way to be on a seven-week tour, not eating that sort of stuff.

“Any food you did eat had to be piping hot. And so those sorts of precautions were daily with the food over there.

“We were just eating lots of breads. Rotis and those sorts of things. The ice cream was pretty good. That’s one thing I remember. Banana splits – I had a fair few banana splits. So very limited.

“We all ate like Warnie, not too many things.”

Today, sports science has overhauled athletes diets and it’s unlikely Australia’s cricketers will be knocking back mid-Test beers in their hotel rooms to make the time go past.

As for the American Club, that no longer exists, although Australia won’t visit Peshawar during this tour anyway.

Waugh says that the tour will be a different experience for the players but one he’s happy to see back on the rotation.

“This is going to be a very high profile tour. It’s going to bring a lot of attention and I think it’s great, he said.

“Obviously the security will be tight but we’ve seen the Pakistan Super League go ahead pretty seamlessly, so looks like it’s running well, the grounds look really good ... in great condition.

“It’ll be fine for the players and it’s exciting to see Australia back in Pakistan.”