2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational fantasy picks , rankings , sleepers : Golf expert says fade Jon Rahm at Bay Hill
Riley Gates revealed his PGA fantasy golf picks , lineup advice and predictions for the Arnold Palmer Invitational 2022 at Bay Hill
By CBS Sports Staff 
42 mins ago
4 min read
Jon-rahm
Getty Images
It should be another tough week for the PGA Tour ' s top player when the 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational tees off Thursday at Bay Hill . The long layout of the Bay Hill course , water in play on half the holes and unpredictable winds make this one of the toughest courses on tour . But that hasn ' t stopped an elite 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational field from stepping up to the challenge . World No . 1 Jon Rahm is the 9-1 favorite in the 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational odds at Caesars Sportsbook . He is the headliner of a field that also includes Rory McIlroy ( 12-1 )  , red-hot Viktor Hovland ( 16-1 ) and Scottie Scheffler ( 18-1 )  . Defending champ Bryson DeChambeau had to withdraw due to a hand injury , but McIlroy ( 2018 )  , Tyrrell Hatton ( 2020 ) and Marc Leishman ( 2019 ) are among recent former winners in the field . 

Can Hovland , who has three wins in his past seven worldwide events , continue his scorching run and be a rewarding 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational Fantasy golf pick ? Or would a former winner like Hatton ( 28-1 ) be a better choice to help you cash in big ? Before setting your fantasy golf lineups or making any bets on the 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational , be sure to check out the fantasy golf projections and lineup advice from SportsLine fantasy expert Riley Gates . 

Gates is a writer for 247Sports and has covered a range of sports for nearly five years . He has followed golf closely for much longer and has a profound knowledge of the sport . He also knows what it takes to win , on the course and in fantasy sports , and he has been on fire this season .  

In his picks for the Honda Classic , eight of his selections finished in the top 16 in a crazy week where four of the top 10 favorites missed the cut . His picks included Shane Lowry , who battled to the finish but came up short as Sepp Straka powered to his first PGA Tour victory .  
 
 
 " Lowry is going to come into this one overlooked , having not played on tour since November ,  " Gates said , but he " is playing good golf and is more than capable of doing it this weekend .  " Lowry certainly did that , playing bogey-free for the final 29 holes but was done in by a driving rain on 18 and finished a shot back .  

Gates also was on the money at the WM Phoenix Open , where nine of Gates ' fantasy picks finished in the top 14 , and his top five all posted top-10 finishes . He also nailed his picks at the Sentry Tournament of Champions , with four of his top seven picks posting top-five finishes . And at the Hero World Challenge , again four of his top seven finished in the top five . Anyone who has followed Gates is way up . 

Now , Gates has ranked his top 20 golfers for the 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational . You can only see his fantasy golf rankings and Arnold Palmer Invitational picks at SportsLine . 

2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational Fantasy golf expert picks
Gates is looking to take advantage of a better price on Matsuyama this week and is backing him at Bay Hill . The Japanese star looks to have cooled off a bit , but he still has two victories this season and is one of just 24 players on tour with a scoring average under 70 . He ranks 21st ( 69 . 944 ) while sitting in the top 20 in both greens in regulation ( 73 percent , 19th ) and strokes gained tee-to-green ( 12th )  . He has 17 worldwide wins in his career , and one of those was last year ' s Masters . With his defense of that title coming up , the 30-year-old will be getting locked in . 

Stunningly , Gates is fading tournament favorite Rahm this week , with the Spaniard barely cracking his top five . Rahm has been dominant , but he hasn ' t been invincible , and he is going to draw a lot of attention , and a high price tag . He has never played this event , and while most of his skills translate to any course , his putting and work around the greens have been less than ideal . He comes off a T-21 at Pebble Beach , and he is 174th in strokes gained around the green and 177th in putts inside 10 feet this season , so he could have more trouble than expected .  

How to set your 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational Fantasy golf rankings
For this week at Bay Hill , the fantasy expert is backing a long shot who is listed at around 40-1 . Gates says this player is " playing some of the best golf of his career ,  " and the expert is stunned his odds aren ' t lower . He sees this golfer as a must-play in your Arnold Palmer fantasy golf picks . You can find out who it is , and check out all of Gates ' top Honda Classic fantasy golf picks at SportsLine . 


Who wins the 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational this week ? Who are the top PGA Tour players to target for your Fantasy picks ? And which overlooked players can help you win your league this week ? Visit SportsLine now to get Riley Gates ' Fantasy golf rankings for the 2022 Arnold Palmer Invitational , all from the fantasy expert with his finger on the pulse of the game , and find out . 