Peng Shuai denies ‘ disappearing ’ after sex assault claim
Tennis star also tells French journalists that she did not make assault allegation and is retiring from the sport . 

Peng Shuai in a pink outfit and shows plays a return shot in a 2014 tournament
There has been rising concern about the welfare of Peng Shuai since she made sexual assauly allegations against a senior Chinese official [ File : Mike Segar / Reuters ] 
Published On 7 Feb 2022
7 Feb 2022
Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has denied she “ disappeared ” last year after making a claim of sexual assault against a top Chinese official on social media . 

Peng alleged in early November that former Chinese Vice-Premier Zhang Gaoli had forced her into sex during a years-long relationship . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Tennis : Peng Shuai T-shirt campaign resumes at Australian Open
list 2 of 4
Peng Shuai : China tennis star denies making sexual assault claim
list 3 of 4
Tennis stars hail WTA stand against China over Peng Shuai
list 4 of 4
Why the Women ’ s Tennis Association rallied for Peng Shuai
end of list
The accusations were quickly deleted from Chinese social media , and Peng was not heard from for nearly three weeks . 

Her apparent disappearance triggered widespread concern around the world , with the Women ’ s Tennis Association leading the campaign for information on her welfare and suspending tournaments in China as a result . 


The player eventually held a video conference with International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) President Thomas Bach on November 21 and later appeared in videos showing her attending sporting events .  
 
 “ I never disappeared . It ’ s just that many people , like my friends or people from the IOC messaged me , and it was simply impossible to answer so many messages ,  ” Peng told the French sports newspaper L ’ Equipe in a Chinese-language interview that was published on Monday .  
 
 “ But I ’ ve been always in close contact with my close friends . I talked to them , I answered their emails , I also talked with the WTA .  ” 


Peng , who was accompanied by Chinese Olympic Committee Chief of Staff Wang Kan , also denied making the assault claim .  
 
 “ In the text we could see in Europe , you accused someone of sexual assault . What did you really write ? We don ’ t understand ,  ” the sports daily ’ s journalists asked Peng .  
 
 “ Sexual assault ? I never said anyone had sexually assaulted me in any way ,  ” she replied without elaborating . 

In her now-deleted post on China ’ s Twitter-like Weibo , Peng had written “ why did you take me to your house and force me into having relations with you ?  ” 

Peng previously denied making the allegation in an interview with Lianhe Zaobao , a Chinese language Singapore newspaper , in December . 

Discussion of the scandal has been heavily censored in China ’ s tightly controlled cyberspace and searches for Peng ’ s name on Weibo continue to show no recent search results . 

Peng has not updated her Weibo account since the post was removed . 

Peng ’ s video appearances and denials have done little to allay concerns about her wellbeing with fans at last month ’ s Australian Open wearing T-shirts bearing the question ‘ Where is Peng Shuai ?  ’ 

The tennis star said she had also met Bach , who is attending the Winter Olympic Games .  
 
 “ We had dinner together on Saturday and we had a nice discussion and exchange ,  ” said Peng , who also announced her retirement from tennis . 

In a statement on Monday , the IOC confirmed the meeting had taken place and said Peng would attend several Olympics events . She also plans to travel to Europe after the pandemic and visit the IOC headquarters in Switzerland , it added . 