UEFA strips Russia of Champions League final over Ukraine attacks
The Russian government calls UEFA ’ s decision to move the final in May from St Petersburg to Paris a ‘ shame ’  . 

An aerial view shows the Gazprom Arena football stadium in Saint Petersburg
The final was supposed to be played at the Gazprom Arena in Saint Petersburg , which already hosted several matches at last year ' s European Championship and at the 2018 World Cup held in Russia [ File : Anton Vaganov / Reuters ] 
Published On 25 Feb 2022
25 Feb 2022
Paris will host this season ’ s Champions League final after Saint Petersburg was stripped of the match due to Russia ’ s military invasion of Ukraine , UEFA has announced . 

The showpiece occasion of the European club season will be played at the Stade de France on May 28 , European football ’ s governing body said on Friday after holding an emergency meeting in response to the crisis . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Ukraine slams ‘ horrific ’ strikes on Kyiv amid Russian advance
list 2 of 4
Photos : Ukraine assesses damage as Russian strikes hit Kyiv
list 3 of 4 
 ‘ Hiding in basements ’  : Thousands of Lebanese trapped in Ukraine
list 4 of 4
What is SWIFT and why were some Russian banks excluded from it ? 
end of list 
 “ UEFA wishes to express its thanks and appreciation to French Republic President Emmanuel Macron for his personal support and commitment to have European club football ’ s most prestigious game moved to France at a time of unparalleled crisis ,  ” a statement said . 

The Russian government responded by calling the decision by UEFA “ a shame ”  .  
 
 “ It is a shame that such a decision was made ,  ” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said .  “ Saint Petersburg could have provided the best possible conditions for holding this football event .  ” 

The final was supposed to be played at the Gazprom Arena , which already hosted several matches at last year ’ s European Championship and at the 2018 World Cup held in Russia . 

UEFA made no reference to its relationship with Gazprom , the Russian state energy giant that is a key sponsor of European football ’ s governing body . 

It is the third year running in which UEFA has moved the Champions League final with the COVID-19 pandemic leading to the 2020 edition being switched from Istanbul to Lisbon , and then again from the Turkish city to Porto in Portugal last year . 

The Stade de France , in Saint-Denis just to the north of the French capital , has hosted the Champions League final twice before – in 2000 when Real Madrid beat Valencia , and in 2006 when Barcelona defeated Arsenal . 

With a capacity of 80 , 000 , it was also the venue for the 1998 World Cup final and the final of Euro 2016 . 

Meanwhile , UEFA announced that Russian and Ukrainian clubs and national teams competing in international competitions must play home matches at neutral venues “ until further notice ”  . 

Spartak Moscow , in the Europa League , are the only club from either Russia or Ukraine still involved in European competition this season . 

FIFA may now move to force Russia to play their World Cup qualifying playoff against Poland on March 24 on neutral ground . 

On Thursday the Polish , Czech and Swedish football federations released a joint statement , calling on FIFA to move upcoming World Cup qualifying playoff ties away from Russia . 

Should Russia beat Poland , they would then host the Czech Republic or Sweden five days later to decide who qualify for the World Cup in Qatar . 


UEFA also said it would work to help football players in Ukraine get out of the country as the war intensifies .  
 
 “ Together with the French government , UEFA will fully support multi-stakeholder efforts to ensure the provision of rescue for football players and their families in Ukraine who face dire human suffering , destruction and displacement ,  ” it said . 

The Ukrainian league , which was due to resume this weekend after its lengthy winter shutdown , has been suspended . 

Global players union FIFPro said in a statement that it was “ currently seeking assurances and support from the international football bodies to protect professional players in the country ”  . 

On Thursday , football clubs from across Europe showed their support for Ukraine as the lineup for the Europa League and Europa Conference League last-16 was finalised . 

Ahead of their Europa League playoff second leg game in Naples , Barcelona and Napoli players were photographed with a “ stop war ” banner . 




Atalanta ’ s Ruslan Malinovskyi , a Ukrainian international since 2015 , unveiled a “ no war in Ukraine ” message under his shirt after scoring twice in their aggregate win at Olympiacos . 