Domenico Tedesco not convinced by Russia boycott as RB Leipzig win again
Christopher Nkunku secured RB Leipzig ' s fourth Bundesliga win in a row on Sunday . But coach Domenico Tedesco said he doesn ' t support a boycott of Russian sports teams , as RB prepare to face his old club Spartak Moscow .  


RB Leipzig coach Domenico Tedesco
Domenico Tedesco has impressed in Leipzig but the Europa League draw poses problems

An 82nd minute goal from star man Christopher Nkunku gave RB Leipzig a labored 1-0 win over Bochum on Sunday , which means a return to the Champions League is in Domenico Tedesco ' s side ' s hands . 

The former Schalke coach has picked up 22 points from his 10 Bundesliga games since replacing Jesse Marsch in December , while the Red Bulls also got past Real Sociedad to reach the last 16 of the Europa League on Thursday . 

That competition was on Tedesco ' s mind . He started Nkunku on the bench as a result of the short turnaround but it was Friday ' s draw , and a reunion with a Spartak Moscow side he left last year , that was a hot topic post-match . 

National teams take the lead
Given Russia ' s invasion of Ukraine , the location and feasibility of that fixture seems in some doubt , with the second leg likely to be on a neutral ground on March 17 , a week after the game in Leipzig . 

Christopher Nkunku celebrates another goal for RB Leipzig
Christopher Nkunku came off the bench to score the winner on Sunday

The Polish , Czech and Swedish national teams said they will not play the Russian national side in World Cup playoffs , before world governing body FIFA said no international matches could be held in the country and the Russian anthem , flag and fans would be banned for now . The Russian team can play under the banner of the RFU , or Russian Football Union . 

RB Leipzig said earlier in the week that they expect UEFA , who run European football , to make a " timely " decision of their own . UEFA recently moved the Champions League final away from St . Petersburg .  
 
 " We are waiting for more information . It ' s clear that I would have liked a different framework for these games ,  " Tedesco said after the match .  " The current situation is bad .  .  . war is absolutely no solution in any situation .  " 

Do boycotts work ? 
But , before FIFA ' s decision on Sunday night , Tedesco said he was unconvinced of the benefit of boycotting the match against his old employers , questioning who such a move benefits .  
 
 " History shows that it always hits the wrong people , first and foremost the athletes and the fans .  " 

Watch video01 : 07
Russian attacks on Ukraine continue after night of bombing
His stance seems somewhat at odds with the national associations who could have played Russia in the coming weeks , with the Czech federation saying on Sunday that :  " it ' s not possible to play against the Russian national team in the current situation , not even on the neutral venue .  " 

Polish federation president Cezary Kulesza tweeted ,  " We are not interested in participating in this game of appearances . Our stance remains intact : Polish National Team will NOT PLAY with Russia , no matter what the name of the team is '  ' 

Bayern Munich ' s Polish striker Robert Lewandowski struck a similar tone when he backed his national association ' s decision on Twitter on Satuday .  
 
 " It is the right decision ! I can ’ t imagine playing a match with the Russian National Team in a situation when armed aggression in Ukraine continues . Russian footballers and fans are not responsible for this , but we can ’ t pretend that nothing is happening ,  " he wrote . 

Leipzig striker Yussuf Poulsen said earlier in the week that he thinks it is different in his club ' s circumstances .  " UEFA is the decision-maker . If UEFA decides nothing other than that we should play on neutral ground , then that ' s the way it is . We can ' t do anything there , then we have to play the game ,  " the Dane said . 