Abramovich hands over control of Chelsea to club’s foundation
English football club’s Russian owner says he is handing over stewardship of Premier League team to trustees of its charitable foundation.

Roman Abramovich is seen on the stands during a football match
News reports say Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich took the decision in order to protect the club from reputational damage as war rages in Ukraine [EPA]
Published On 26 Feb 2022
26 Feb 2022
Chelsea’s Russian owner Roman Abramovich said he is handing over the “stewardship and care” of the Premier League club to the trustees of its charitable foundation.

The move comes with Russia under intense scrutiny following its invasion of Ukraine this week.

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Map: Which countries are accepting Ukrainian refugees?
list 2 of 4
Putin is a war criminal and should be treated as such
list 3 of 4
Photos: Ukrainians flee to borders en masse
list 4 of 4
Chechen leader, a Putin ally, says his forces deployed to Ukraine
end of list
Billionaire Abramovich, who took over at Stamford Bridge in 2003, said in a statement on Saturday: “During my nearly 20-year ownership of Chelsea FC, I have always viewed my role as a custodian of the club, whose job it is ensuring that we are as successful as we can be today, as well as build for the future, while also playing a positive role in our communities.

“I have always taken decisions with the club’s best interest at heart. I remain committed to these values. That is why I am today giving trustees of Chelsea’s charitable foundation the stewardship and care of Chelsea FC.

“I believe that currently they are in the best position to look after the interests of the club, players, staff, and fans.”





Abramovich took the decision in order to protect Chelsea from reputational damage as war rages in Ukraine, news reports say.

The Telegraph newspaper reported Abramovich will remain the owner of the club and is not looking to sell the European champions.

Chelsea chairman Bruce Buck is also chair of the club’s foundation.

Thomas Tuchel, the team’s manager, admitted on Friday that uncertainty over Abramovich’s future as owner was weighing on his club ahead of Sunday’s League Cup final against Liverpool.

“We should not pretend this is not an issue,” he said. “The situation in general for me and for my staff, the players, is horrible.

“Nobody expected this. It’s pretty unreal, like I said it’s clouding our minds, it’s clouding our excitement towards the final.”

Earlier in the week, using parliamentary privilege, Liberal Democrat member of Parliament Layla Moran named Abramovich as one of 35 “key enablers” to Russian leader Vladimir Putin who should be sanctioned.

The United Kingdom government on Friday ordered all assets of Putin and his Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov frozen over Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

The Treasury issued financial sanctions notice against the two men, adding them to a list of Russian oligarchs who have already had their property and bank accounts in the UK frozen.

Abramovich is not on the list.


The UK is a favourite destination for oligarchs and their families and has been criticised for not doing enough to prevent the flow of their money into the country.

Abramovich has supplied Chelsea with 1.5 billion pounds ($2bn) worth of funding over the past 19 years.

Chelsea FC have enjoyed a period of unprecedented success as a result, winning five Premier League titles and two Champions League crowns among a vast haul of silverware since he took over the club.

Portugal granted citizenship to the 55-year-old in December, and he has also been granted Israeli citizenship.

Abramovich is worth nearly $14bn according to Forbes. He ranked 142nd on the magazine’s 2021 list of the globe’s billionaires.