Kamila Valieva : Russian media say Olympic skater failed drug test
Reports come after IOC delays ceremony to present Russian figure skating team with their Olympic gold medals . 

Kamila Valieva ( ROC ) performs during the women ' s single free skating portion of the figure skating mixed team final during the Beijing 2022 Olympic Winter Games at Capital Indoor Stadium
Kamila Valieva performs during the women ' s single free skating portion of the figure skating mixed team final during Beijing 2022 on February 7 [ Michael Madrid / USA TODAY Sports via Reuters ] 
Published On 10 Feb 2022
10 Feb 2022
Russian figure skating star Kamila Valieva tested positive for a banned drug before the Winter Olympics in Beijing , two Russian newspapers say . 

The reports , late on Wednesday , came after the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) postponed a ceremony to present the 15-year-old skater and her teammates with their Olympic gold medals . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Winter Olympics : China stirs controversy with Uighur torchbearer
list 2 of 4
Photos : Opening ceremony of Winter Olympic Games in Beijing
list 3 of 4
Winter Olympics : Which world leaders are attending Beijing 2022 ? 
list 4 of 4
At Winter Olympics , Beijing tries to sell world on digital yuan
end of list
They cited unexplained legal reasons . 

Newspapers RBC and Kommersant said Valieva tested positive for trimetazidine before she won the European championship in Estonia last month . The drug is banned by the World Anti-Doping Agency because it can increase blood flow efficiency and help endurance . 


The alleged positive test could cost Russia the team gold and also threaten Valieva ’ s participation in the individual event that starts next week . The teenager is a strong favourite in the competition . 


The IOC declined to comment on Thursday . 

Mark Adams , the group ’ s spokesman , told reporters that an “ active legal case ” was under way concerning the medal ceremony and that claims of a failed drug test were “ speculation ”  .  
 
 “ We had a situation arise yesterday that has all sorts of implications ,  ” he said .  “ I ’ m not … going to comment on a legal case because it wouldn ’ t be appropriate .  ” 


The Russian Olympic Committee ( ROC ) also declined to comment on reports that Valieva had returned a positive test . 

The teenager delivered one of the highlights of the Beijing Games so far when she landed the first quadruple jump by a woman in Olympic competition . 

Any move to penalise Valieva or strip the team of their medals would probably cause a national outcry as figure skating is a prestige sport for Russia . 

 ‘ Leave Kamila in peace ’ 
Prominent journalist Vasily Konov , deputy general producer at Russian sports channel Match-TV , said without citing sources that the sample in question had been taken two months ago .  
 
 “ The drug trimetazidine does not help an athlete in any way . At all . It was found in one single sample in December . A minuscule amount . Nothing in her samples before or since ,  ” he wrote on social media .  
 
 “ There is no doping in the conventional sense . No ! This cardiac drug has no impact on … performance . Now leave Kamila in peace .  ” 


Dr Sadiya Khan , a cardiologist and assistant professor at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , told Reuters news agency that in theory trimetazidine might be used in a healthy person to enhance blood flow above and beyond normal levels .  
 
 “ The idea behind it would be , potentially , if you enhance blood flow , you could improve somebody ’ s ability to exercise longer or exercise more efficiently by allowing the heart to respond super-normally ,  ” she said . 

But she said it is not clear if the drug offers any performance-enhancing benefit .  
 
 “ There ’ s a theoretical benefit ,  ” she said .  “ There ’ s no strong evidence that it does make a difference .  ” 

Former Russian pairs skater Tatiana Volosozhar , who won two gold medals at the 2014 Sochi Olympics , showed her solidarity with Valieva on social media , calling for the use of the Russian hashtag # Iwillneverbelieve to show support to the teenager . 

Her post was “ liked ” on Instagram by Valieva . 


If the Russian team is disqualified , the United States team would be elevated to the gold medal for the first time in the event . Japan would be awarded silver and fourth-place finisher Canada would receive the bronze . 

Russian athletes are in Beijing competing as the “ Russian Olympic Committee ” after the country was banned because of a massive state-sponsored doping scheme at the 2014 Sochi Olympics . 

Russia has acknowledged some shortcomings in its implementation of anti-doping rules but denies running a doping programme . 