 ‘ Poetic justice ’  : How the world reacted to Senegal ’ s AFCON win
Celebrations across Senegal and on social media after the team ’ s maiden Africa Cup of Nations triumph . 

Senegal ' s fans celebrate after winning the Africa Cup of Nations final against Egypt
Senegal ' s fans celebrate after winning the Africa Cup of Nations final against Egypt [ Zohra Bensemra / Reuters ] 
Published On 7 Feb 2022
7 Feb 2022
Jubilant football fans poured onto the streets across Senegal , while social media went into overdrive to celebrate the West African nation ’ s historic and maiden Africa Cup of Nations triumph . 

A public holiday was declared in the country after Senegal beat seven-time winners Egypt with Sadio Mane converting the decisive penalty in the final at the Olembe Stadium in Cameroon ’ s Yaounde on Sunday evening . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Mane converts decisive penalty as Senegal win AFCON final
list 2 of 4
AFCON final : Senegal beat Egypt on penalty kicks – As it happened
list 3 of 4
AFCON : How The Gambia was at home among Africa ’ s best
list 4 of 4
Online abuse , death threats for Nigeria players after AFCON exit
end of list
Mane stepped up to make history for Senegal with a 4-2 victory , banishing memories of the team ’ s 2019 failure when they lost the final to Algeria . The Liverpool striker had also missed a seventh-minute penalty . 

Here is how the world reacted to Senegal ’ s win :  
 
 
 “ Success might delay but it can never be denied with consistency ,  ” African football journalist Usher Komugisha tweeted in reference to Senegal team coach Aliou Cisse who lost an AFCON final as a player in 2002 and as coach in 2019 . 


Jamie Carragher , former Liverpool player , where Mane and Mo Salah both play currently , said the decision to leave Egypt ’ s Mohamed Salah for the last kick ( which was not needed in the end ) was “ madness ”  . 



This is what happened when Al Jazeera ’ s Assed Beig tried reporting on Senegal ’ s win while standing among the celebrating fans . 


There were also comments on Mane ’ s strong nerves for not missing the penalty after failing on the previous attempt . 




Football clubs , including Chelsea and Liverpool FC , joined the chorus in congratulating the team and Mane ’ s final kick . 


Steve Parish , chairman of Crystal Palace Football Club in England , congratulated Senegal player Cheikhou Kouyate , adding that it “ could have not happened to a nicer more positive person ”  . 



Enthusiasm for Senegal ’ s victory stretched into the world of politics with the country ’ s President Macky Sall calling it a “ beautiful moment of communion and national pride ”  .  
 
 “ So proud of you ! Congratulations to our heroes !  ” he added . 


Translation : African champions !  !  ! What a game ! What a team ! You did it ! Beautiful football moment , beautiful moment of communion and national pride . So proud of you ! Congratulations to our heroes ! 


Compliments poured also from the African Union as the 55-country bloc ’ s Chair Moussa Faki Mahamat congratulated the team on his Twitter account . 


To mark the historical moment , Senegalese football player Idrissa Gana Gueye posted a picture of the team , writing simply :  “ History ”  . 




Cheers also came from other champion athletes , such as world heavyweight champion Francis Ngannou .  
 
 “ They left no doubt on their performance in the final ,  ” he said . 


Video on social media showed crowds in Senegal ’ s capital Dakar in jubilation : 


And a reminder to all those celebrating at how things did not go according to plan at the start : 