FIFA , UEFA suspend Russian clubs , national teams from all competitions
FIFA and UEFA have announced that Russian clubs and national teams are suspended in all their football competitions until further notice . This comes after Poland , Sweden and Czech Republic refused to play against Russia .  


A Russian flag in front of the German and Russian national teams
Russia ' s national and club teams won ' t be playing internationally for the foreseeable future

Football ' s world and European governing bodies , UEFA and FIFA , said on Monday that due to Russia ' s invasion of Ukraine , they had frozen all Russian club and national teams out of competitive fixtures indefinitely .  
 
 " FIFA and UEFA have today decided together that all Russian teams , whether national representative teams or club teams , shall be suspended from participation in both FIFA and UEFA competitions until further notice ,  " a joint statement published on both organization ' s websites said .  




The measure , even if it ultimately proves comparatively short lived , could amount to excluding Russia from the World Cup .  

Russia were scheduled to host Poland in a World Cup qualifying playoff on March 24 and assuming they remain suspended at that time , they will be out of the men ' s World Cup , which kicks off in Qatar in November .  

As the suspension covers all club and national teams , Russia ' s women ' s team will miss the Women ' s Euros in England – if the suspension remains in place in July .  

RB Leipzig through to Europa League quarterfinals
The decision also means that Bundesliga side RB Leipzig advance to quarterfinals of the Europa League , as their opponents in the round of 16 were Russian outfit Spartak Moscow . 

Monday ' s statement came a day after FIFA had announced much softer sanctions , saying that it was banning Russia from playing international matches on home soil , but that it would be allowed to continue its World Cup qualifying campaign under the name " Football Union of Russia ( RFU )  .  " 

Polish FA first to act
However , these measures were deemed unsatisfactory by a number of national federations , including the Polish FA , which had become the first to announce that its teams would refuse to play against Russia while the invasion of Ukraine continued .  

Polish FA President Cezary Kulesza wrote on Twitter on Saturday :  " No more words , time to act !  "  

He doubled down on Sunday , tweeting :  " We are not interested in participating in this game of appearances . Our stance remains intact : Polish National Team will NOT PLAY with Russia , no matter what the name of the team is .  " 

The Polish national team also used Twitter to post its own statement in support of their FA .  
 
 " It is not an easy decision , but there are more important things in life than football . Our thoughts are with the Ukrainian nation and our friend from the national team , Tomasz Kedziora , who is still in Kiev with his family .  "  

Bayern Munich star Robert Lewandowski also expressed his personal support for the decision . 


What made FIFAs position even less tenable , is that had Russia beaten Poland to advance to the next round of qualifying , both of their possible opponents had already announced that they would refuse to take the pitch against them .  
 
 " The men ' s national team will not play against Russia , regardless of where the match is played ,  " the Swedish FA posted on Twitter . 

The Czech football federation followed suit , adding that they would not play " even on a neutral venue .  " 

UEFA ends Gazprom partnership 
In a separate statement on Monday , UEFA also announced that it was ending its partnership with major sponsor Gazprom .  
 
 " UEFA has today decided to end its partnership with Gazprom across all competitions ,  " it said . The decision is effective immediately and covers all existing agreements including the UEFA Champions League , UEFA national team competitions and UEFA EURO 2024 .  "  




The suspension of Russia from international football and UEFA ' s termination of its deal with Gazprom are just the latest in a series of sporting sanctions that have rained down on Moscow since its troops marched into Ukraine last Thursday .  

These began with UEFA revoking St . Petersburg ' s right to host this year ' s Champions League final , which is now to be held at the Stade de France outside of Paris . Earlier on Monday , longtime Bundesliga club Schalke , who are currently in the second division , also announced that they were planning to end their long association with Gazprom .  .  

Meanwhile , the International Olympic Committee has called on sports federations to exclude Russian and Belarusian athletes from international events . 