 ‘ Grew up down the road ’  : Khawaja says Pakistan tour is ‘ special ’  .  .  . but also ‘ just another game ’ 
Khawaja :  ' I grew up down the road ' 
Khawaja :  ' I grew up down the road '  | 02 : 33

Christy Doran
Christy Doran from Fox Sports 
@ christypdoran
March 1st , 2022 7 : 53 am
Usman Khawaja says playing against Pakistan in the nation he was born in is just another game . 

It is hard to believe , but they are his words not ours .  
 
 “ Any Test match , any game , is just another match , just another game , I ’ ve played it for such a long time ,  ” a relaxed Khawaja told reporters during an extended interview following a long delay due to dodgy Wi-Fi .  
 
 “ I ’ ve been out of the team , I ’ m back in the team ; every game for me now for Australia is just a bonus .  
 
 “ I ’ m not out here to prove anyone different , I ’ ve got a beautiful family back home . It ’ s not the be-all-and-end-all , I just love playing cricket and love being competitive .  ” 

Watch Australia ’ s Tour of Pakistan on Kayo . Every Test , ODI and T20 Live & On-Demand . New to Kayo ? Start your free trial now > 

Whilst that could well be the case for Khawaja , it is far from the case looking from the outside in . 


Australia ’ s first Pakistan-born Test cricketer is returning to the nation he was born in . 

It is a historic moment , not just for Khawaja but for Pakistan cricketers and deprived fans , who have only watched their heroes play on home soil on a handful of occasions since that forgettable and regrettable attack on Sri Lanka ’ s team bus in 2009 . 

Perhaps that is why Khawaja - the most open of Australia ’ s cricketers - is not wanting to make his homecoming the centre of attention . 

Australian cricketer Usman Khawaja prepares to bat during their final practice session at the MCG before their departure for the team ' s first tour of Pakistan since 1998 .  ( Photo by William WEST / AFP ) 
Australian cricketer Usman Khawaja prepares to bat during their final practice session at the MCG before their departure for the team ' s first tour of Pakistan since 1998 .  ( Photo by William WEST / AFP ) 
Source : AFP 
 “ I know how I ’ d feel in Australia if cricket was taken away from us ,  ” Khawaja said .  
 
 “ There would be some very lonely summers , some pretty boring summers to be honest .  
 
 
 “ I feel for the fans . I know how much they love cricket in the subcontinent . I think Pakistan has been deprived a fair bit . It ’ s been disappointing , I understand why , they ’ re still playing overseas , but it ’ s not the same , you want to be able to see your home grounds , your own conditions , go out and watch and take the kids , do all that stuff , which Pakistanis haven ’ t been able to do , which is disappointing both in terms of players not being able to come out to Pakistan to play .  
 
 “ I ’ ve also found it really disappointing that India and Pakistan don ’ t play . Growing up , being from Pakistan .  .  . get those two nations playing together because we all know what competition and great camaraderie comes from that , so hopefully we can get this box ticked and then that ’ s the next goal for Pakistan cricket next .  ” 

Born in Islamabad , Khawaja attended matches at Rawalpindi - the venue of the first Test , starting Friday . 

When he returned on a four-week trip home as a child , he wore thigh pads as cricket pads and spent endless hours glued to his bat like a mother to a child . 

Australia set for historic Pakistan tour
Australia set for historic Pakistan tour | 02 : 12

Now , 24 years after Australia ’ s previous tour in 1998 , the men wearing the baggy greens are back . 

Khawaja , 35 , on his first visit to Pakistan since 2010 - the year before he made his Test debut against England at the SCG - will in all likelihood open the batting in his former backyard . 

The mild-mannered left-hander appreciates the significance , but he won ’ t let the match define him .  
 
 “ The fact that I ’ m playing Pakistan is special , don ’ t get me wrong , it ’ s special , it ’ s something I ’ ve always wanted to do ,  ” he said .  
 
 “ I grew up down the road , so there is that bit of sentiment definitely , but when the game starts you don ’ t really think about that stuff . You ’ re more worried about the ball coming down - the Test match happens like that ( clicking his fingers )  .  
 
 “ I ’ m sure when I look back on it and think that ’ s pretty cool - the first tour of Pakistan after so many years , being born in Pakistan , as fate would have it , everything ’ s worked out beautifully , touch wood .  ” 

For a cricket obsessed nation like Pakistan , the fact Khawaja is a “ local ” is not lost on anyone . 

Just don ’ t tell Khawaja he is the local . 

Khawaja has faced Pakistan overseas before , but this ODI was in Dubai .  ( Photo by MAHMOUD KHALED / AFP ) 
Khawaja has faced Pakistan overseas before , but this ODI was in Dubai .  ( Photo by MAHMOUD KHALED / AFP ) 
Source : AFP 
 “ I don ’ t really think that is my role ,  ” he quipped , having been asked how he was enjoying being the team ’ s guide by a local journalist .  
 
 “ I think guys ask me questions here and there , I know some of it , but others I don ’ t . I ’ ve got to remind them , look , I ’ m Australian , I ’ ve grown up in Australia my whole life . I know bits and pieces .  .  . Google usually has all the answers .  ” 

But Khawaja says he suspects those who pile the stands at Rawalpindi will want him to succeed , as long as it ends in a victory for Pakistan .  
 
 “ I ’ ve got a lot of support here in Pakistan ,  ” he says .  
 
 “ I think they ’ ll support me . I think they ’ ll be hoping I get runs . But I think they ’ ll be hoping Australia get smashed at the same time , it ’ s going to be one of those catch 22s .  
 
 “ It ’ s pretty special . I know where the Rawalpindi ground is . I think I ’ ve got a couple of photos of when I was younger at the Old Rawalpindi Ground .  
 
 “ Being born here , I think it ’ s going to be pretty cool walking out there , playing a game , but I don ’ t expect a hostile crowd . Pakistanis love their cricket , they appreciate good cricket , and I think that ’ s what they ’ ll be hoping for .  ” 

Just as he played down the significance of his homecoming , so did Khawaja down play his match saving innings against Pakistan in the UAE , where he scored a 302-ball 141 .  
 
 “ Any century for Australia is pretty amazing ,  ” he said .  “ I guess the century at that time , everything that happened beforehand , going to Dubai and scoring that was very special . But I don ’ t want to live in the past too much . It was a few years ago , I loved it , I had a lot of fun , I try to stay quite present , another three matches coming now . To me , you say it , but it ’ s just another game .  ” 

Head and Australia prepping for Pakistan
Head and Australia prepping for Pakistan | 02 : 29


Albeit it was not just another innings , as then Pakistan skipper Sarfraz Ahmed noted at the time .  
 
 “ I have seen one of the best innings in Test cricket , especially in the fourth innings ,  ” Sarfraz said .  
 
 “ The way he batted , he took Australia to the draw . He batted very well , he played most of his shots , even the reverse-sweep , so his was a brilliant knock .  ” 

His remarkable knock came after years of fruitless toil across Asia , where he had made just 117 runs across five Tests in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh . 

Whilst acknowledging that the surfaces in Pakistan will likely be different to the one he succeeded on in the UAE , Khawaja believes playing his way , a style that has been tweaked and re-tweaked over years , helped him succeed in 2018 and can set up his tour over the next month .  
 
 “ I took ( the ) onus on myself , I wasn ’ t going to listen to anyone else about how I needed to bat in the subcontinent ,  ” he said .  
 
 “ I tried that , failed , so I made sure I did learn from it .  
 
 “ It wasn ’ t just the Dubai series . I had been to an India A series , scored hundreds in the India A series ,  ( in the ) white ball series I was player of the series there against India ; It wasn ’ t just a one off in Dubai , I ’ ve done it time and time again in different teams .  
 
 “ There was a lot of work that went into it . I guess at the end of the day , that ’ s like five years ago . They were great learning experiences . If I didn ’ t have those experiences I probably wouldn ’ t be able to do that . But I gave myself the best opportunity to score .  
 
 “ There ’ s nothing certain in cricket , you can have all those skills and if certain things don ’ t go your way , you need a bit of luck , it ’ s a combination of both , but at least I know I ’ ve given myself the best chance to score in these conditions . Before in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh , I didn ’ t really understand what I needed to do in those conditions .  ” 

Win or lose , succeed or struggle , you get the feeling that Khawaja has already won by returning to the Test fold . 

Everything else , well it is just a bonus . 


But for everyone else , his legacy and homecoming return will go down in history . 