Facial recognition taken to court in India ’ s surveillance hotspot
Lawsuit challenges facial recognition as unconstitutional in Telangana , the state using the most facial recognition systems . 

A bird sits atop a closed-circuit television ( CCTV ) camera pole at a traffic intersection
Telangana state has more than 600 , 000 cameras - most of them in the capital Hyderabad [ File : Anindito Mukherjee / Reuters ] 
Published On 20 Jan 2022
20 Jan 2022
It was lockdown in the Indian city of Hyderabad when activist S Q Masood was stopped on the street by police who asked him to remove his face mask and then took his picture , giving no reason and ignoring his objections . 

Worried about how the photographs would be used , Masood sent a legal notice to the city ’ s police chief . But after receiving no response , he filed suit last month over Telangana state ’ s use of facial recognition systems – the first such case in India . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
India ’ s Telangana to test facial recognition in local elections
list 2 of 4
Privacy fears as India ’ s gov ’ t schools install facial recognition
list 3 of 4
Indian city plans facial recognition to spot ‘ women in distress ’ 
list 4 of 4
Privacy concerns as India readies facial recognition system
end of list 
 “ Being Muslim and having worked with minority groups that are frequently targeted by the police , I ’ m concerned that my photo could be matched wrongly and that I could be harassed ,  ” Masood , 38 , told the Thomson Reuters Foundation .  
 
 “ It is also about my right to privacy , and my right to know why my photograph was taken , what it will be used for , who can access it , and how it ’ s protected . Everyone has a right to know this information ,  ” he said . 

Masood ’ s petition in the southern state is seen as a test case as facial recognition systems are deployed nationwide , with digital rights activists saying they infringe on privacy and other basic rights . 

Facial recognition technology , which is increasingly used for everything from unlocking mobile phones to checking in at airports , uses artificial intelligence ( AI ) to match live images of a person against a database of images . 

The Indian government , which is rolling out an automated facial recognition system nationwide – among the world ’ s largest – has said it is needed to bolster security in a severely under-policed country , to prevent crime and find missing children . 

But there is little evidence that the technology reduces crime , critics say . 

It also often fails to identify women and darker-skinned persons accurately , and its use is problematic in the absence of a data protection law in India , digital rights activists say .  
 
 “ The technology is being rolled out at a very fast pace in India , on the premise that 24 / 7 surveillance is necessary and good for us ,  ” said Anushka Jain from the Internet Freedom Foundation ( IFF ) digital rights group in Delhi .  
 
 “ It ’ s important to challenge this notion , and a court case such as this will also help raise public awareness – most people are not even aware they are being surveilled ,  ” said Jain , associate counsel at IFF , which helped prepare the petition . 

World ’ s most surveilled place : Amnesty
CCTV cameras have become a common sight across the world , with an estimated one billion installed by the end of last year . 

Alongside Chinese cities , Hyderabad and New Delhi also have some of the world ’ s highest concentrations of CCTV cameras , according to the website Comparitech . 

Telangana state has more than 600 , 000 cameras – most of them in the capital , Hyderabad – and police can use an application on their mobile phones and tablets to take photographs and match them on the database . 

The state is “ the most surveilled place in the world ”  , according to research published last year by Amnesty International , IFF and rights group Article 19 , with systems deployed by the police , the election commission and others . 

Hyderabad , which is home to the Indian offices of several global tech firms including Microsoft , Amazon and IBM ,  “ is on the brink of becoming a total surveillance city ”  , said Matt Mahmoudi , Amnesty ’ s AI and Big Data researcher .  
 
 “ It is almost impossible to walk down the street without risking exposure to facial recognition ,  ” he said . 

The rights of Muslims , Dalits , Indigenous Adivasis , transgender people and other historically marginalised groups are at particular risk from such surveillance , activists say , with the systems already being used to police protests . 

Masood ’ s lawsuit , which is listed for a hearing later this year , argues that the use of facial recognition in Telangana is “ unconstitutional and illegal ”  . It says it is unnecessary , disproportionate , and lacks safeguards to prevent misuse .  
 
 “ This illegality cannot be cured or justified on the basis of its purported benefits in advancing law enforcement interests – under the guise of providing better policing … ( when ) these purported benefits are yet to be proven ,  ” the petition says . 


Hyderabad police say the technology has served as a “ deterrent ” and helped them catch criminals .  
 
 “ We don ’ t infringe upon the privacy of any individual , as we are not barging into anybody ’ s house to take pictures ,  ” said C V Anand , Hyderabad ’ s police commissioner .  
 
 “ The technology is being used only to keep surveillance on criminals or suspected criminals ,  ” he told reporters earlier this month in response to the petition . 

 ‘ Losing our fight to protect privacy ’ 
In some parts of the world , there is growing pushback against the use of facial recognition , with companies , including Microsoft and Amazon , ending or curbing sales of the technology to the police , and the European Union mulling a five-year ban . 

In India , resistance from students , municipal workers and minority communities is growing as more services go online and government agencies and companies require personal data and location-tracking apps to undertake everyday tasks . 

A planned data protection law gives wide exemptions to government agencies for the purposes of national security .  
 
 “ It doesn ’ t talk about surveillance , which gathers data in secret and without consent , and it exempts government use , so it will fail to provide the sort of robust protections that are needed ,  ” said Jain . 

Masood , who is much more aware now of CCTV cameras and police officers taking photographs of residents in Hyderabad , wants others to see the dangers of facial recognition .  
 
 “ The state has spent so much money on it , yet people have no idea how it works , how it can be misused , and how it abuses their privacy ,  ” he said .  
 
 “ We are losing our fight to protect our privacy every day .  ” 