Slack went down today , but work wasn ' t canceled
Clare Duffy
By Clare Duffy , CNN Business

Updated 2015 GMT ( 0415 HKT ) February 22 , 2022
Slack went down for many users Tuesday morning , throwing off companies that rely on the popular workplace communication platform just as workers returned from the extended holiday weekend .  
 
 " We ' re investigating the issue where Slack is not loading for some users ,  " the company said on its status page around 9 : 30 am ET . Issues persisted for some users throughout the morning . The issue was fully resolved about five hours later , the company said . 
Slack and similar services emerged as essential tools for office workers to stay connected to their colleagues during the pandemic . The company serves major companies including Netflix , Uber and Target , as well as government agencies such as the US Department of Veterans Affairs . Many news organizations , including CNN , also rely on the platform . Slack was acquired by Salesforce ( CRM ) last year .  
 " Slack is down which means work is canceled ,  " one Twitter user joked Tuesday . Others joked that they worried they had been fired , before realizing it was just an outage . 
Outage tracking website Down Detector showed problem reports about Slack spiking around 9 : 30 am ET , before tapering off slightly . 
About an hour after the outage was confirmed , some users began reporting that their service had resumed , especially on the mobile app . However , Slack said others were still unable to load the platform and it was continuing to investigate the issue as of 11 : 30 am ET . 
Shortly after noon ET , Slack said it was " seeing signs of improvement .  " And just before 2 : 30 pm ET , Slack said it had fully resolved the issue , but it didn ' t offer any explanation for the outage . The company encouraged users to reload the service or , if that doesn ' t work , to do a cache reset 
 " Thanks for bearing with us and we apologize for the disruption to your work day !  " it said . 