The 3G shutdown will affect everyday devices you probably own
Samantha Murphy Kelly byline
By Samantha Murphy Kelly , CNN Business

Updated 1700 GMT ( 0100 HKT ) February 16 , 2022
The looming shutdown of 3G networks won ' t just impact older phones . 

With AT & T ' s 3G network shutting down next week , and other carriers following suit later this year , a range of products require updates to continue working , including some home alarm systems , medical devices such as fall detectors , and in-car crash notification and roadside assistance systems such as General Motors ' OnStar . 
Just as many mobile carriers have urged customers to swap their older 3G iPhones , Android phones , e-readers and other handheld devices for newer models ahead of the shutdown , other businesses are urging customers to upgrade or replace some of the everyday products and services in their homes and cars before they drop connectivity . 
If left unaddressed , the stakes could be high in certain cases . Millions of cars , for example , may no longer have the ability to contact first responders after a collision or receive updates such as location or traffic alerts for built-in GPS systems . Some vehicles , including Chevrolet , Buick and Cadillac , have software upgrades for drivers to connect their systems to a 4G network , but other models will reportedly lose this feature for good . 
3G networks are shutting down soon . A scramble to get users to upgrade is underway 
3G networks are shutting down soon . A scramble to get users to upgrade is underway
The introduction of 3G in 2002 allowed some early car infotainment systems and home security services -- pioneers in the smart home space -- to connect to the networks . But over time , wireless companies moved on to 4G and more recently 5G networks . 
Now , the major carriers are phasing out 3G technology in the United States and some markets abroad . AT & T ( T )  , which owns CNN ' s parent company , is shutting it down on February 22 ; T-Mobile ( TMUS ) is doing so in the third quarter ; and Verizon ( VZ ) will take this step by the end of the year . As the technology officially becomes obsolete , a scramble is underway to help consumers avoid a disruption . 
What companies are doing about it
Some industries are better set up to handle the change . Many home security companies , for example , have been migrating their subscriber bases from 3G to 4G over the past two years .  " From the most recent industry discussions I ' ve participated in , it appears most US home security dealers have migrated 100% or very close to 100% of their subscribers so it ' s not on most providers ' to-do lists any longer ,  " said Jack Narcotta , principal industry analyst at Strategy Analytics . 
He said the home security industry ' s effort to transition to 4G wasn ' t overly complicated because it simply involved having a technician install a box or panel for a newer model . Some companies such as ADT have also put additional resources into the transition . In 2020 , the home security company acquired Cellbounce , which makes a device that converts 3G signals to 4G for AT & T ' s network . 
Security businesses , such as My Alarm Center , have been clear in their messaging to customers that replacement units were needed ahead of the shutdown , too .  " Even if your alarm appears to function , it will no longer communicate with our central service station to notify us that emergency services are needed ,  " My Alarm Center states on its website . 
But even with these efforts , some customers and systems will likely get left behind -- and not just home security and car assistance services .  
 " A few million connected devices in the smart home space still need to be replaced , including my meter for my solar panels ,  " said Roger Entner , analyst and founder of Recon Analytics .  " Some companies started reaching out to their customers over the past 2 years informing them that service would soon shut off , but as of 6 months ago , many products still haven ' t gotten around to replacing them yet .  " 
What is C-band 5G ? Verizon and AT & amp ; T are flipping on the switch in the US
What is C-band 5G ? Verizon and AT & T are flipping on the switch in the US
The auto industry is in more of a gray area . In addition to software upgrades , some automakers are offering consumers newer parts to add to existing technologies to get them running on 4G . But some are offering no accommodation at all . This is compounded by consumers likely being less aware of which network their car systems use than which network their phones use .  
 " A fair number of people are going to be surprised ,  " said Sam Abuelsamid , principal analyst with Guidehouse Insights , a market research firm focused on emerging technologies .  " But if they ' re currently a paying subscriber to a connectivity service , they most certainly have been notified at this point .  " 
What you can do about it
As a general rule , most cars built in the last five years with connectivity are using 4G modems , according to Abuelsamid . Anyone who isn ' t sure if their vehicle is going to lose connectivity can call their local dealer for more information . 
If the car does use 3G , Abuelsamid recommended customers ask the manufacturer if there is an upgrade program and , failing that , contact the carriers , which can provide an adapter with a modem that can be plugged into a vehicle . 
For those who are unsure if their home alarm system runs on 3G , the security company likely has an FAQ page on its website with a list of impacted model numbers . Customers can also call the company directly to ask and arrange for next steps . 
Ultimately , it ' s much easier to replace some items that run on 3G than others .  " It ' s easier to replace a 3G e-reader if you want to keep cellular connectivity than it is to replace a car system , so some folks have an expensive decision to make if they want to keep their older auto connected with cellular ,  " said Bill Menezes , director at market research firm Gartner . 
Future disruptions
It ' s not the first time a network has been phased out nor will it be the last . The 3G shutdown is primarily intended to re-use the spectrum for 4G and 5G , which are newer standards , better technologies and more efficient . The same thing happened with 2G , which AT & T and Verizon shut down around the end of 2017 ; T-Mobile plans to shut its 2G network in December . 
Last month , AT & T and Verizon turned on C-band 5G networks , an important set of higher radio frequencies that will supercharge the internet . The change will allow users to , for example , stream a Netflix movie in 4K resolution or download a movie in seconds .  ( Verizon said its C-band speeds reach nearly one gigabyte per second , about 10 times as fast as 4G LTE .  ) 
In the home security world , 5G would give the ability to stream high-definition video or interactive mapping with motion detection so an alarm company could see where on a 3D map an alarm went off and track anything moving through the area . Moreover , 4G enables more sophisticated features , such as the ability to communicate with alarm companies faster and share pictures and rich videos over the network . 
For those worried about seeing 4G household devices phased out , don ' t be . Dimitris Mavrakis , a senior director at market research firm ABI Research , said the shut down of 4G networks won ' t happen anytime soon , noting " other generations will likely remain in the market for a very long time .  " Because 2G introduced mobile voice and 4G introduced mobile broadband , he calls 3G " somewhere in between " and " not ideal for either voice or mobile broadband .  "  
 " Ultimately , 4G is a lot better than 3G ,  " he said .  " This is why it ' s being phased out .  " 