Google moves to make Android apps more private
Google ' s plan to limit data tracking on its Chrome browser has been extended to cover apps on its Android-based smartphones . 

Its so-called Privacy Sandbox project aims to curb the amount of user data that advertisers can gather . 

Rival Apple now forces app developers to ask permission from users before tracking them . 

The news will be a blow to firms like Meta , which rely on putting their code on apps to track consumer behaviour . 

Meta said this month that Apple ' s changes would cost it $10bn ( £7 . 3bn ) this year . Google ' s Android operating system is used by about 85% of smartphone owners worldwide . 

No detail
Third-party cookies , which use people ' s browsing history to target adverts , will be phased out on Google ' s Chrome browser by 2023 . 

In a blog , Google said it was now extending what it calls its Privacy Sandbox to Android apps , and working on solutions that will limit sharing users ' data and " operate without cross app identifiers , including advertising ID "  . 

These identifiers are tied to smartphones and are used by apps to collect information . Google said that it will keep them in place for at least two years , while it works " with the industry " on a new system .  
 
 " We ' re also exploring technologies that reduce the potential for covert data collection , including safer ways for apps to integrate with advertising SDK ( software developer kits )  ,  " it added . 

The tech giant did not detail how it plans to do this . 

Apple decided in April last year that app developers had to explicitly ask for permission from users to use IDFA ( Identifier for Advertisers )  . Data from advertising company Flurry Analytics , and published by Apple , suggests that US users are choosing to opt out of tracking 96% of the time . 

Google ' s blog did not name Apple , but referred instead to " other platforms " which it said " have taken a different approach to ads privacy , bluntly restricting existing technologies used by developers and advertisers "  .  
 
 " We believe that - without first providing a privacy-preserving alternative path - such approaches can be ineffective ,  " it added . 

Google , unlike Apple , relies on advertising revenue . 

Google ' s attempts to create alternatives to third party cookies on its Chrome browser have not gone entirely smoothly . 

Its first proposal -a system called Federated Learning of Cohorts ( Floc ) - was disliked by privacy campaigners and advertisers alike . 

Floc aimed to disguise users ' individual identities by assigning them to a group with similar browsing histories . 

Real-time bidding
Its successor , Topics , was announced recently and aims instead to group users in topic clusters selected out of about 350 categories such as fitness or travel . When someone visits a website , Topics will show the site and its advertising partners three of their interests from the previous three weeks . 

The Competitions Market Authority has been scrutinising Google ' s transition to more privacy-focused systems and said of its plans to extend them to Android apps :  " We will continue to monitor this closely and engage with Google on the nature and detail of its proposals .  " 

The average app includes at least six third-party trackers that are there solely to collect and share online data , according to a report commissioned by Apple last year . 

And any one data broker is estimated to have data on up to 700 million consumers , according to research firm Cracked Lab . 

Regulators , such as the UK ' s Information Commissioner ' s Office , are investigating the advertising ecosystem , especially the way ads are sold - known as real-time bidding - which automatically places billions of online adverts on web pages and apps every day . 