Russia partially restricts access to Facebook to ‘ protect Russian media ’ 
Restrictions come after Facebook limits Kremlin-backed media accounts in wake of Russia ’ s invasion of Ukraine

Russia-Ukraine war latest news : follow live updates
The Russian watchdog said its ‘ partial restriction ’ of Facebook would take effect on effect Friday , but did not clarify what measures would be implemented . 
The Russian watchdog said its ‘ partial restriction ’ of Facebook would take effect on effect Friday , but did not clarify what measures would be implemented . Photograph : Dado Ruvić / Reuters
Dan Milmo , Kari Paul and agencies
Fri 25 Feb 2022 17 . 51 GMT

Russian authorities have announced the “ partial restriction ” of access to Facebook after the social media network limited the accounts of several Kremlin-backed media organisations after Moscow ’ s invasion of Ukraine . 

The state communications watchdog , Roskomnadzor , demanded that Facebook lift restrictions it said the company had placed on state news agency RIA Novosti , state TV channel Zvezda , and pro-Kremlin news sites Lenta . ru and Gazeta . ru . The restrictions placed by Facebook on the sites included marking their content as unreliable , Roskomnadzor said . 

The watchdog said its “ partial restriction ” of Facebook would take effect on Friday , but did not clarify what measures would be implemented . Roskomnadzor described its move as “ measures to protect Russian media ”  . It said Russia ’ s foreign ministry and the prosecutor general ’ s office found Facebook “ complicit in violation of fundamental human rights and freedoms , as well as the rights and freedoms of Russian nationals ”  . 

Facebook ’ s owner , Meta , did not comment . Nick Clegg , Meta ’ s president of global affairs , announced on Friday morning that the company had established a “ special operations centre ” to deal with Ukraine-linked content that incited violence or used hate speech . 

He later acknowledged in a tweet that Russia had restricted Facebook after it refused to “ stop the independent factchecking and labelling of content posted on Facebook by four Russian state-owned media organisations ”  .  
 
 “ Ordinary Russians are using our apps to express themselves and organise for actions ,  ” he said .  “ We want them to continue to make their voices heard .  ” 


Meanwhile , Russia Today , the state-backed news service , confirmed its website had been hit by a cyber-attack after a Twitter account linked to the Anonymous hacker collective declared “ cyberwar ” against the Russian government . 

Advertisement

The organisation said it had been subjected to “ massive ” distributed denial of service ( DDoS ) attacks , which render sites unreachable by bombarding them with spurious requests for information . It came as a Twitter account linked to Anonymous ,  @ YourAnonOne , said the group was at war with the Kremlin . 

Russia Today said :  “ After the statement by Anonymous , RT ’ s websites became the subject of massive DDoS attacks from some 100 million devices , mostly based in the US . Due to the attacks there might be temporary website access limitations for some users , yet RT is promptly resolving these issues .  ” 

In a DDoS , a website is deluged with spurious requests for information – described by experts as akin to stuffing a thousand envelopes through a letterbox every second – that render the site unreachable . According to Craig Terron , a senior analyst at Recorded Future , which monitors cyber threats , the Russia Today site remained “ intermittently available ” on Friday , having gone down at 5pm ( 2pm GMT ) Moscow time on Thursday .  
 
 “ The website is intermittently available , with continued reports of users unable to access the website , as of 1330 Moscow time on February 25 ,  ” he said . 

The Anonymous declaration came as Reuters reported that the government of Ukraine is asking for volunteers from the country ’ s hacker underground to help protect critical infrastructure and conduct cyber spying missions against Russian troops . 

Anonymous also claimed on Friday to have hacked and leaked the database of the Russian Ministry of Defence website . 

As Russian forces attacked cities across Ukraine , requests for volunteers began to appear on hacker forums on Thursday morning , as many residents fled the capital Kyiv .  
 
 “ Ukrainian cybercommunity ! It ’ s time to get involved in the cyber defence of our country ,  ” the post read , asking hackers and cybersecurity experts to submit an application via Google Docs , listing their specialties , such as malware development , and professional references . 

Yegor Aushev , the co-founder of a cybersecurity company in Kyiv , told Reuters he wrote the post at the request of a senior defence ministry official who contacted him on Thursday . Aushev ’ s firm Cyber Unit Technologies is known for working with Ukraine ’ s government on the defense of critical infrastructure . 

Another person directly involved in the effort confirmed that the request came from the Defense Ministry on Thursday morning . Ukrainian government websites have been hit by DDoS attacks this week and a new strain of wiper malware , dubbed HermeticWiper , has been found on hundreds of computers in the country . Experts have widely attributed the cyber-attacks to Russian state-backed hackers . 

PrivatBank logo on screen
Russia unleashed data-wiper malware on Ukraine , say cyber experts
Read more
A defence attache at Ukraine ’ s embassy in Washington told Reuters he “ cannot confirm or deny information from Telegram channels ” referring to the mobile messaging platform , and declined further comment . 

Aushev said the volunteers would be divided into defensive and offensive cyber units . The defensive unit would be employed to defend infrastructure such as power plants and water systems . In a 2015 cyber-attack , widely attributed to Russia state hackers , 225 , 000 Ukrainians lost electricity . 

The offensive volunteer unit Aushev said he is organising would help Ukraine ’ s military conduct digital espionage operations against invading Russian forces .  
 
 “ We have an army inside our country ,  ” Aushev said .  “ We need to know what they are doing .  ” 

The effort to build a cyber military force is coming late in the game , Aushev acknowledged . 

Why has Putin ’ s Russia waged war on Ukraine ? – video explainer
03 : 37
Why has Putin ’ s Russia waged war on Ukraine ? – video explainer
Advertisement

A Ukrainian security official said earlier this month that the country had no dedicated military cyber force , the Washington Post reported .  “ It ’ s our task to create them this year ,  ” he told the Washington Post . 

Aushev said that he had already had received hundreds of applicants and was going to begin vetting to ensure that none of them were Russian agents . 

Reuters also reported on Friday that Ukrainian cybersecurity officials said hackers from neighbouring Belarus are targeting the private email addresses of Ukrainian military personnel “ and related individuals ”  . 

In an announcement posted to Facebook , Ukraine ’ s Computer Emergency Response Team ( CERT ) said the hackers were using password-stealing emails to break into Ukrainian soldiers ’ email accounts and using the compromised address books to send further malicious messages . 