Google plans to change Android app tracking in a bid to improve user privacy
Clare Duffy
By Clare Duffy , CNN Business

Updated 1729 GMT ( 0129 HKT ) February 16 , 2022
Google ( GOOG ) plans to develop new privacy measures that remove the ability to track users across apps on Android devices , potentially rattling digital advertising-based businesses like Facebook that have already been disrupted by app tracking changes introduced by Apple last year . 

Google said Wednesday that it is launching a multi-year effort to build privacy-focused advertising solutions that will limit the sharing of user data with third parties . These solutions will operate without the individual identifiers that allow developers to track user activity across various mobile apps and enable them to create ads targeted to a user ' s behavior and interests . Google ( GOOGL ) said it is also exploring technologies that would reduce the potential for a user ' s data to be collected without their knowledge . 
The announcement — which comes as Google and other Big Tech companies face mounting regulatory scrutiny for privacy concerns and other issues — was light on specific details about how the new system would work . But it was enough to unnerve some investors in companies reliant on targeted digital advertising . Shares of Facebook-parent Meta ( FB )  , Snap ( SNAP )  , Twitter ( TWTR ) and Pinterest ( PINS ) all dipped in early trading Wednesday following the announcement . 
Meta &  # 39 ; s market value just dropped by more than most companies are worth
Meta ' s market value just dropped by more than most companies are worth
Some of those companies have already taken a financial hit in recent months after Apple implemented changes in its iOS 14 . 5 update last Spring with the aim of giving users greater privacy and control over their data . The change — which gives users the option to opt-out of having apps track their behavior — contributed to a more than $200 billion market value decline for Meta after it reported earnings results earlier this month . Meta said the app tracking change is expected to have a $10 billion impact on its bottom line this year . 
However , Google noted that it plans to work with developers to build the new system and said , without naming Apple , that it won ' t take the same " blunt ,  " opt-out approach that the iPhone maker has taken , which could provide some reassurance to app companies and advertisers .  
 " We believe that — without first providing a privacy-preserving alternative path — such approaches can be ineffective and lead to worse outcomes for user privacy and developer businesses ,  " Anthony Chavez , vice president of product management for Android security and privacy , said in a blog post . 