Truth Social : will Trump ’ s ‘ free speech haven ’ overcome its rocky start ? 
Technical snags , criticisms of its terms of service and questions about copyright infringement plague the app ’ s kickoff

A hand holds a smartphone with a cracked screen showing the sign-in page for Truth Social . The company logo is at the top in blue text , with black text underneath that reads :  " Follow the Truth . You ' re just a few simple steps from creating your account .  " 
Early users of Truth Social reported multiple error messages when registering and long waitlists to join . Photograph : John Nacion / NurPhoto / REX / Shutterstock
Kari Paul in San Francisco
Sun 27 Feb 2022 06 . 00 GMT

Donald Trump last week launched his long-awaited social media app , Truth Social , luring users with the promises of a platform free from “ discrimination against political ideology ”  . 

But with tech glitches plaguing the platform and early criticisms of its content policies the rollout is already raising questions about its future . 

Even though social media was instrumental to his rise , Trump for years had accused platforms like Facebook , Twitter and others of censorship . In 2021 , he was permanently removed from most major sites for his role in inciting the insurrection at the Capitol . In response , he promised to launch his own firm , establishing Trump Media & Technology Group ( TMTG ) and positioning his new company as a champion of free speech . 

Advertisement 
 
 “ Our main goal here is to give people their voice back ,  ” said former Republican US congressman Devin Nunes , who became TMTG ’ s president earlier this year , adding that the app offers “ the opposite of some Silicon Valley tech oligarch freak telling people what they want to think and deciding who can or cannot be on the platform .  ” 

But experts say Trump ’ s new venture faces an uphill battle to attract users in a crowded field , and is looking at mounting regulatory issues . 

Off to a rocky start
Truth Social had been available to some users in a test phase since early last week , and became available to the general public in Apple ’ s App store late Sunday night . The app quickly became the top-downloaded free social networking app . But even as it rose in popularity , it ran up against a number of tech setbacks . 

Early users reported receiving error messages when attempting to create accounts . Many of those who were ultimately able to register reported they were not able to actually enter the app , being told they had been placed on a waitlist of hundreds of thousands of people . 

Others reported the app ’ s “ terms of service ” page was down and the company confirmed that on Monday it experienced a 13-hour partial outage related to “ application launch traffic ”  . 

As of Wednesday morning , Trump ’ s account on Truth Social had just under 50 , 000 followers , according to the New York Times . Users on Thursday reported being told they were 600 , 000th in line to join . 

Nunes told reporters that the app would be “ fully operational ” in the US by the end of March , several months behind the launch date the former president had put forth when announcing the platform . 

 ‘ A big part of Trump ’ s appeal is conflict ’ 
Advertisement

To observers , the delay and technological challenges did not come as a surprise .  “ Since Trump wants to run for office again , the timeline of the app is driven by political objectives – not by readiness of the platform ,  ” said Jennifer Grygiel , a professor of communications at Syracuse University . 

Truth Social has been pegged as an attempt by Trump to reclaim the massive power of his social media empire of the past . The former president , when he was removed from Twitter , had a direct line to speak to his 88 millon followers . At his height , a single tweet from Trump could launch a cable news cycle , and move the stock market . Trump ’ s “ first post ” on Truth Social read “ Get Ready ! Your favorite President will see you soon !  ” But whether his new platform will provide him the megaphone he seeks remains to be seen . 

The TRUTH is out there … in the ‘ non-cancellable ’ community . 
A ‘ non-cancellable ’ community : the ‘ truth ’ about Trump ’ s social media platform
Read more
Truth Social will need to go toe-to-toe with bigger social media players like Facebook and Twitter , which have had years to build up loyal bases . 

Meanwhile , newer “ free speech ” startups including Parler , MeWe , Gettr , and Rumble are crowding the field and competing for a similar pool of social media users . 

The user base of those platforms , and the one Trump is eying , seeks partisan feeds , but such activity may not actually be good for business , said Paul Barrett , deputy director at New York University ’ s Stern Center for Business and Human Rights .  
 
 “ A big part of Trump ’ s appeal on social media is conflict ,  ” he said .  “ The right wing often goes back to this idea of ‘ owning the libs ’ – well , there are not going to be any libs to own on Truth Social , which begs the question , why is this going to be interesting ?  ” 

Others have pointed out that the supposed main selling point of Truth Social – that it is an anti-censorship alternative to “ mainstream ” media – doesn ’ t hold up to scrutiny . These skeptics point to the app ’ s terms of service – which , according to Mike Masnick of Techdirt , imply the site will be “ one of the most aggressive in moderating content ”  . 

In its rules , Truth Social promises to take down any content that is “ false , inaccurate , or misleading ” and says users need to “ have the written consent , release , and / or permission of each and every identifiable individual person ” in every post . 

 ‘ Everything has a grifter angle ’ 
Truth Social may face additional challenges . The platform shows an eerie resemblance to Twitter , with a nearly identical layout but different labels , swapping terms like “ truths ” for “ tweets ” and “ re-truths ” for “ retweets ”  . 


Advertisement

Twitter declined to comment about whether it planned to pursue any action against Truth Social for copyright infringement . 

Trump Media also has to confront financial and regulatory hurdles to access millions of dollars in funding . In 2021 it announced a merger with Digital World Acquisition Corp ( DWAC )  , a special purpose acquisition company , through which it stands to receive $293m in cash . 

But the merger is stalled pending scrutiny from the Securities and Exchange Commission and the US Financial Industry Regulatory Authority . 

TMTG raised an additional $1bn from private investors , which also will not be available until the DWAC deal closes – which could be months away , according to regulatory filings . 

Those mergers and deals have led some to say that Truth Social , like many Trump ventures in the past , is simply a shameless money grab .  
 
 “ Everything Trump does has a grifter angle to it ,  ” Barrett said .  “ We all may be spinning our wheels wondering about how the app is to affect Trump politically , or as a potential vehicle for his reconquering social media , when he just may be in it for a quick profit .  ” 