The data game : what Amazon knows about you and how to stop it
The tech giant has many ways of gathering information about its users ’ activity – from Prime to Alexa . But how much can it collect and what can you do to keep your life private ? 

Kate O ' Flaherty
Sun 27 Feb 2022 11 . 00 GMT
From selling books out of Jeff Bezos ’ s garage to a global conglomerate with a yearly revenue topping $400bn ( £290bn )  , much of the monstrous growth of Amazon has been fuelled by its customers ’ data . Continuous analysis of customer data determines , among other things , prices , suggested purchases and what profitable own-label products Amazon chooses to produce . The 200 million users who are Amazon Prime members are not only the corporation ’ s most valuable customers but also their richest source of user data . The more Amazon and services you use – whether it ’ s the shopping app , the Kindle e-reader , the Ring doorbell , Echo smart speaker or the Prime streaming service – the more their algorithms can infer what kind of person you are and what you are most likely to buy next . The firm ’ s software is so accomplished at prediction that third parties can hire its algorithms as a service called Amazon Forecast . 

Advertisement
Not everyone is happy about this level of surveillance . Those who have requested their data from Amazon are astonished by the vast amounts of information they are sent , including audio files from each time they speak to the company ’ s voice assistant , Alexa . 

Like its data-grabbing counterparts Google and Facebook , Amazon ’ s practices have come under the scrutiny of regulators . Last year , Amazon was hit with a $886 . 6m ( £636m ) fine for processing personal data in violation of EU data protection rules , which it is appealing against . And a recent Wired investigation showed concerning privacy and security failings at the tech giant . 

So , what data does Amazon collect and share and what can you do to stop it ? 

The data Amazon collects , according to its privacy policy
Strict EU regulation in the General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR ) and UK equivalent the Data Protection Act limit the ways personal data can be used in Europe compared with the US . But , according to Amazon ’ s privacy policy , the tech giant still collects a large amount of information . This covers three areas : information you give Amazon , data it collects automatically and information from other sources such as delivery data from carriers . 

Amazon can collect your name , address , searches and recordings when you speak to the Alexa voice assistant . It knows your orders , content you watch on Prime , your contacts if you upload them and communications with it via email . Meanwhile , when you use its website , cookie trackers are used to “ enhance your shopping experience ” and improve its services , Amazon says . 

How often you look up words on the Kindle e-reader might indicate how literate you are in a certain language
Some of the data is used for “ personalisation ” – big tech speak for using your data to improve your online experience – but it can reveal a lot about you . For example , if you just use its online retail site via the app or website , Amazon will collect data such as purchase dates and payment and delivery information . 

Advertisement 
 
 “ From this information , Amazon can work out where you work , where you live , how you spend your leisure time and who your family and friends are ,  ” says Rowenna Fielding , director of data protection consultancy Miss IG Geek . 

At the same time , Prime Video and Fire TV information about what you watch and listen to can reveal your politics , religion , culture and economic status , says Fielding . If you use Amazon to store your photos , a facial recognition feature is enabled by default , she says .  “ Amazon promises not to share facial recognition data with third parties . But it makes no such commitment about other types of photo data , such as geolocation tags , device information or attributes of people and objects featured in images .  ” 

Amazon Photos does not sell customer information and data to third parties or use content for ad targeting , an Amazon spokesperson says , insisting the feature is for ease of use . You also have the option to turn the feature off in the Amazon Photos app or on the website . 

Meanwhile , Amazon ’ s Kindle e-reader will collect data such as what you read , when , how fast you read , what you ’ ve highlighted and book genres .  “ This could reveal a lot about your thoughts , feelings , preferences and beliefs ,  ” says Fielding , pointing out that how often you look up words might indicate how literate you are in a certain language . 

Smart speakers have been criticised by privacy advocates and devices such as Amazon ’ s Echo have been known to be activated accidentally . But Amazon says its Echo devices are designed to record “ as little audio as possible ”  . 

No audio is stored or sent to the cloud unless the device detects the wake word and the audio stream is closed immediately after a request has ended , an Amazon spokesperson says . 

More broadly , Amazon says much of the information it collects is needed to keep its products working properly . An Amazon spokesperson says the company is “ thoughtful about the information we collect ”  . 

But it can add up to a lot of data . In 2020 , a BBC investigation showed how every motion detected by its Ring doorbells and each interaction with the app is stored , including the model of phone or tablet and mobile network used . Ring can share your stored data with law enforcement , if you give your consent or if a warrant is issued . 

How Amazon shares data across its own services
The more services you use , the bigger Amazon ’ s opportunity to collect your data .  “ If you have bought fully into the Amazon experience , you will share details , habits and information that the company will collect and potentially use to ‘ enhance your experience ’  ,  ” says Richard Hale , a senior lecturer in digital forensics at Birmingham City University . 

Advertisement

But what exactly is shared within its own companies isn ’ t clear . The privacy policy section on data sharing within the Amazon group of companies is “ pretty limited ”  , says Will Richmond-Coggan , an information and privacy law specialist at Freeths LLP . Taking this into account , he says , people should “ assume that any information shared with one Amazon entity will be known to any other ”  . 

How Amazon shares your data with third parties
Like Google and Facebook , Amazon operates an advertising network allowing advertisers to use its customer data for targeting .  
 
 “ Although Amazon doesn ’ t share information that can directly identify someone , such as a name or email address , it does allow advertisers to target by demographic , location , interests and previous purchases ,  ” says Paul Bischoff , privacy advocate at Comparitech . 

Amazon lets other companies track users visiting its website , says Wolfie Christl , a researcher who investigates the data industry .  “ It lets companies such as Google and Facebook ‘ tag ’ people and synchronise identifiers that refer to them . These companies can then potentially better track people on the web and exchange data on them .  ” 

Amazon says it doesn ’ t sell your data to third parties or use personally identifiable information such as your name or email for advertising purposes . Advertising audiences are only available within its ads systems and cannot be exported and you can opt out of ad targeting via its advertising preferences page . 

What you can do to stop Amazon collecting data
Amazon ’ s data collection is so vast that the only way to stop it completely is not to use the service at all . That requires a lot of dedication but there are some ways to reduce the amount of data collected and shared . 

If you value alternatives to Amazon , now is a good time to use them . 
How to avoid Amazon : the definitive guide to online shopping – without the retail titan
Read more
If you are concerned about what Amazon knows about you , you can ask the company for a copy of your data by applying under a “ data subject access request ”  . The Alexa assistant and Ring doorbell have their own privacy hubs that allow you to delete recordings and adjust privacy settings . Ring ’ s Control Centre allows you to tweak settings including who ’ s able to see and access your videos and personal information from a central dashboard . Speaking to Alexa , you can say :  “ Alexa , delete what I just said ” or :  “ Alexa , delete everything I said today .  ” 

Amazon says it allows customers to view their browsing and purchase history from “ Your Account ” and manage which items can be used for product recommendations . More broadly , you can also use privacy-focused browsers such as DuckDuckGo or Brave to stop Amazon from tracking you . 

But it ’ s not always easy to change the settings on Amazon itself , says Chris Boyd , lead analyst at security company Malwarebytes . He recommends turning off browsing history on Amazon and opting out of interest-based ads to reduce the level of tracking by the company . Yet he warns :  “ You ’ ll likely still see ads from Amazon or encounter third-party advertisers in one form or another – they just won ’ t be as targeted .  ” 