World ' s first electric plane start up parts ways with CEO in mysterious rift
By Jennifer Korn , CNN Business

Updated 1724 GMT ( 0124 HKT ) February 17 , 2022
Eviation , the company behind what is supposed to be the world ' s first all-electric passenger airplane , has undergone an unexpected change in leadership just before the plane ' s projected first flight -- and the company and the now-former CEO are offering different takes on the situation . 

Eviation , an Israel-based company , has said it plans three versions of its all-electric plane : a " commuter " variant holding nine passengers and two pilots , an executive version holding six passengers , and one specialized for cargo . The company has said the nine-passenger version , which it calls " Alice ,  " will be able to fly for one hour and about 440 nautical miles after 30 minutes of charging . 
Eviation initially aimed for the Alice to take flight before 2022 , but said poor weather conditions in the Pacific Northwest at the end of the year had hindered testing . The Alice has been undergoing several taxi tests since late 2021 , and last month then-CEO Omer Bar-Yohay told CNN Business that its first flight was " just weeks away .  " Bar-Yohay did not mention an impending CEO shift at that time . 
On Monday , Bar-Yohay , who was also a co-founder of Eviation , left the company after seven years , and he was replaced by interim CEO and current Eviation president Gregory Davis . The company says the change is part of a " planned succession process " as Eviation shifts from planning to production of the Alice , according to a statement . An executive search process is underway to fill the CEO position long-term , it said . 
But Bar-Yohay said that while it is time for a new direction , his departure is the result of a dispute within the company .  
 " This is definitely part of a natural progression . It is time for the company to turn a corner and really transition from proving our prototype to manufacturing ,  " Bar-Yohay told CNN Business .  " That said , there is a long-standing disagreement about how and what exactly does the company need to do going forward , and that created some friction between myself and the main shareholder of the company .  " 
Bar-Yohay declined to answer questions as to the nature of the disagreement . While Bar-Yohay said the change is not a big shock , he had not been aware of how and when it would be announced . 
Alice , the first all-electric passenger airplane , prepares to fly 
Alice , the first all-electric passenger airplane , prepares to fly
Eviation ' s main shareholder is Richard Chandler , the New Zealand-born billionaire owner of the Clermont Group . The Singapore-based Clermont Group includes MagniX , Eviation ' s sister company and propulsion provider . Just last month , Eviation executive chairman and MagniX CEO Roei Ganzarski stepped down from both roles .  " I do believe some of the underlying reasons [ for our departures ] are similar ,  " Bar-Yohay said .  " There was no way to make this go any differently .  " The Clermont Group has not responded to multiple requests for comment . 
Though Ganzarski has not commented on the reasons behind his own departure from both companies , he made the announcement last month " with a heavy heart ,  " according to a post on his LinkedIn .  " I have no doubt that the future of aviation is electric . It has to be for the sake of our children and grandchildren . It is no longer a question of if , but only when and who . I leave magniX and Eviation positioned to continue their leadership in this field .  " 
Ganzarski did not comment when asked if his exit was due to the same circumstances Bar-Yohay describes .  " Omer did a tremendous job building a leading aerospace company and phenomenal aircraft with very limited resources ,  " Ganzarski told CNN Business when asked about the leadership change .  " I am very proud of what he and his team did .  " 
Bar-Yohay will remain involved with Eviation as a board member and investor moving forward , he has said . 