Trump social media app gearing up for launch
729627 CNN Digital Expansion Washington DC 2020 , Brian Fung
By Brian Fung , CNN Business

Updated 1606 GMT ( 0006 HKT ) February 17 , 2022
Conservative figures are increasingly promoting Truth Social , the alternative social media app backed by former President Donald Trump , as the platform undergoes pre-launch testing . 

And as more images of the app have surfaced , the more Truth Social appears to be a direct clone of Twitter ( TWTR )  , the social network of choice for Trump before he was kicked off the platform . 
On Tuesday , Donald Trump Jr . tweeted a purported screenshot of the app , showing what appeared to be the former president ' s first post on the service .  
 " Get Ready ! Your favorite President will see you soon !  " the elder Trump ' s message said . 
Does kicking bad actors off social media platforms work ? 

Does kicking bad actors off social media platforms work ? 04 : 29
A larger screenshot of the same post shared by Liz Willis , an executive at Right Side Broadcasting , a conservative media company , appeared to reveal much more of the app , including a layout that closely resembles Twitter , down to the engagement buttons beneath every post .  
 " Beta testing the new ' Truth Social ' app and all I can say is , y ' all are going to LOVE it !  " Willis said in a separate tweet . 
Willis told Reuters she received an email Tuesday stating that " T Media Tech LLC has invited you to test Truth Social .  " There are said to be about 500 beta testers using an early version of " Truth Social ,  " according to Reuters , citing two unnamed sources . 
On Tuesday , the YouTube alternative Rumble — which is popular with conservatives — announced its first post on Truth Social , saying that its technology would help display videos on the new platform . 
Truth Social ' s page on Apple ' s App Store continues to display an expected official launch date of Feb . 21 , President ' s Day — though the actual release could come later . 
The app ' s looming release comes a year after major social media services including Facebook ( FB )  , Twitter and YouTube suspended Trump following the Jan . 6 Capitol riot . After leaving the White House , Trump went on to found the conservative media entity behind Truth Social , Trump Media and Technology Group . 
Former Rep . Devin Nunes , who left Congress to become the media group ' s CEO , said Wednesday that the beta testing for Truth Social involves " bringing people on the platform very , very slowly " but that " every day we bring on more and more people .  "  
 "  [ We ' re ] trying to do it methodically because we ' re having to build this from scratch in order to make sure we can ' t be canceled and can ' t be shut down ,  " Nunes told Sebastian Gorka , Trump ' s former deputy national security adviser , in an interview on Gorka ' s podcast . 
Nunes added that he expects Truth Social to be fully open to the public by the end of March . 
Additional reporting from Reuters . 