Virgin Hyperloop to focus on cargo , not people
By Jane Wakefield
Technology reporter

Published 13 hours ago
Share
Virgin Hyperloop pod
IMAGE SOURCE , VIRGIN HYERLOOP
Image caption , 
Virgin says the pods could reach speeds of over 1 , 000km / h
Virgin Hyperloop , a futuristic train service that promised a new era of travel for passengers , will be focusing on cargo instead , it has revealed . 

The company told BBC News the change in direction was due to global supply-chain issues and Covid . 

The Financial Times , which first reported the story , said it had also laid off more than 100 staff members . 

Experts have expressed doubts about the engineering challenges and practicalities of Hyperloop travel . 

The company said :  " The global supply chain has experienced dramatic changes in the past year , due in part to the worldwide pandemic .  
 
 " Virgin Hyperloop as a company is responding to strong customer demand for a cargo-based hyperloop system and is focusing its resources on delivering this product .  " 


Its long-term vision remained to " address passenger mobility "  , the company added . 

Magnetic tracks
DP World , a logistics provider owned by the Dubai government and a majority stakeholder in Virgin Hyperloop , told the Financial Times that " focusing on pallets is easier to do - there is less risk for passengers and less of a regulatory process "  . 

The idea of a Hyperloop was first conceived by tech entrepreneur Elon Musk , who suggested the idea of a high-speed transport system in a vacuum tube in a 2013 research paper . 

The pods would travel through the tubes at more than 600mph ( 1 , 000km / h ) on magnetic tracks , similar to those used by existing Maglev trains . 

There are several firms working to make the vision a reality , including Hyperloop Transportation Technologies and Virgin Hyperloop . 

Initially founded as Hyperloop Technologies in 2014 , the firm became Virgin Hyperloop when British billionaire Richard Branson invested $85m ( £62m ) in the business in 2017 . 

At the time it was hailed as " the world ' s most revolutionary train service "  . 

In late 2020 , the firm unveiled its vision for the future of Hyperloop travel - with a video taking people through a typical journey " from arriving at the portal to boarding the pod "  . 

Virgin Hyperloop test-track in Nevada
IMAGE SOURCE , VIRGIN HYPERLOOP
Image caption , 
Two passengers rode in a pod on the Virgin Hyperloop test-track in the Nevada desert
Sultan Bin Sulayem , the chairman of the firm , called it " the first new mass-scale transportation mode in a century .  " 

Virgin is the only company to have completed a successful passenger ride using hyperloop technology so far . It took two passengers - both company staff - on a 500m test-track , reaching speeds of 107mph ( 172km / h ) in November 2020 . 

But many felt the technology was more hype than Hyperloop . 

At present , the transport system is unable to cope with corners , so the tracks have to run in a straight line . 

Moreover , the costs of building such systems at scale would run into the billions . 