Ukraine : EU deploys cyber rapid-response team
By Joe Tidy
Cyber reporter
A cyber rapid-response team ( CRRT ) is being deployed across Europe , after a call for help from Ukraine . 

The newly formed team of eight to 12 experts , from Lithuania , Croatia , Poland , Estonia , Romania , and the Netherlands , has committed to help defend Ukraine from cyber-attacks - remotely and on site in the country . 

An official warned attacks were likely .  
 
 " We can see that cyber-measures are an important part of Russia ' s hybrid toolkit ,  " the CRRT official said . 

It comes after the UK and the US blamed Russia for cyber-attacks earlier this month that temporarily took a small number of Ukrainian banking and government websites offline . 

Why is Putin ordering troops into Ukraine ? 
UK warned to bolster defences against cyber attacks
EU wants emergency team for cyber-attacks
The Lithuanian Ministry of Defence tweeted :  " In response to Ukraine request ,  [ we ] are activating [ a ] Lithuanian-led cyber rapid-response team , which will help Ukrainian institutions to cope with growing cyber-threats .  # StandWithUkraine .  " 

CRRTs are a European Union initiative to deepen defence and co-operation between member states . 

They are said to be equipped with commonly developed cyber-toolkits designed to detect , recognise and mitigate cyber-threats . 

An official said the team was " composed of different cyber-expertise , such as incident response , forensics , vulnerability assessment , to be able to react to a variety of scenarios "  . 

Russia has previously been accused of so-called hybrid warfare , combining cyber-attacks with traditional military activity , in Georgia and Crimea . 


Media caption , 
Experts have been warning for years it is a matter of when - rather than if - hackers will kill somebody
The EU and Ukraine blamed Russia after thousands of people in multiple cities in Ukraine experienced power cuts , in 2015 and 2016 , when hackers temporarily shut off electricity substations . 

The US , UK and EU also blamed it for the hugely disruptive NotPetya wiper attack . 

Experts say about 2 , 000 NotPetya attacks were launched in 2017 , mainly aimed at Ukraine but the malicious software spread globally , causing billions of dollars of damage to computer systems across Europe , Asia , and the Americas . 

Moscow denies being behind the attack , calling such claims " Russophobic "  . 