Elon Musk says Starlink internet service ‘ active ’ in Ukraine
Billionaire says satellite broadband service is available in Ukraine , as Russian attacks disrupt the internet . 

Tesla CEO Elon Musk speaks before unveiling the Model Y
Musk said on January 15 that SpaceX had 1 , 469 Starlink satellites active and 272 moving to operational orbits soon [ File : Jae C . Hong / AP Photo ] 
Published On 27 Feb 2022
27 Feb 2022
SpaceX billionaire Elon Musk says the company ’ s Starlink satellite broadband service is available in Ukraine and SpaceX is sending more terminals to the country , whose internet has been disrupted due to the Russian invasion .  
 
 “ Starlink service is now active in Ukraine . More terminals en route ,  ” Musk wrote on Twitter on Saturday . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
NATO bolsters arms supply to Ukraine with anti-tank weapons
list 2 of 4
Ukraine : A view from a city ‘ frozen in horror ’ 
list 3 of 4
Chechen leader , a Putin ally , says his forces deployed to Ukraine
list 4 of 4
Romania on edge as Russia invades Ukraine
end of list
He was responding to a tweet by a Ukrainian government official who asked Musk to provide the embattled country with Starlink stations .  
 
 “  @ elonmusk , while you try to colonize Mars – Russia try to occupy Ukraine ! While your rockets successfully land from space – Russian rockets attack Ukrainian civil people !  ” Ukraine ’ s vice prime minister , Mykhailo Fedorov , said on Twitter . 



Internet connectivity in Ukraine has been affected by the Russian invasion , particularly in the southern and eastern parts of the country where fighting has been heaviest , internet monitors said on Saturday . 

While extremely costly to deploy , satellite technology can provide internet for people who live in rural or hard-to-serve places where fibre-optic cables and cell towers do not reach . The technology can also be a critical backstop when hurricanes or other natural disasters disrupt communication . 

Musk said on January 15 that SpaceX had 1 , 469 Starlink satellites active and 272 moving to operational orbits soon . 