CES is back on in Las Vegas , but who will go in person ? 
Several big tech companies have opted not to attend CES in person . 

People walk around the Las Vegas Convention Center during pduring preparations for the 2019 CES
The Consumer Technology Association ' s last physical electronics show in January 2020 pumped an estimated $300m into the economy of Las Vegas , Nevada , the United States [ File : John Locher / AP ] 
Published On 3 Jan 2022
3 Jan 2022
Is anyone going to CES this year ? 

A long-simmering question in the tech world will finally get its answer as the influential gadget show returns to the Las Vegas Strip after a hiatus caused by the COVID-19 pandemic . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Elon Musk says Starlink internet service ‘ active ’ in Ukraine
list 2 of 4
UK-based scientists smash nuclear fusion energy record
list 3 of 4
SpaceX satellites are tumbling out of orbit after solar storm
list 4 of 4
Pegasus : What you need to know about Israeli spyware
end of list 
 “ We know it will be a smaller show this year , for obvious reasons ,  ” said Jean Foster , senior vice president at the Consumer Technology Association ( CTA )  , the event ’ s organiser . Several huge tech companies have abandoned plans to attend in person . The latest sign of its dwindling size was Friday ’ s announcement that CES will run one day shorter than originally planned . 

The sprawling exhibition floors open Wednesday as the spread of COVID-19 ’ s Omicron variant has heightened concerns about the safety of indoor events and international travel . The CTA by late December was anticipating between 50 , 000 and 75 , 000 attendees for this week ’ s conference , down from more than 170 , 000 who came for the last in-person gathering two years ago . 


Some die-hard CES devotees were mulling over the choice to go or stay home right up until last week .  
 
 “ An online CES is not a real CES ,  ” said Prince Constantijn of the Kingdom of the Netherlands , in a December interview .  “ You ’ ve got to see the products and meet the people .  ” But a week later , the royal who regularly serves as a special envoy for Dutch technology startups had opted to stay home after all . His country is sending a barebones crew to CES 2022 . So are many big tech companies — if they send anyone at all . 

A worker helps set up a booth before CES International in January 2020The CTA took CES online in 2021 as COVID-19 hospitalisations were spiking around the world and vaccines weren ’ t yet widely available [ File : John Locher / AP ] 
The last physical CES in January 2020 pumped an estimated $300m into the Las Vegas economy . Few attendees would have known then about the coronavirus outbreak emerging in central China and still months away from being declared a pandemic . The CTA took the conference online in 2021 as COVID-19 hospitalisations were spiking around the world and vaccines weren ’ t yet widely available . 

The trade group announced eight months ago it was ready to come back to Nevada in 2022 but would offer options for remote participants to see some of it virtually . Those who do travel to CES are required to show they are fully vaccinated and will be given a COVID-19 test kit . Masks are required inside .  
 
 “ CES is maybe the most significant event economically of the year in terms of conventions ,  ” said Alan Feldman , a former casino executive who is a fellow at the International Gaming Institute at the University of Nevada , Las Vegas . Even a significantly reduced event will be “ something to look forward to ” for local hotels , restaurants , casinos , retailers and entertainment crews , Feldman said . 

With a smaller audience and the same sprawling footprint occupied by some 2 , 000 exhibitors , and a desire to keep people distanced , the CTA ’ s Foster said the “ main change for people ” will be more empty space and wider aisles . 

Much about the Omicron coronavirus variant remains unknown , including whether it causes more or less severe illness . Scientists say Omicron spreads even more easily than other coronavirus strains , including Delta . 

Even without a pandemic to dampen the party , tech industry analyst Carolina Milanesi said “ big industry events like this are becoming less important than they used to be ” as digital technology has supplied other ways to network and keep up with trends . 


CES used to stand for Consumer Electronics Show , but Milanesi said the decades-old gathering has become less a place to find the next line of consumer gadgetry and more focused on longer-term technology cycles , like self-driving cars or the artificial intelligence applications being fused into smart homes and cities .  
 
 “ You no longer go to CES to see what ’ s going to be in the Best Buy near you by summer ,  ” Milanesi said . 

New expo categories centred around the digital assets called non-fungible tokens , or NFTs , as well as space technology and food , reflect the latest tech buzzwords on the minds of investors and marketers . Some companies also plan to hype their vision for the next generation of the internet – a collection of virtual worlds known as the metaverse — though explored from the confines of a physical convention floor . 

Milanesi has regularly attended CES for a decade to keep an eye on tech companies and trends , but public health concerns led her to mull over whether she ’ d go this time . She made a final decision in mid-December to attend , but plans to do things differently — visiting the exhibition halls but skipping big speaking events she can watch from her hotel room . 
 
 
 “ I haven ’ t decided yet on the cocktail hours ,  ” she said .  “ That ’ s a big reason to go to CES and meet people face to face . With a glass in your hand , people get a little more comfortable discussing things .  ” 