UK firms warned of Russian cyberwar ‘ spillover ’ from Ukraine
Meetings held on threat posed , particularly to critical infrastructure , and how it could be tackled

Ukraine crisis : live updates
An cyber-attacks illustration . 
Cyber-attacks illustration . Last week an attack tried to disrupt customer services at two Ukrainian banks and the defence ministry website . Photograph : Dado Ruvić / Reuters
Dan Sabbagh Defence and security edior
Wed 23 Feb 2022 15 . 20 GMT

British officials are concerned about “ spillover ” from any heightened Russian cyber-activity in Ukraine , as demonstrated by last week ’ s attack on two banks by hackers linked to the GRU spy agency . 

Although there have been no Ukraine-related Russian attacks on the UK since the start of the crisis , cyber-specialists have been holding meetings with key companies to discuss the possible threat and how it could be tackled .  
 
 “ Organisations need to understand there is a heightened risk ,  ” said one official , with a particular focus on monitoring whether an intense Russian cyber-attack on Ukrainian targets could have wider consequences . 

Advertisement

Jeremy Fleming , the head of the spy agency GCHQ , held a roundtable last week to discuss the threat with organisations responsible for Britain ’ s “ critical national infrastructure ”  , which includes the communications , energy , food , health and transport sectors . 

Ukraine has been a target for regular Russian cyber-attacks since the start of the war in 2014 and last week was hit with a “ sophisticated ” attack that tried to disrupt customer services at two Ukrainian banks and the website of the defence ministry . 

On Friday , the NCSC , Britain ’ s cybersecurity agency , said it believed Russia ’ s GRU military intelligence was behind the “ denial of service ” attack . But although relatively serious , officials believe it was “ not necessarily a precursor ” for a military offensive or enhanced cyber-action . 

A recent NCSC briefing , which is considered still valid , said :  “ While the NCSC is not aware of any current specific threats to UK organisations in relation to events in and around Ukraine , there has been an historical pattern of cyber-attacks on Ukraine with international consequences .  ” 

In 2017 , Russian state actors launched the NotPetya malware against Ukrainian companies , but it spread indiscriminately around the world , affecting a string of western companies and even some Russian corporations . Western spy agencies have previously said that attack was also conducted by GRU operatives . 

Ukraine ’ s long experience in dealing with cyber-attacks – two of which , in 2015 and 2016 , briefly disrupted some power supplies – means that western officials believe Kyiv is relatively experienced at picking up the pieces after a damaging attack . 

Nevertheless , the UK and the US have been helping the country ’ s cybersecurity agencies , as the crisis has intensified . On Tuesday , six EU countries said they , too , would offer further assistance . 

A western official said :  “ We share our understanding of the threats and we have and continue to make them aware of threats .  ” 