 ‘ Auction ’ of India ’ s Muslim women shows tech weaponised for abuse
Technologies such as deepfake and tracking used to harass women as victims struggle to be taken seriously or get justice . 

Police escort woman and man accused of involvement in online abuse in Mumbai
Police officials escort a woman and a man at a court following their arrest over alleged involvement in an online app that shared pictures of Muslim women for a virtual ' auction ' in Mumbai [ Niharika Kulkarni / Reuters ] 
Published On 10 Jan 2022
10 Jan 2022
Six months ago , pilot Hana Khan saw her picture on an app that appeared to be “ auctioning ” dozens of Muslim women in India . The app was quickly taken down , no one was charged , and the issue shelved – until a similar app popped up on New Year ’ s Day . 

Khan was not on the new app called Bulli Bai – a slur for Muslim women – that was hawking activists , journalists , an actor , politicians and Nobel Laureate Malala Yousafzai as maids . 

KEEP READING
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Alleged creator of app ‘ selling ’ Muslim women arrested in India
list 2 of 4
India police make arrests in online ‘ auction ’ of Muslim women
list 3 of 4
Bulli Bai : India ’ s Muslim women again listed on app for ‘ auction ’ 
list 4 of 4
Sulli Deals : Indian Muslim women offered for sale in ‘ auction ’ 
end of list
Amid growing outrage , the app was taken down , and four suspects were arrested last week . 

Police escort a 20-year-old man through New Delhi airport after he was arrested in the eastern state of Assam over allegedly creating an online app ' selling ' Muslim women . Police officials escort Niraj Bishnoi , a 20-year-old man after he was arrested in the eastern state of Assam over allegedly creating Bulli Bai app [ Reuters ] 
The fake auctions that were shared widely on social media are just the latest examples of how technology is being used – often with ease , speed and little expense – to put women at risk through online abuse , theft of privacy or sexual exploitation . 

For Muslim women in India who are often abused online , it is an everyday risk , even as they use social media to call out hatred and discrimination against their minority community .  
 
 “ When I saw my picture on the app , my world shook . I was upset and angry that someone could do this to me , and I became angrier as I realised this nameless person was getting away with it ,  ” said Khan , who filed a police complaint against the first app , Sulli Deals , another pejorative term for Muslim women .  
 
 “ This time , I felt so much dread and despair that it was happening again to my friends , to Muslim women like me . I don ’ t know how to make it stop ,  ” Khan , a commercial pilot in her 30s , told the Thomson Reuters Foundation . 

1 . 00
Play Video
Video Duration 02 minutes 46 seconds
02 : 46
Bulli Bai : Indian Muslim women listed ‘ for sale ’ on auction app
Mumbai police said they were investigating whether the Bulli Bai app was “ part of a larger conspiracy ”  . 

A spokesperson for GitHub , which hosted both apps , said it had “ longstanding policies against content and conduct involving harassment , discrimination , and inciting violence .  
 
 “ We suspended a user account following the investigation of reports of such activity , all of which violate our policies .  ” 

Misconception
Advances in technology have heightened risks for women across the world , be it trolling or doxxing with their personal details revealed , surveillance cameras , location tracking , or deepfake pornographic videos featuring doctored images . 

Deepfakes – or artificial , intelligence-generated , synthetic media – are used to create pornography , with apps that let users strip clothes off women or replace images of their faces in explicit videos . 

Digital abuse of women is pervasive because “ everybody has a device and a digital presence ,  ” said Adam Dodge , the chief executive of EndTAB , a United States-based nonprofit tackling tech-enabled abuse .  
 
 “ The violence has become easier to perpetrate , as you can get at somebody anywhere in the world . The order of magnitude of harm is also greater because you can upload something and show it to the world in a matter of seconds ,  ” he said .  
 
 “ And there is a permanency to it because that photo or video exists forever online ,  ” he added . 

Police officials escort man and woman over Bulli Bai appPolice officials escort a man and a woman after they appeared before a court in Mumbai following their arrest over alleged involvement in Bulli Bai app [ Niharika Kulkarni / Reuters ] 
The emotional and psychological effect of such abuse is “ just as excruciating ” as physical abuse , with the effects compounded by the virality , public nature , and permanence of the content online , said Noelle Martin , an Australian activist . 

At 17 , Martin discovered her image had been digitally altered into pornographic images and distributed . Her campaign against image-based abuse helped change the law in Australia . 

But victims struggle to be heard , she said .  
 
 “ There is a dangerous misconception that the harms of technology-facilitated abuse are not as real , serious , or potentially lethal as abuse with a physical element ,  ” she said .  
 
 “ For victims , this misconception makes speaking out , seeking support , and accessing justice much more difficult .  ” 

Persecution
Tracking lone creators and rogue coders is hard , and technology platforms tend to shield anonymous users who can easily create a fake email or social media profile . 

Even legislators are not spared : in November , the US House of Representatives censured Republican Paul Gosar over a digitally altered anime video that showed him killing Democrat Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez . He then retweeted the video .  
 
 “ With any new technology we should immediately be thinking about how and when it will be misused and weaponised to harm girls and women online ,  ” said Dodge .  
 
 “ Technology platforms have created a very imbalanced atmosphere for victims of online abuse , and the traditional ways of seeking help when we are harmed in the physical world are not as available when the abuse occurs online ,  ” he said . 

Some technology firms are taking action . 

Following reports that its AirTags – locator devices that can be attached to keys and wallets – were being used to track women , Apple launched an app to help users shield their privacy . 

In India , the women on the auction apps are still shaken . 

Ismat Ara , a journalist showcased on Bulli Bai , called it “ nothing short of online harassment ”  . 

It was “ violent , threatening and intending to create a feeling of fear and shame in my mind , as well as in the minds of women in general and the Muslim community ,  ” Ara said in a police complaint that she posted on social media . 

Arfa Khanum Sherwani , also featured for sale , wrote on Twitter :  “ The auction may be fake but the persecution is real .  ” 