Tyrannosaurus rex may have been three species , scientists say
Experts say there is enough variation in samples to argue there was also a Tyrannosaurus imperator and a regina

A Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton at the French National Museum of Natural History in Paris
A Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton at the French National Museum of Natural History in Paris . Photograph : Philippe Wojazer / Reuters
Nicola Davis Science correspondent 
@ NicolaKSDavis
Tue 1 Mar 2022 01 . 00 GMT
With its immense size , dagger-like teeth and sharp claws , Tyrannosaurus rex was a fearsome predator that once terrorised North America . Now researchers studying its fossils have suggested the beast may not have been the only tyrannosaurus species . 

Experts studying remains thought to belong to T rex have suggested their variation shows evidence of not one species but three . 

The lead author of the research , Gregory Paul , who was a dinosaur specialist on the film Jurassic Park , said the findings had multiple implications , noting that previously experts had studied the growth of the T rex using remains from different rock layers . 

Advertisement 
 “ That may not be a good idea to do because you may be [ looking at ] different species ,  ” he said . 

The team say it is to be expected that more than one tyrannosaurus species evolved over their million-or-so years on Earth , as has been found for other dinosaurs who lived at the same time , such as triceratops . 

Writing in the journal Evolutionary Biology , Paul and colleagues report how previous work has revealed that fossilised bones designated as being from T rex vary in terms of their stout build or “ robustness ”  , and different specimens had one or two pairs of lower incisor-like teeth . 

Paul and colleagues studied a total of 37 specimens attributed to T rex , in particular looking at the length and circumference of the thigh bones , available for about two-thirds of the specimens , to assess their robustness . 

The team say their findings suggest differences in the robustness of the thigh bones are unlikely to be down to individual variation .  
 
 “ We found that the robustness in the sample we have of tyrannosaurus , the variation of the femur is greater than all other tyrannosaurids combined over 10m years of evolution ,  ” said Paul .  “ You can ’ t just not pay attention to that .  ” 

The team say the variation does not appear to be linked to the overall size of the specimen or how mature the animal was when it died , while other factors – such as the uneven ratio of more robust bones to those that were more slender , or “ gracile ” – suggests such variation is unlikely to be linked to the sex of the beasts . 

What ’ s more , fossils with more gracile bones were only found in higher layers of sediment , and these and more robust specimens found alongside them tended to have only one incisor-like tooth in the lower jaw , in contrast to the robust specimens in lower layers . 

While the team say they cannot rule out other explanations for the findings , they propose that specimens found in lower layers are probably from one species they have called Tyrannosaurus imperator , or tyrant lizard emperor ; the later , stocky-boned specimens are from Tyrannosaurus rex ; and the slender-boned specimens are from a third species the team have called Tyrannosaurus regina , or tyrant lizard queen . 

Prof Steve Brusatte , a palaeontologist at the University of Edinburgh who was not involved in the work , said he was not convinced .  
 
 “ I understand the temptation to divide T rex into different species , because there is some variation in the fossil bones that we have . But ultimately , to me , this variation is very minor and not indicative of meaningful biological separation of distinct species that can be defined based on clear , explicit , consistent differences ,  ” he said . 

FILE PHOTO : Visitors look at a 67 million year-old skeleton of a Tyrannosaurus Rex dinosaur , named Trix , during the first day of the exhibition “ A T-Rex in Paris ” at the French National Museum of Natural History in Paris < br > FILE PHOTO : Visitors look at a 67 million year-old skeleton of a Tyrannosaurus rex dinosaur named Trix during the first day of the exhibition “ A T-Rex in Paris ” at the French National Museum of Natural History in Paris , France , June 6 , 2018 . REUTERS / Philippe Wojazer / File Photo 
 ‘ That ’ s a lot of teeth ’  : 2 . 5 billion T rex walked the earth , researchers find
Read more
Advertisement

Prof Thomas Carr , a T rex expert at Carthage College in the US , also disputed the results , saying the definitions of the different species put forward by the team were vague , and the findings were at odds with his own work in which he analysed variations in 1 , 850 different features in 31 specimens .  “ I found no evidence of more than one species . And if that signal was in the data , I would have picked it up ,  ” he said . 

Carr said another concern was that the study included specimens from privately owned or commercial outfits , affecting the ability of researchers to reproduce the results . 

Nevertheless , Paul said it would be decades before there were enough museum specimens to do a statistical analysis . He said the variations were significant .  “ Other dinosaurs species have been named on less data ,  ” he said . 