Google ' s advertising tech targeted in European publishers ' complaint
By Reuters

Updated 1328 GMT ( 2128 HKT ) February 17 , 2022
Google ( GOOG ) on Friday was targeted in an antitrust complaint by the European Publishers Council over its digital advertising business , potentially strengthening EU antitrust chief Margrethe Vestager ' s investigation into the issue . 

Alphabet Inc ' s Google made $147 billion in revenue from online ads in 2020 , more than any other company in the world , with ads including search , YouTube and Gmail accounting for the bulk of its overall sales and profits . 
About 16% of its revenue came from the company ' s display or network business , in which other media companies use Google technology to sell ads on their website and apps . 
The European Commission opened an investigation in June into whether Google favours its own online display advertising technology services to the detriment of rivals , advertisers and online publishers . 
Google stock jumps 8% after blowout quarter fueled by strong ad sales
Google stock jumps 8% after blowout quarter fueled by strong ad sales
The publishers ' trade body , whose members include Axel Springer , News UK , Conde Nast , Bonnier News and Editorial Prensa Iberica , took its grievance to the European Commission , alleging Google has an adtech stranglehold over press publishers .  
 " It is high time for the European Commission to impose measures on Google that actually change , not just challenge , its behaviour ,  " EPC Chairman Christian Van Thillo said in a statement .  
 " Google has achieved end-to-end control of the ad tech value chain , boasting market shares as high as 90-100% in segments of the ad tech chain ,  " he said . 
Vestager , who has fined Google more than 8 billion euros ( $9 . 2 billion ) in recent years for anti-competitive practices in three cases , last year launched the investigation into Google ' s digital advertising business . 
Google said publishers benefit from its adtech services .  
 " When publishers choose to use our advertising services , they keep the majority of revenue and every year we pay out billions of dollars directly to the publishing partners in our ad network ,  " a Google spokesperson said . 