Simple test promises early diagnosis of debilitating skin disease
Harvard University researchers develop method to facilitate Buruli ulcer diagnosis in the field
31 July 2014 Departmental news Geneva Reading time : 2 min ( 419 words ) 
The accurate diagnosis of Buruli ulcer - one of the most devastating and debilitating neglected tropical diseases – may become common practice in a near future . 

Researchers at Harvard University in the United States have devised a rapid diagnostic test using thin-layer chromatography to detect mycolactone , the toxin that causes tissue damage in Buruli ulcer1 . Thin-layer chromatography is a commonly used technique in chemistry for identifying compounds in a given mixture . But in this test , researchers used boronate-assisted fluoroscent thin-layer chromatography ( F-TLC ) to selectively detect mycolactone when visualized with ultraviolet light . 

They were able to read the results within one hour .  

Diagnosis of Buruli Ulcer using TLC method
Diagnosis of Buruli Ulcer using TLC method to detect mycolactone
Yellow circle : Standard mycolactone A / B ; Red circle : Mycolactone A / B from human tissue

This simple test has the potential to become an important tool for field workers involved in Buruli ulcer case detection and treatment . 

At the moment , clinical diagnosis of Buruli ulcer relies on well-trained and experienced health professionals . Polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) is the most widely used diagnostic test because of its high sensitivity but PCR can be done only in reference laboratories , remote from affected communities . 

Significant progress has been made in treating Buruli ulcer over the past few years . WHO recommends combined antibiotics treatment which when given in right doses is highly effective , with a cure rate of almost 80% with antibiotics alone . 

An urgent research priority has been the development of a rapid point-of-care diagnostic test .  
 
 “ Ten years ago , the treatment of Buruli ulcer relied almost entirely on surgery , often requiring wide radical excision and in some cases amputation of limbs ” says Dr Kingsley Asiedu , Medical Officer at WHO ’ s Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases “ We hope that the TLC method , once validated in a planned clinical trial , it can be implemented initially at district hospital laboratories to reinforce accurate diagnosis and treatment of patients .  ”  


In November 2013 , WHO and the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics ( FIND ) convened a meeting in Geneva to identify priority areas and gaps for accelerating the development of a rapid test2 . The new FIND strategy 2015–20203 will contribute to the development of a rapid diagnostic test for Buruli ulcer . 