Chapter 1
What Is Public Health ? 
Cecile Knai ´
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Discuss the meaning of public health
 Describe the changing approaches to public health over time
 Discuss some of the current debates within public health
 Comment on some of the implications of health practitioners
Introduction
This chapter attempts to answer the question ‘ What is public health ?  ’ and
at one level , the answer is simple and straightforward : public health aims at
preventing health problems before they occur and focuses on populations
rather than on individuals . As we will see in the chapter , there are different
ways of going about this task . The more convenient linear , two-dimensional
way holds that there is a cause and there is a disease , and to address the
disease one needs to address the cause . According to this line of thought , disease is brought about by specific aetiological agents which affect the body ’ s
structure and function , with illness a separate ‘ subjective experience of dysfunction ’  [ 1 ]  . This biomedical model has been argued as being narrow : the
reality is that achieving public health is a complex task with an ill-defined
scope . This is not for lack of effort on behalf of public health practitioners . 
Indeed , as discussed below , an enormous amount of effort and debate and political commitment have converged over time so that the field of public health
is a field in its own right , with educational and professional specialisations . The
approach to health has shifted from a relatively narrow approach to a broader
conception of what health means , as expressed by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) definition which has not been amended since 1948 :  ‘ Health
is a state of complete physical , mental and social well-being and not merely
the absence of disease or infirmity ’  [ 2 ]  . Moreover , the understanding of public health and the extent to which governments should intervene to support
1
2 Public Health Nursing
population health will vary according to the sociopolitical stance of countries 
[ 3 , 4 ]  . 
This chapter introduces the various meanings and applications of public
health , placing it in a historical context to help the reader to understand
the development of modern public health . We highlight some of the major
achievements of the past century , and discuss the current challenges we face . 
The discussion of these challenges provides an opportunity to understand
some of the underlying philosophical and practical debates in public health . 
Finally , we suggest some of the implications for health practitioners . Although
many of these arguments are universal , this chapter mainly draws on European
context and highlights the experience and development of public health in
Britain . 
The development of modern public health
An early definition of public health , variations of which have informed later definitions , is that of Winslow from the 1920s . Winslow proposed that public health
was ‘ the science and art of preventing disease , prolonging life , and promoting mental and physical health and efficiency through organised community
efforts for the sanitation of the environment , the control of communicable
infections , the education of the individual in personal hygiene , the organisation of medical and nursing services for the early diagnosis and preventive
treatment of disease , and the development of social machinery to ensure to
every individual a standard of living adequate for the maintenance of health , 
so organising these benefits as to enable every citizen to realise his birthright
of health and longevity ’  [ 5 ]  . 
Although the wording is slightly dated , the meaning still holds . Importantly , 
it demonstrates the many overlapping disciplines comprising public health , 
adapted according to time and context . The modern field of public health
is highly varied and encompasses many academic disciplines including the
fundamental tools of epidemiology , biostatistics , health education , advocacy , 
policy analysis and health services management applied to various fields such
as environmental health , food and nutrition , tobacco and alcohol abuse , and
the health of different age groups across the life course . Increasingly , a crucial
facet of public health research and practice has been to factor in as thoroughly
as possible factors such as social , economic , cultural , psychological and political considerations since they characterise the diverse aspects of health risk in
different ways and to different degrees of importance according to context [ 6 ]  . 
The question of whether public health should confine itself to individual
risk factors for disease or rather be increasingly concerned with the more
 ‘ upstream ’ sources of health ( or ill health ) such as employment , housing , 
transport , food and nutrition and global trade concerns is central to public debates and in many ways defined by the political and economic stance of those
on either side of the debate . Beaglehole and Bonita [ 7 ] argue that ‘ the central
What Is Public Health ? 3
challenge for public health practitioners is to articulate and act upon a broad
definition of public health which incorporates a multidisciplinary and intersectoral approach to the underlying causes of premature death and disability ’  . 
Origins and history of public health
Understanding the historical development of the public health movement provides perspective on current health issues and on the wider significance and
impact of health interventions [ 8 ]  . Writing for the journal Public Health in
1928 , Wood notes that above and beyond the great achievements of public
health in Britain , there were ‘ adverse circumstances still requiring attention ’  , 
citing , for example , the appalling conditions in newly industrialising cities and
stating that ‘ in the forefront I would place one of our last remaining problems
of environmental hygiene , the smoke pollution of the atmosphere , with its
direct and indirect effects on physical well-being ’  [ 9 ]  . Many of the discussions
of the past resonate with contemporary ones . 
The ideology and concept of public health and how it is organised and implemented have undergone important changes over time . The history of public
health stretches back to ‘ remote times ’  [ 10 ]  , by some accounts as far as the ancient Greeks [ 11 ]  . The growing involvement of ‘ authorities ’ in addressing the
health problems of citizens progressively increased with the approach of the
modern era [ 10 ]  , many examples of which have been documented ( read , for
example , Occupational Health and Public Health : Lessons from the Past – Challenges for the Future [ 4 ] and Public Health at the Crossroads : Achievements
and Prospects [ 11 ]  )  . George Rosen ’ s A History of Public Health [ 12 ] provides an
in-depth account of the development of public health over time and throughout the world . For the purposes of this chapter , we focus on developments in
Europe and particularly Britain and step into the history of public health at the
time of industrialisation , particularly its consequences on the health of urban
populations , and the debates and policy decisions it engendered . 
The nineteenth century saw an increasingly systematic approach to public
health , taking root throughout European countries , with considerable scientific advances and a growing consciousness of the impact of life in industrial
cities on the health of populations . 
In Britain the sanitary movement was launched in the 1820s , emphasising
the need for government-level expertise in health [ 13 ]  . It is argued that the
sanitary movement was motivated and led by the work of social reformers
rather than medical practitioners [ 11 ]  . During his travels through Britain in the
1830s , the French political thinker Alexis de Tocqueville commented on the
abject conditions of urban centres , noting that here ‘  .  .  . humanity attains its
most complete development and its most brutish ; here civilization works its
miracles , and here civilized man is turned back almost into a savage ’  [ 14 ]  . 
During the 1840s , public health emerged as a field in its own right in Britain . 
A key player in the ‘ meshing of medicine with the moral and political economy ’  
[ 15 ] was Edwin Chadwick . His seminal 1842 report on the sanitary conditions
4 Public Health Nursing
of the working class revealed the dangerous conditions in which labourers
lived and worked [ 11 ]  . This report was the first such national investigation
and pointed to a number of now widely accepted phenomena about economic development , urbanisation and health within industrial urban areas 
[ 15 ]  . Chadwick supported the principle that the people ’ s health was a matter
of public concern and thus one of the responsibilities of the state [ 16 ]  . He
highlighted through his report how modern circumstances could contribute
to a health schism between social groups [ 15 ]  . One of the conclusions of this
report was that ‘  .  .  . the various forms of epidemic , endemic , and other disease
caused , or aggravated , or propagated chiefly amongst the labouring classes
by atmospheric impurities produced by decomposing animal and vegetable
substances , by damp and filth , and close and overcrowded dwellings prevail
amongst the population in every part of the kingdom , whether dwelling in
separate houses , in rural villages , in small towns , in the larger towns — as they
have been found to prevail in the lowest districts of the metropolis ’  [ 17 ]  . This
document was not only a survey of the social and environmental condition
of towns and cities , but in effect an act to bring together formerly isolated
health and sanitary domains , and to create public health policy [ 15 ]  . The subsequent Public Health Act of 1848 was a legislative attempt to impart social
and health equity in Britain [ 11 ]  . It was built upon the assumption that implementation of the sanitary reform would address and remove causes of illness
and early death , and allow labourers to live longer and healthier lives and
thus contribute to the economy [ 18 ]  . Then , as now , however , the battle was to
convince government that these ideas were viable , particularly in the light of
the great costs related to sanitary measures [ 18 ]  . It saw the establishment of
the Board of Health , though reportedly unpopular and short-lived because it
challenged powerful vested interests : it faced strong opposition from the medical profession and local government officials reluctant to yield to a central
authority . It is reported that by the 1870s the medical profession dominated
public health in Britain ; this dominance continues in most European countries
including the United Kingdom [ 11 , 19 ]  . 
The Public Health Act was shaped by the prevailing miasmic medical notions , 
or the idea that disease is associated with noxious odours , impure air and poor
sanitation [ 15 ]  ( miasma translates as ‘ bad air ’ in Greek )  . This was of course
subsequently refuted , as described below . But by the 1850s , as a result of
the Public Health Act there were better sewers , cleaner water and streets
less polluted with decaying animals and human excrement . Disease did in fact
decline , providing empirical evidence for these disease theories [ 18 ]  . However , 
at this time great scientific advances contributed to the understanding of how
disease was caused and spread . It was the French microbiologist Louis Pasteur
who ‘ dealt the final blow to [  .  .  .  ] miasma as the cause of infectious diseases ’  
[ 18 ]  . In short , Pasteur is credited with reframing disease by demonstrating
what eventually came to be known as the ‘ germ theory ’  , namely , that specific
microbes caused specific diseases , an unthinkable concept until then . Towards
the end of the nineteenth century , the German scientist Robert Koch devised a
series of proofs or criteria to establish a causal relationship between a microbe
What Is Public Health ? 5
and a disease , now referred to as ‘ Koch ’ s postulates ’  , and these supported the
germ theory [ 11 , 13 ]  . One of Chadwick ’ s contemporaries , John Snow , was a
strong supporter of the germ theory . He is credited with carrying out one
of the first epidemiological study in 1854 , now commonly referred to as the
study of the Broad Street Pump : while investigating a local cholera epidemic
in London , Snow linked all cases to a single contaminated well . He convinced
authorities to remove the pump handle and the spread of the disease was
rapidly reduced . Snow isolated what would eventually be identified as the
bacterium responsible for cholera . 
By the turn of the century there was no longer any question that certain
microbes caused specific diseases , and slowly but surely major cities were
building sewages systems and providing cleaner water for their inhabitants . 
These advances provided a solid foundation for contemporary measures for
communicable diseases control and laid the scientific basis for vaccination [ 18 , 
20 ]  . 
The early twentieth century saw the rise of preventive medicine , characterised by its focus on the concept of hygiene , supporting the previous developments in several ways [ 20 ]  : it took into account the concept of disease
vectors ; it highlighted the importance of nutrition and the role of nutrient
deficiencies in impairing optimal health ( thus leading to the development of
vitamins )  ; and it emphasised the particular needs of ‘ high-risk ’ population
groups such as schoolchildren , pregnant women and older people [ 21 ]  . Advances in housing , education , road and other infrastructure enabled rapid
economic progress to take place across Europe during this period and this
undoubtedly did much to improve the health of those populations . 
The assumption of scientific rationality where disease aetiology follows a
relatively linear pathway [ 1 ] was increasingly challenged by many as failing
to capture all factors pertinent to disease : broad social conditions must be
addressed by all relevant sectors to bring about long-term and meaningful
improvements in population health [ 22 , 23 ]  . These principles were supported
and developed by a series of important policy commitments at the national
and international level . The 1974 Lalonde Report by the Canadian Government
proposed the health field concept wherein genetic predisposition , individual
behaviour and lifestyle , health services and environmental circumstances all
contribute to population health [ 24 ]  . A focus on healthy public policy and intersectoral action was then laid out in 1978 by the WHO ’ s ‘ Health for All by the
Year 2000 ’ movement [ 25 ]  , the key principles of which were ( 1 ) global cooperation and peace as important aspects of primary health care ;  ( 2 ) recognition
that primary health care should be adapted to the particular circumstances
of a country and the communities within it ;  ( 3 ) recognition that health care
reflects broader social and economic development ;  ( 4 ) primary health care as
the backbone of a nation ’ s health strategy , with an emphasis on health promotion and disease prevention strategies ;  ( 5 ) achievement of equity in health
status ; and ( 6 ) involvement of all sectors in the promotion of health [ 26 ]  . 
These principles were enshrined in the 1986 Ottawa Charter for Health
Promotion which called for building healthy public policy , creating supportive
6 Public Health Nursing
environments , strengthening community actions , developing personal skills , 
reorienting health services and demonstrating commitment to health promotion [ 24 ]  . The conference participants challenged the WHO and other international organisations ‘ to advocate the promotion of health in all appropriate
forums and to support countries in setting up strategies and programmes for
health promotion ’  [ 27 ]  . These commitments continue to be renewed by WHO
and are increasingly cross-disciplinary to ensure a broad enough scope of
action and influence . 
Moreover , the ecological approach to public health is increasingly accepted . 
In public health , an ecological model refers to people ’ s interactions with their
physical and sociocultural surroundings [ 28 ]  , incorporating many influences
at multiple levels [ 29 , 30 ] including biological , psychological , cultural , physical 
( built and natural environment ) and policy [ 31 ]  . Although there are ongoing
debates about whether this is an appropriate approach or not , the ecological
approach is supported by influential public health publications such as the
WHO / FAO report Diet , Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Disease [ 32 ] 
and by the WHO Global Strategy for Diet and Physical Activity [ 33 ]  . 
Successes and challenges in public health
The advances in public health over the past century , due in part to the convergence of scientific progress and political commitment , have improved our
quality of life [ 34 ]  . In 1999 , the US Centre for Communicable Disease Control
published a list of the twentieth century ’ s ten greatest public health achievements [ 35 ]  . These are summarised below . As noted in an article by Gray
et al .  , these achievements are all applicable to the United Kingdom where
they have significantly contributed to considerable , long-term increases in life
expectancy [ 36 , 37 ]  :  
( 1 ) Vaccination resulted in the eradication of smallpox ; elimination of polio 
( in the Americas )  ; and control of measles , rubella , tetanus , diphtheria and
Haemophilus influenzae type b 
( 2 ) Motor-vehicle safety led to substantial reductions in motor vehiclerelated deaths due to engineering improvements in vehicles and highways , and changes in personal behaviours such as using seat belts and
other safety devices , and reductions in drinking and driving 
( 3 ) Safer workplaces due to a focus on occupational health and environments
led to , e . g .  , the control of pneumoconiosis and silicosis and a reduction in
fatal occupational injuries 
( 4 ) Reduction of infectious diseases was achieved through the control of
typhoid and cholera by focusing on improving water and sanitation , and
the control of tuberculosis and sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ) by
education and the advent of antibiotics 
( 5 ) A decline in deaths from coronary heart disease and stroke was attained
from changing high-risk behaviours , such as smoking cessation and blood
pressure control , and improved access to early detection and treatment
What Is Public Health ? 7 
( 6 ) Safer and healthier foods contributed to nearly eliminating nutritional deficiency diseases such as rickets , goitre and pellagra , and were achieved
by decreasing microbial contamination and increasing nutritional content 
( 7 ) Advances in maternal and child health came about through better hygiene and nutrition , availability of antibiotics , access to health care and
technological advances in neonatal and maternal medicine 
( 8 ) Family planning contributed to improved maternal and child health and
supported a more important socioeconomic role of women , reduced family size , and increased birth intervals ; barrier contraceptives also reduced
unwanted pregnancies and transmission of STDs 
( 9 ) Fluoridation of drinking water contributed to reducing tooth decay and
tooth loss 
( 10 ) Recognition of tobacco use as a health hazard resulted in changes in
social norms , reduced prevalence of tobacco smoking and mortality and
morbidity from smoking-related diseases
Although these have certainly been important successes in population
health due to public health strategies and the role of public health is increasingly recognised , implementation is more often than not difficult to achieve 
[ 38 ]  . Philosophical debates continue on who holds the responsibility for action in health , as well as how best to translate scientifically independent and
comparable data into effective public health policy . The following section addresses some of these challenges . 
The responsibility for health
Individuals and nation states will have different understandings of how to
achieve a population which benefits from ‘ a state of complete physical , mental and social well-being ’  . These differences are grounded in sociocultural and
political stance . Traditionally , a more liberal group will support minimal government intervention , whereas a more socialist group may have more faith
in the effects of policy . This debate is important as it is a decisive factor in
the direction a government will take in addressing public health at the national level . The health status of a population will be affected by its culture , 
economy and social norms [ 3 , 4 ]  . These factors will often dictate or at least
influence the extent to which public health practitioners will be successful in
convincing policy- and decision-makers of the need for addressing particular
determinants of ill health as broadly and comprehensively as possible . 
This debate has taken several forms and has been expressed in social and
political philosophies . The eighteenth- and nineteenth-century responses to
this question were most powerfully formulated by philosophers and political economists who held that the free functioning of individual choice and
freedom would be the best way to work in the interest of public good . The
utilitarian criterion for deciding where to set the boundary between the private and the public was the notion of harm ; the private was the realm in
which action did not harm others [ 39 ]  :  ‘ The only purpose for which power
8 Public Health Nursing
can be rightfully exercised over any number of a civilized community , against
his will , is to prevent harm to others . His own good , either physical or moral , 
is not a sufficient warrant [  .  .  .  ] The only part of the conduct of anyone , for
which that concerns others [  .  .  .  ] over himself , over his own body and mind , 
the individual is sovereign ’  [ 40 ]  . The notion of what constituted harm has , 
however , expanded , as it became increasingly clear that private actions could
have public consequences . Thus , in the late nineteenth century , certain kinds
of problems such as housing , health and education were no longer considered
private matters and were taken into the public sphere of interest . 
By the early twentieth century , proponents of a ‘ new liberalism ’ had
emerged , as expressed by writers such as J . M . Keynes in Britain , to argue
that a more knowledgeable form of governance was required to balance public and private claims and interests . Thus , the role of the state should be to
manage the public sphere and its problems so as to address aspects of social
and economic life that markets were no longer capable of solving . 
The 1970s saw a revival of libertarianism with , for example , Friedrich Hayek
and Milton Friedman , who argued that the attempt to use public policy to
promote the public interest was flawed [ 41 ]  ; rather the relationship between
private and public was best defined by the market and freedom of choice . John
Rawls provided a strong counter-argument by considering public interests in
terms of fairness and equality of opportunity , arguing that justice has to
do with the distribution of outcomes in a fair way , where differences could
be accepted if social and economic inequalities maximised benefits to the
least advantaged [ 42 ]  . Those that supported his approach considered it a
key philosophical underpinning of public policy , yet those that critiqued his
approach , such as Robert Nozick , suggested that justice does not have to do
with fairness but with what people are entitled to [ 43 ]  , maintaining , as did
the early libertarians , that the organisation of society through the forces of
individuals and markets is the only way forward for the attainment of justice 
[ 39 ]  . 
These philosophical arguments continue and are well represented within the
field of public health . Where does the onus for action in population health lie ? 
Environmental and policy changes are at the centre of the ecological approach
and have been identified as the most promising strategy for bringing about
population-wide improvements in diet , physical activity and other key determinants of health [ 31 , 44–46 ]  . Critics argue that taking an ecological approach to
address disease prevention and health promotion threatens ‘ informed choice ’ 
through societal paternalism or ‘ nanny-statism ’  . Moreover , factors dictating
the health of populations include not only behaviours and attitudes but also
genetic profile and family history , factors that are not necessarily subject to
modification . The example of obesity challenges this argument : the rapidity
with which rates of obesity are growing in virtually all countries of Europe
and the rest of the world far exceeds the speed with which genetic mutations
develop . Proponents of the ecological approach to disease prevention might
respond that the development of policies and regulations is not a question of
challenging informed choice ; rather it is a question of creating an environment
What Is Public Health ? 9
conducive to increased physical activity ( e . g . urban planning policies that help
to increase access to parks and playgrounds ) and healthy diet ( e . g . food and
nutrition policies that help to make fruit and vegetables affordable and available )  ; legislating corporate conduct where there is clear conflict of interest
and ethical issues ( e . g . advertising soft drinks in the classroom ) and a reasonable probability of negative impact on children ’ s behaviour ; and learning
how to disseminate the public health message in a more sustainable , effective
way . An individual who is deemed competent is ultimately responsible for his
or her actions ; however , these actions occur within a specific context which
inevitably imparts a positive or negative influence . Vulnerable groups , such as
the unborn child , children and young people , the elderly or disabled , and those
with mental incapacity may need additional protections . Behavioural change
is notoriously difficult to bring about in isolation from the context from which
it emerges , thus making preventive strategies targeting individual change often ineffective [ 47 , 48 ]  . In reality , those most likely to become ill are those
with the least ability to make healthy choices because of the structural , social , 
organisational , financial and other constraints they face , and fundamentally , 
behaviour is directly related to and perhaps even a result of the conditions in
which they live [ 47 , 49 , 50 ]  . Eisenberg wrote in 1977 that ‘ the new converts
to prevention , having discovered that behaviour affects health , focus on the
responsibility of the individual for illness prevention by eating and drinking
in moderation , exercising properly , not smoking and the like . Surely , in the
final analysis , it is the individual who carries out these actions . But what does
it mean to hold the individual responsible for smoking when the government
subsidizes tobacco farming , permits tax deductions for cigarette advertising
and fails to use its taxing power as a disincentive to smoking ? What does
it mean to castigate the individual for poor eating habits when the public is
inundated by advertisements for “ empty-calorie ” fast foods and is reinforced
in present patterns of consumption by federal farm policy ?  ’  [ 51 ]  . 
Using evidence
Scientific evidence has an incontestable role in public health in that it is essential to inform effective and appropriate actions , programmes and policies . 
However , there are serious challenges to acquiring good data [ 52 ]  , and when
they do exist , they are not always independent and are seldom comparable , and merely having a set of data does not guarantee action on the part
of decision makers . This makes it all the more difficult for the public health
community to communicate risk clearly . 
Understanding where data come from , and striving to base actions and initiatives on scientifically independent data , will be essential for public health
practitioners . There is already substantial evidence from the literature on the
health impact of tobacco that articles produced by the tobacco industry or
by scientists supported by the tobacco industry are less objective . This is
equally true in other areas such as food and nutrition . For example , Vartanian
et al . carried out a systematic review of the effects of soft drink consumption
10 Public Health Nursing
on nutrition and health . They analysed the effect size as reported by industryfunded versus non-industry-funded studies on soft drinks and health and found
that the average overall effect size for industry-funded studies was significantly smaller than the average effect size for non-industry-funded studies . 
When examining studies on the effects of soft drink consumption on energy
intake , effect sizes were moderate for non-industry-funded studies and essentially non-existent for industry-funded studies [ 53 ]  . It is the responsibility of
the public health community to critically consider where the evidence comes
from . 
Even with the provision of robust independent data , action does not always
follow evidence . Stone et al . propose several explanations as to why this
might be [ 54 ]  . There can be an inadequate supply of policy relevant research , 
a lack of access to research for both researchers and policy makers ; poor
policy comprehension by researchers concerning both the policy process and
how research might be relevant to this process ; ineffective communication
by researchers of their work ; a societal disconnection of both researchers
and decision makers from those whom the research is about or intended
for , to the extent that effective implementation is undermined ; ignorance by
policy makers about the existence of policy relevant research , or incapacity of
overstretched bureaucrats to absorb research ; poor governmental capacity
to recognise and absorb research ; power relations generating concerns about
the contested validity of knowledge ( s )  , issues of censorship and control and
the question of ideology [ 54 ]  . 
Policy-making is not a rational process , but rather messy and highly political ; rarely is there a direct causal chain between the production of scientific
evidence ( or even the acknowledgement that there is a problem ) and the
development and implementation of relevant policies . As public health practitioners we need to understand the dynamic process and players in much
greater depth . 
Implications for public health practitioners
What are the specific actions that public health practitioners should initiate or
continue to develop , in light of the current application of and debates within
public health ? Gray et al .  [ 36 ] suggest that if there are still challenges in public
health , and indeed where public health indices are worsening , this is due to
an over-reliance on education and personal choice , and ‘ a failure to consider , 
or implement , other pivotal public health strategies such as regulation and
fiscal intervention ’  . What are some of the ways forward for public health
practitioners ? 
Be public health advocates
In light of some of the issues raised here , namely , that even solid evidence of a
public health risk may not elicit adequate response from decision makers , and
What Is Public Health ? 11
that some of the evidence generated may be coloured by vested interests , 
there is an important case to be made for public health advocacy [ 24 ]  . As
argued in a recent paper on public health advocacy [ 55 ]  , most fields of public
health have objectives that can be strongly opposed by governments , industry , 
community and various interest groups , and even from within the public health
field itself and so developing public health advocacy skills is crucial . 
The disclosure of public health risks may cause some to lose significantly , 
either financially or in terms of social considerations [ 56 ]  . Whose role is it to
sound the alarm about the discovery or presumption of risk and to act upon
it ? This is exemplified in Henrik Ibsen ’ s 1882 play ‘ An Enemy of the People ’ 
wherein the local doctor suggests that the town ’ s lucrative spa be closed
down because the surrounding waters are contaminated from nearby tanneries (  ‘ That source is poisoned [  .  .  .  ] The whole of the town ’ s prosperity is rooted
in a lie !  ’  ) and is met by angry opposition by local authorities :  ‘ The matter in this
instance is by no means a purely scientific one ; it is a combination of technical
and economic factors .  [  .  .  .  ] Any man who can cast such aspersions against his
own birthplace is nothing but a public enemy ’  [ 57 ]  . Practitioners and decision
makers face a messy problem when confronting risk where the problem itself
is ill-defined ( or there is disagreement about how it should be defined )  . Some
have particular interests in the problem , though the problem is often characterised by scientific uncertainty as noted above , and existing processes for
solving the problem have , up to that point , proven insufficient . Significantly , 
while the problem in question may touch on health effects , inevitably it also
touches upon social , political and economic issues [ 56 ]  . Chapman proposes
ten key questions to ask oneself as part of strategic planning for public health
advocacy [ 55 ]  :  
( 1 ) What are your public health objectives with this issue ?  
( 2 ) Can a ‘ win-win ’ outcome be first engineered with decision makers ?  
( 3 ) Who do the key decision makers answer to , and how can these people be
influenced ?  
( 4 ) What are the strengths and weaknesses of your and your opposition ’ s
position ?  
( 5 ) What are your media advocacy objectives ?  
( 6 ) How will you frame what is at issue here ?  
( 7 ) What symbols or word pictures can be brought into this frame ?  
( 8 ) What sound bites can be used to convey 6 and 7 ?  
( 9 ) Can the issue be personalised ?  
( 10 ) How can large numbers of people be quickly organised to express their
concerns ? 
Communicate public health risks effectively and to all stakeholders
A key element of public health advocacy is communication : in order to improve
disease risk understanding across the board , one must address the many
 ‘ publics ’ in the real world [ 58 ]  . Risk communication should keep in mind the
12 Public Health Nursing
particular positions of interested parties and be communicated without being
prescriptive but by explaining the risks according to the priorities of each type
of stakeholder . An important but often ignored fact is that there is no single
 ‘ public ’  , particularly when it comes to communicating the health risks faced
by individuals and communities at large : there are many different publics , not
only in terms of sex , age and geography , but also in terms of individual risk
susceptibility , exposure and risk literacy [ 58 ]  . Those at greatest potential risk
are often least likely to be well informed about the risks they face or be able
to understand the complex , changing information about health hazards . On
the other hand , those who actively seek out health information through the
traditional mass media channels are a more literate audience and are often
at lower risk because they are already taking good care of themselves and
have access to healthier lifestyles and behaviours [ 58 ]  . The European Food
Information Council [ 59 ] suggests key pointers at getting the message across , 
including : 
 Know your target : It is vital to be clear about their target audience . Is it the
citizen , a stakeholder group , regulators , other trade bodies , or a combination
of these actors ? 
 Craft an appropriate message : Know the nature of the risks to be communicated . Are they technical or naturally occurring , are they voluntary
or involuntary , are they familiar or unfamiliar ? The message can then be
crafted accordingly . It is also important to pick the most appropriate communication tool for disseminating the message . In doing so , one must also
carefully weigh the costs ( public concern )  , and benefits ( public reassurance ) 
associated with each communication method . 
 Do not amplify risks or events : By amplifying risks that are by their nature
perceived as attenuated ( most food risks fall in this category )  , a communication strategy is bound to fail ; the audience will eventually see through
any amplification and discard the message . Unnecessarily amplifying risks
will be viewed as scare mongering and lead to public distrust in the source
of the information . 
 Do not involve too many authorities : Having two many groups involved
increases the chance of having conflicting messages . This can lead to inflexibility , leaks and miscommunication , all contributing to public misunderstanding . 
 Proactive communication is best : Proactive and transparent communication increases public trust and retroactive risk communication decreases it . 
On the other hand , communicating uncertainties when it is not necessary
increases public confusion . 
Source : Adapted from The European Food Information Council [ 59 ]  . 
The current obesity epidemic exemplifies the challenge of effectively communicating the risk of not acting to prevent this disease . The literature and
data have established obesity as a major public health issue , and one that is
escalating in most countries of the world . They demonstrate how its origins
What Is Public Health ? 13
extend beyond individual behaviour to encompass the ‘ obesogenic ’ environments that increasingly characterise modern societies . Britain is no exception ; 
indeed , government figures suggest that two-thirds of adults and a third of
children are either overweight or obese . These figures could rise to almost
nine in ten adults and two-thirds of children by 2050 , putting them at serious
risk of heart disease , diabetes and cancer [ 60 , 61 ]  . However , in Britain as in
other countries , information on the health impact of obesity has not in itself
been sufficient to adequately move government to action , often because there
are other , more urgent and more visible priorities on the agenda . Here , the
cost argument may carry more weight with policy makers [ 62 ]  : it is estimated
that the pressure obesity and its associated illnesses and conditions put on
families , the NHS and society more broadly with overall costs to society forecast to reach £ 50 billion per year by 2050 on current trends [ 63 ]  . Preventing
obesity leads to cost saving . An American study showed that a sustained 10%
weight loss among obese people would translate into a lifetime saving of US
$2200 to 5300 per person ( 1999 prices ) depending on age , gender and starting body mass index , and an increase in life expectancy of 2–7 months . The
study also found that lifetime incidence of coronary heart disease could be
reduced from 12 to 1 case per 1000 , and the incidence of stroke from 38 to 13
cases per 1000 [ 64 ]  . 
Information is not enough
Merely providing information to consumers , patients and , as discussed above , 
government will not be enough to bring about changes in behaviour conducive to disease prevention and health promotion . Preventing disease risk
is certainly not only a question of health education : effective action should
engage with areas such as education , information , culture , trade , transport , 
distribution , industry and social services [ 65 ]  . 
The tendency to understand the contexts within which populations live and
work by involving different sectors and fields illustrates the fact that the scope
and purpose of public health are still very political . As in the nineteenth century
when public health actors and approaches were being formalised , there continues to be difficult debates because public health touches on areas with high
stakes for different stakeholders at the local , national and international levels , such as tobacco , food and climate change . These three examples on their
own comprise a series of important determinants of health ( such as diet and
nutrition , food-borne pathogens , the use of tobacco products , the impact of
environmental deterioration on water and food sources and so forth ) and their
role in health ( or lack thereof ) of populations is for the most part grounded
in robust scientific bases . However , they are particularly political subjects in
part because the economic stakes are extremely high . Thus , simply imparting
knowledge about these public health risks does not necessarily translate into
action ( arguably more often not )  . For example , narrow nutritional education
has , on the whole , failed to change diet since it has focused traditionally on reducing risky behaviour through improving knowledge of individuals . Reviews
14 Public Health Nursing
of nutrition education interventions ( see Box 1 . 1 , for an example ) find that while
a focus on individual behavioural change may be effective in the short term , 
the factors influencing long-term changes are environmental , i . e . broad-based
involvement of the school and the community [ 66 , 74 , 75 ]  . 
Box 1 . 1 Factors of success in most effective
interventions for fruit and vegetable consumption
A systematic review of the evidence of interventions to promote children ’ s fruit and vegetable consumption found that the evidence is
strongest in favour of multifaceted interventions [ 66 ]  . 
A closer look at the three most effective reviewed studies [ 67–69 ] 
suggests that the more students are exposed to fruit and vegetables , 
the more the consumption patterns improve . Fruit and vegetable intake
increases were highest with the most intensive exposure such as independent work in classrooms , canteens and with families , community
youth organisation activities , point-of-purchase education and promotion in produce markets , public service announcements on local television stations , fruit and vegetable promotion competitions sponsored
by the local fruit and vegetable industry , and providing links with local
organisations in the community which offered low-cost nutrition and
physical activity programmes for the parents . 
Lessons learned from other areas of public health point to the importance of creating an enabling environment within which public health
can be promoted [ 70 ]  . It is important that an enabling environment for
fruit and vegetable consumption by children be generated . This might
include a range of macro-level interventions such as increasing access
to fruit and vegetables through targeted government subsidies of production ; agricultural policies that support healthy diets [ 71 ]  ; adequate
funding and policies for schools to provide adequate school food services including local fresh fruit and vegetables [ 72 ]  , reduced access to
junk food in schools to make the ‘ healthier choice ’ easier for children 
[ 73 ]  , and consistent practice ( at least in the school ) of nutrition education lessons . 
Source : Adapted from Knai et al .  [ 66 ]  . 
Facilitating the participation of all stakeholders
Actors in public health include a series of stakeholders at the local , regional , 
national and international level . International organisations and agencies such
as the European Commission and United Nations have a crucial role in raising
public health issues on the political agenda . They can help coordinate , share
good practice and monitor progress in countries and support national-level
What Is Public Health ? 15
actions to reduce the ill health . Government ministries and agencies have
a primary steering and stewardship role where they can build on existing
structures and processes that address all aspects of public health , e . g . diet , 
nutrition and physical activity [ 76 ]  . This stewardship role may be interpreted
in many ways but the primary responsibility of governments for safeguarding
public health is fundamental . The health sector often relies on conventional
approaches involving health promotion programmes that have been found
to achieve little success unless supported by regulation ; it should rather call
attention to the importance of public health as a key compound in overall
strategic planning . 
The academic and research institutions , from schools to universities and
research centres , have a central role in knowledge generation and dissemination . They have a responsibility to produce independent research and inform
evidence-based policy by working with other sectors , stakeholders and national / international health authorities such as the WHO . 
Non-governmental organisations are key players particularly in monitoring the activities of organisations and institutions involved in public health
activities and research . They can also help to ensure governments provide
support for healthy lifestyles , and the food industry to provide more healthy
products and services [ 76 ]  . These organisations tend to still be traditionally
 ‘ low-influence ’ stakeholder groups , along with other civil society organisations , 
teachers and parents ; they will need to develop their skills to ensure that they
can contribute constructive and participatory responses to risk communication processes . If all stakeholders are to participate constructively , decisionmaking processes in public health need to better accommodate and formalise
interactions with these groups [ 77 ]  . How can this be done ? Parents , teachers
and school administrations can be unexpectedly influential at raising awareness and bringing about change , and this process should as far as possible
be documented and analysed . Initiatives to support empowerment – enabling
people to mobilise social forces and create conditions that are conducive to
health living – are essential in making all voices heard and taken into account 
[ 65 ]  . 
Summary
This chapter traces some of the various incarnations of public health since
its inception as a field of study and practice , and highlights important milestones in our understanding of contemporary public health . The political
commitments that have been taken during this time underscore the growing recognition that disease aetiology is more often than not complex and
therefore warrants a multifaceted , comprehensive approach , with a focus
on behaviour change and supportive environments and policies . The challenges , discussed in this chapter , are by no means exhaustive , but on their
own they point to an increasing imperative for public health practitioners
and governments to use the existing independent evidence and to act . This
16 Public Health Nursing
can be facilitated by building effective coalitions across relevant sectors and
getting public support for appropriate , effective action in the promotion of
healthy environments [ 36 ]  . This is not an easy task , and as history reminds
us , requires courage of conviction and political backing :  ‘ from the early days
of sanitary reform and slum clearance , there has always been opposition to
public health action in one form or another . We need to recognise that the
new public health challenges may bring us into conflict with different groups , 
which will include those with powerful vested interests . Building a robust consensus from across the political spectrum to support public health action
where needed will be a key skill for the public health advocates of tomorrow ’  
[ 36 ]  . 
References
1 Jones L . The Social Context of Health and Health Work . Basingstoke : Macmillan , 
1994 . 
2 World Health Organization . WHO definition of health . Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as adopted by the International Health
Conference , New York , 19–22 June 1946 ; signed on 22 July 1946 by the representatives of 61 States ( Official Records of the World Health Organization , 
no . 2 , p . 100 ) and entered into force on 7 April 1948 . Geneva : World Health
Organization , 1946 . Accessed August 2008 on 
definition / en / print . html . 
3 Fox D . Politics as a tool of public and occupational health practice . In : Nelson M , ed . Occupational Health and Public Health : Lessons from the Past –
Challenges for the Future , Nr 2006 : 10 ( available at http :  /  / wwwmedicineguse / 
digitalAssets / 824 / 824187 ah2006 10pdf )  . Stockholm : National Institute for
Working Life , 2006 . 
4 Nelson M . Occupational Health and Public Health : Lessons from the Past
– Challenges for the Future , Nr 2006 : 10 ( available at . 
gu . se / digitalAssets / 824 / 824187 ah2006 10 . pdf )  . Stockholm : National Institute for Working Life , 2006 . 
5 Viseltear A . CEA Winslow and the early years of public health at Yale , 1915–1925 . 
Yale Journal of Biological Medicine 1982 ; 55 : 137–51 . 
6 Stirling A , Gee D . Science , precaution , and practice . Public Health Reports 2002 ; 
117 ( 6 )  : 521–33 . 
7 Beaglehole R , Bonita R . Public health at the crossroads : which way forward ? 
Lancet 1998 ; 351 : 590–92 . 
8 Berridge V . History in the public health tool kit . Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health 2001 ; 55 : 611–12 . 
9 Wood F . The prophet in public health . Public Health 1928 ; 42 : 198–202 . 
10 Grieco A , Bock-Berti G , Fano D . Occupational health and public health : analogies and discrepancies . In : Nelson M , ed . Occupational Health and Public Health : 
Lessons from the Past – Challenges for the Future , Nr 2006 : 10 ( available
at http :  /  / wwwmedicineguse / digitalAssets / 824 / 824187 ah2006 10pdf )  . Stockholm : National Institute for Working Life , 2006 . 
11 Beaglehole R , Bonita R . Public Health at the Crossroads : Achievements and
Prospects , 2nd edn . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2004 . 
What Is Public Health ? 17
12 Rosen G . A History of Public Health . Baltimore : The Johns Hopkins University
Press , 1993 . 
13 Berridge V , Loughlin K . Public health history . Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health 2003 ; 57 : 164–5 . 
14 de Tocqueville A , Mayer J . Journeys to England and Ireland . London : Faber & 
Faber , 1958 . 
15 Morley I . City chaos , contagion , Chadwick , and social justice . Yale Journal of
Biological Medicine 2007 ; 80 ( 2 )  : 61–72 . 
16 Hamlin C . State medicine in Great Britain . In : Porter D , ed . The History
of Public Health and the Modern State . Amsterdam : Editions Rodopi BV , 
1994 . 
17 Chadwick E . Report from the Poor Law Commissioners of an Enquiry into
the Sanitary Conditions of the Labouring Population of Great Britain . London , 1842 . Excerpts accessed August 2008 on 
history / chadwick2 . html . 
18 Golub E . The Limits of Medicine : How Science Shapes Our Hope for the Cure . 
Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1997 . 
19 Fee E , Porter D . Public health , preventive medicine and professionalization : 
England and America in the nineteenth century . In : Wear A , ed . Medicine in
Society . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1992 . 
20 Awofeso N . What ’ s new about the “ New Public Health ”  ? American Journal of
Public Health 2004 ; 94 ( 5 )  : 705–9 . 
21 Rose G . The Strategy of Preventive Medicine . New York : Oxford University
Press , 1993 . 
22 Marmot M , Wilkinson R . Social Determinants of Health . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1999 . 
23 Cosgrove J . The McKeown thesis : a historical controversy and its enduring
influence . American Journal of Public Health 2002 ; 92 ( 5 )  : 725–9 . 
24 Pomerleau J , McKee M . Issues in Public Health . Maindehead : Open University
Press , 2005 . 
25 World Health Organization . Strategies for Health for All by the Year
2000 ( available at rc32
r05 . htm )  . Geneva : World Health Organization , 1981 . 
26 World Health Organization . From Alma-Ata to the Year 2000 : Reflections at
the Midpoint . Geneva : World Health Organization , 1988 . 
27 World Health Organization . Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion . First International Conference on Health Promotion ( Document WHO / HPR / HEP / 95 . 1 )  . 
Ottawa , 21 November 1986 . Accessed September 2008 on 
hpr / NPH / docs / ottawa charter hp . pdf . 
28 Stokols D . Establishing and maintaining healthy environments : toward a social
ecology of health promotion . American Psychologist 1992 ; 47 : 6–22 . 
29 Sallis J , Owen N . Ecological models of health behavior . In : Glanz K , Rimer B , 
Lewis F , eds . Health Behavior and Health Education : Theory , Research , and
Practice , 3rd edn , San Francisco : Jossey-Bass , 2002 . 
30 McLeroy K , Bibeau D , Steckler A , Glanz K . An ecological perspective on health
promotion programs . Health Education Quarterly 1988 ; 15 : 351–77 . 
31 Sallis J , Cervero R , Ascher W , Henderson K , Kraft M , Kerr J . An ecological
approach to creating active living communities . Annual Review of Public Health
2005 ; 27 : 297–322 . 
32 World Health Organization . Diet , Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases . Report of a Joint WHO / FAO Expert Consultation . WHO Technical Report
Series , No . 916 . Geneva : World Health Organization , 2003 . 
18 Public Health Nursing
33 World Health Organization . Global Strategy on Diet , Physical Activity and
Health . Report by the Secretariat . 57th World Health Assembly ( A57 / 9 )  . 
Geneva : World Health Organization , 2004 . 
34 Association of Schools of Public Health . This Is Public Health Toolkit , 2008 . 
Accessed August 2008 on . 
35 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Ten great public health achievements – United States , 1900–1999 . MMWR 1999 ; 48 ( 12 )  : 241–3 . Accessed August
2008 on . 
36 Gray S , Pilkington P , Pencheon D , Jewell T . Public health in the UK : success or
failure ? Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 2006 ; 99 : 107–11 . 
37 Office for National Statistics . Life Expectancy . Newport : Office for National Statistics , 2004 . Accessed September 2008 on . 
gov . uk / cci / nugget . asp ? id = 881 . 
38 Wanless D . Securing Good Health for the Whole Population . London : HM Treasury , 2004 . 
39 Parsons W . Public Policy : An Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Policy . 
Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar , 1995 . 
40 Mill J . On Liberty . New York : P . F . Collier & Son , 1860 . 
41 Hayek F . The Road to Serfdom . London : Routledge , 1944 . 
42 Rawls J . A Theory of Justice . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1971 . 
43 Nozick R . Anarchy , State and Utopia . New York : Basic Books , 1974 . 
44 Booth S , Sallis J , Ritenbaugh C , Hill J , Birch L , Frank L et al . Environmental and
societal factors affect food choice and physical activity : rationale , influences , 
and leverage points . Nutrition Reviews 2001 ; 3 : 21–39 . 
45 Egger G , Swinburn B . An ‘ ecological ’ approach to the obesity pandemic . BMJ
1997 ; 315 : 477–80 . 
46 French S , Story M , Jeffery R . Environmental influences on eating and physical
activity . Annual Review of Public Health 2001 ; 22 : 309–25 . 
47 Tesh S . Hidden Argument : Political Ideology and Disease Prevention Policy . 
New Brunswick and London : Rutgers University Press , 1988 . 
48 Whitehead D , Russell G . How effective are health education programmes –
resistance , reactance , rationality and risk ? Recommendations for effective
practice . International Journal of Nursing Studies 2004 ; 41 ( 2 )  : 163–72 . 
49 Dowler E . Inequalities in diet and physical activity in Europe . Public Health
Nutrition 2001 ; 4 ( 2B )  : 701–9 . 
50 McKee M , Raine R . Choosing health ? First choose your philosophy . Lancet
2005 ; 365 : 369–71 . 
51 Eisenberg L . The perils of prevention : a cautionary note . New England Journal
of Medicine 1977 ; 297 : 1231 . 
52 Pomerleau J , Knai C , Nolte E . The burden of chronic disease in Europe . In : Nolte
E , McKee M , eds . Caring for People with Chronic Conditions : A Health System
Perspective . Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2008 . 
53 Vartanian L , Schwartz M , Brownell K . Effects of soft drink consumption on
nutrition and health : a systematic review and meta-analysis . American Journal
of Public Health 2007 ; 97 ( 4 )  : 667–75 . 
54 Stone D , Maxwell S , Keating M . Bridging Research and Policy . An international
workshop funded by the UK Department for International Development . Warwick : Warwick University , 2001 . 
55 Chapman S . Advocacy for public health : a primer . Journal of Epidemiology
Community Health 2004 ; 58 : 361–5 . 
56 Leviton C , Needleman C , Shapiro M . Confronting Public Health Risks : A Decision
Maker ’ s Guide . London : Sage , 1998 . 
What Is Public Health ? 19
57 Ibsen H . An Enemy of the People . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 1882 . 
58 Russell C . Implications for improving risk communication through various channels : a discussion . National Cancer Institute Monograph 1999 ; 25 : 177–8 . 
59 The European Food Information Council . An Introduction to Food Risk Communication . Accessed January 2007 on alimentaire-qualite-aliments / risk-communication / expid / review-food-riskcommunication /  ; EUFIC REVIEW ( 06 )  , 2006 . 
60 Department of Health . Healthy Weight , Health Lives : A Cross-Government
Strategy for England . Accessed October 2008 on 
Publicationsandstatistics / Publications / PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance / 
DH 082378 ; 2008 . 
61 NHS Information Centre . Health Survey for England 2005 Latest Trends . 
London : NHS Information Centre , 2006 . 
62 Lang T , Rayner G . Overcoming policy cacophony on obesity : an ecological public
health framework for policymakers . Obesity Reviews 2007 ; 8 ( Suppl 1 )  : 165–81 . 
63 Foresight . Tackling Obesities : Future Choices – Project Report . London : Government Office for Science , 2007 . 
64 Oster G , Thompson D , Edelsberg J , Bird A , Colditz G . Lifetime health and economic benefits of weight loss among obese persons . American Journal of Public
Health 1999 ; 89 : 1536–42 . 
65 Vaandrager H , Koelen M . Consumer involvement in nutritional issues : the role
of information . American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1997 ; 65 ( Suppl )  : 1980S–
84S . 
66 Knai C , Pomerleau J , Lock K , McKee M . Getting children to eat more fruit and
vegetables : a systematic review . Preventive Medicine 2006 ; 42 ( 2 )  : 85–95 . 
67 Reynolds K , Franklin F , Binkley D , Raczynski J , Harrington K , Kirk K et al . 
Increasing the fruit and vegetable consumption of fourth-graders : results from
the high 5 project . American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2000 ; 30 : 309–19 . 
68 Foerster S , Gregson J , Beall D , Hudes M , Magnuson H , Livingstone S et al . The
California children ’ s 5 a day-power play ! campaign : evaluation of large scale
social marketing initiative . Family and Community Health 1998 ; 21 : 46–64 . 
69 Gortmaker S , Cheung L , Peterson K , Chomitz G , Cradle J , Dart H et al . Impact
of a school-based interdisciplinary intervention on diet and physical activity
among urban primary school children : eat well and keep moving . Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 1999 ; 153 ( 9 )  : 975–83 . 
70 Swinburn B , Caterson I , Seidell J , James W . Diet , nutrition and the prevention of
excess weight gain and obesity . Public Health Nutrition 2004 ; 7 ( Special Issue
1 )  : 123–46 . 
71 Schafer-Elinder L . Public health aspects of the EU common agricultural policy . 
In : Developments and Recommendations for Change in Four Sectors : Fruit and
Vegetables , Dairy , Wine and Tobacco . Stockholm : National Institute of Public
Health , 2003 . 
72 NHS . The National School Fruit Scheme . London : Department of Health , 2002 . 
73 James J , Thomas P , Cavan D , Kerr D . Preventing childhood obesity by reducing
consumption of carbonated drinks : cluster randomised controlled trial . BMJ
2004 ; 328 ( 7450 )  : 1237 . 
74 Contento I . The effectiveness of nutrition education and implications for nutrition education policy , programs , and research : a review of research . Journal
of Nutrition Education 1995 ; 27 ( 6 )  : 277–418 . 
75 Pomerleau J , Lock K , Knai C , McKee M . A systematic review of interventions
designed to increase adult fruit and vegetable intake . Journal of Nutrition
2005 ; 135 : 2486–95 . 
20 Public Health Nursing
76 World Health Organization . Involving different stakeholders . In : Branca F , Nikogosian H , Lobstein T , eds , The Challenge of Obesity in the WHO European
Region and the Strategies for Response . Copenhagen : World Health Organization , Regional Office for Europe , 2007 . 
77 Robertson A , Tirado C , Lobstein T , Knai C , Jensen J , Ferro-Luzzi A et al . 
Food and Health in Europe : A New Basis for Action . WHO Regional Publications , European Series No 96 . Copenhagen : WHO Regional Office for Europe , 
2004 . Accessed at InformationSources / Publications / Catalogue / 20040204 1 . 
Chapter 2
Public Health Nursing
Gill Coverdale
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Define nursing and public health nursing
 Describe the role of the statutory bodies and the statutory and
mandatory aspects of nursing registration
 Discuss the public health nursing role within health promotion
 Explore the four levels of prevention : primordial , primary , secondary
and tertiary
 Comment on the challenges for public health nursing in the twentyfirst century
Introduction
Chapter 1 looked at defining public health and argued that achieving public
health is complex and the scope ill-defined ; however , the large amount of
effort that has gone into making public health a recognised field of practice
has resulted in a range of practitioners contributing to this specialism . Elaine
Haycock-Stuart says : 
An emerging conclusion is that for public health nursing to stand the test
of time attention needs to be given to making explicit the knowledge that
is informing the design of planned interventions and the framework for
research and evaluation . It will be a missed opportunity if nursing seizes
the opportunity to work extensively with a public health approach without
simultaneously developing the theory behind its inception and evaluation . 
This is not a simple task , but a necessary one for nursing to be acknowledged
for its contribution to meeting the public health agenda [ 1 ]  . 
This chapter will look at the nursing contribution to public health and in particular those nurses registered on the third part of the Nursing and Midwifery
21
22 Public Health Nursing
Council ( NMC ) register – specialist community public health nurses ( SCPHNs )  . 
It will first analyse the definitions of nursing and public health nursing assessing the similarities and differences between the two . The role of the statutory
bodies , the statutory and mandatory aspects of nursing registration and the
relatively new public health part of the nursing register will be discussed . It
will outline the role of the nursing professional bodies and the guidance and
support they provide for their specific nursing disciplines . The public health
nursing role within health promotion and the four levels of prevention : primordial , primary , secondary and tertiary will be explored and debated along
with the challenges for public health nursing in the twenty-first century in the
promotion of the health and well-being of the whole population . 
The definition of nursing and public health nursing
Defining nursing
In 2003 , the Royal College of Nursing ( RCN ) provided a comprehensive review
to define ‘ nursing ’ using a national and international group of experts and
wide consultation . It was felt that nursing required ‘ some specification for
purposes such as the formulation of policy , the specification of services , and
the development of educational curricula ’  [ 2 , p . 1 ]  . Interestingly , the United
Kingdom Central Council ( UKCC ; the nursing regulation body at the time ) 
suggested that a definition was not useful and would place restrictions on the
profession . A definition was , however , agreed upon : 
The use of clinical judgement in the provision of care to enable people to
improve , maintain , or recover health , to cope with health problems , and to
achieve the best possible quality of life , whatever their disease or disability , 
until death .  [ 2 , p . 1 ] 
Nursing encompasses a range of skills , attributes and competencies , and
arguably requires the provision of empathy and sympathy towards the
client / patient and their families . Nursing interventions are concerned with
empowering people , and helping them to achieve , maintain or recover independence [ 2 ]  . The RCN [ 2 , p . 3 ] suggests that
Nursing is an intellectual , physical , emotional and moral process which includes the identification of nursing needs ; therapeutic interventions and
personal care ; information , education , advice and advocacy ; and physical , 
emotional and spiritual support . In addition to direct patient care , nursing
practice includes management , teaching , and policy and knowledge development . 
Of course , nurses must and cannot avoid working in partnership – with
patients , their relatives , other carers and even employers , as well as collaborating with others as members of a multidisciplinary / agency team . Leadership
Public Health Nursing 23
is a necessity and skills such as delegating , supervising the work of others and
arguably prescribing are all skill sets the nurse requires and develops through
their career pathway . However , nurses remain professionally accountable for
their own decisions both on and off duty and issues such as confidentiality
is second nature to a good nurse , which arguably is quite distinctive to the
health care profession . 
There are three parts to the NMC register : Nursing ( Part 1 )  , Midwifery ( Part
2 ) and since 2004 , Part 3 for SCPHNs , for those nurses with a predominantly
public health role . Each part of the register has a designated title indicative
of different qualifications and different kinds of education or training and a
registrant is entitled to use the title corresponding to the part of the register
in which they are registered [ 2 ]  . 
In England there are three main disciplines on the public health part of
the NMC register – health visitors ( HVs )  , occupational health nurses ( OHNs ) 
and school nurses ( SNs ) – who each deliver services to a range of clients from
primary and community care and in the school and work setting . The register is
also open to sexual health nurses and those nurses with a predominantly public
health role but who have not undertaken specific specialist programmes . This
chapter will focus on the collective role of nurses registered on this part of the
NMC register who will be collectively termed SCPHNs for ease of writing . Later
chapters will explore the distinctive roles of health visiting , occupational health
nursing and school nursing with the literature , research and policy directives
for each discipline . 
Defining public health nursing
The NMC states that the third part of the register 
.  .  . recognises those nurses who work with populations and whose role is
primarily public health focused – including the responsibility to work with
both individuals and a population , which may mean taking decisions on
behalf of a community or population without having direct contact with
every individual in that community .  [ 3 , p . 4 ] 
This provides a different emphasis to the role of the general nurse in that the
SCPHN may not necessarily work with individuals but rather a community or
population group who they will not meet all members of ; when they do work
with individuals these are often referred to as clients . These clients most likely
choose to engage in professional help and advice as they are not a captive
audience as in hospital or requiring care after illness or medical intervention . 
The difference is notable as the SCPHN may be viewed in a very different
manner if help or advice has not been actively sought by the client . 
The elements of public health nursing are : 
 Planning health promoting and health protecting programmes
 Reducing risky behaviours and health inequalities
 Preventing disease
24 Public Health Nursing
 Assessing and monitoring the health of communities and populations to
identify those at risk and those with health problems
 Assessing health needs and identify priorities for action
The principles of public health nursing are centred on equity , collaboration
and participation with others to strengthen community action [ 4 ]  . As capacity for services in the acute sector becomes more constrained , the need for
preventative action in the community is increased . Securing healthy lifestyle
actions which provide short- and subsequent long-term benefits for people
are vital . It is argued that the public health role of nurses needs strengthening so that every contact is an opportunity to promote health regardless
of the setting [ 5 ]  . An essence of care benchmark on promoting health [ 6 ] 
has been developed to ensure quality is being driven into service provision . 
SCPHNs provide care along the continuum of public health practice working
with the individual through the differing population groups ; working with children laying down the foundations of good health or supporting and managing
the chronically sick ; changing unhealthy lifestyles , improving knowledge or
attitudes , personal empowerment , or influencing policy and community development [ 7 ]  . 
SCPHNs need to be responsive to the needs of both individuals and population groups , working with communities and other agencies in order to meet
need . In order to do this effectively , they have to lead community public health
nursing practice within their communities . A community is defined by the NMC 
[ 3 ] as a group of people living or working in a geographically defined area or
who have a characteristic , cause , need or experience in common . An empathic
understanding that the behaviours of their population groups are influenced
by social and environmental factors , cultural norms and economy , as well as
policy and politics is vital as these factors deem to shape the choices their
client groups make and the environments they live in [ 8 ]  . 
The determinants of health are firmly rooted in the lives of the SCPHN ’ s
client groups and promoting and maintaining public health is about enabling
and empowering these population groups to have influence over these health
and social determinants . The World Health Organization ( WHO ) asserts that
empowerment is a process through which people gain greater control over
decisions and actions affecting their health . It may be a social , cultural , psychological or political process through which individuals and social groups are
able to express their needs , present their concerns , devise strategies for involvement in decision making , and achieve political , social and cultural action
to meet those needs [ 9 ]  . 
The influence of policy
National government policy has recognised the public health contribution of
all nurses , midwives and HVs [ 10–15 ] and advocates a range of policy to drive
the agenda forward in improving public health services [ 16–19 ]  . Nurses have a
major role to play in promoting the health of their client groups and are seen as
advocates , enabling and advising clients on their health and well-being [ 14 , 15 ]  . 
Public Health Nursing 25
The Ottowa Charter [ 20 ] is a vital guide for health-promoting nursing practice , 
and as public health is everyone ’ s business , the role of public health promotion
is a major role for all nurses who need to ensure wherever they practice that
they are in a position to adopt public health practices in their work . This is
reflected in their roles and responsibilities of health education for restoration
and promotion of health and prevention of disease ; participation in preventive
measures and programmes ; and epidemiological surveys [ 21 ]  . 
The SCPHN is required to be politically active with the ability to :  
.  .  . contribute to the development of public policies in collaboration with
community and government leaders . These policies are designed to solve
identified local priorities and address national health problems . If nurses
are to influence policy they need to understand the political and ideological
interplay that influences and drives service provision . 
Richman [ 22 ] proposes that there are three key perspectives changing the
face of public health and therefore impacting on the provision and delivery of
public health nursing services : 
 The population groups as consumers are taking responsibility for their own
health
 The power relationship between the consumer and the health professional
has changed and the health professional is no longer solely responsible for
providing expert advice and support
 Health care is not confined to large institutions such as the NHS
It is , therefore , not just about assuring that populations have access to
appropriate and cost-effective care , which includes health promotion and disease prevention services and evaluation of the effectiveness of that care ; 
it is also essential to address health and social inequalities such as general
socioeconomic , cultural and environmental conditions , living and working conditions and social and community influences . This requires nurses to take into
account individual lifestyle factors , age , sex and genetic influences . Enabling
individuals and communities to take charge of their own health should be a key
aim in all public health nursing , but this requires multi-agency collaborative
working ; it cannot be done solely by one agency . Partnerships also need to
be encouraged with the individuals in a community to help shape the services
provided to meet their needs . The call for health needs assessments carried
out in partnership with client groups , as the way forward in helping to identify
local needs , is prevalent in the literature [ 23–26 ]  . 
Ideology of public health practice
In order for intersectoral partnerships to develop , communication and interpersonal skills are essential , as is an understanding of the ideology , structure
and philosophy of public health practice within the differing professional roles , 
as well as an awareness of the constraints for delivering public health . There is
26 Public Health Nursing
much written on the ideologies of public health and a brief introduction would
need to include three broad ideological perspectives offered by Baggott [ 27 ]  : 
 Collectivism / socialism
 Environmental / green ideology
 Individualism / libertarianism
Baggott [ 27 ] asserts that collectivists and socialists place great emphasis on
the role of the state , voluntary societies and cooperative efforts and are cynical of the ability of the individual to produce their own solutions to complex
social problems . They see the role of the state as integral to the amelioration of health-damaging behaviours of individuals . Equity in health is their key
aim to achieve social justice ; state intervention is therefore justified to reduce junk food , emissions , smoking in public places and alcohol consumption ; 
and promotes everyone ’ s health regardless of social class , income , gender , 
or ethnicity [ 27 ]  . It could be argued that current health policy is leaning towards this ‘ nanny-state ’ approach with individual health promotion as well as
community-based action . 
Environmentalists , or those adopting a green perspective , oppose the destruction of society through economic growth and industrialisation , relying
on individuals and groups to promote a sustainable environment [ 27 ]  . They
are proponents of social justice and the power of collectivism ; however , they
are wary of state power , believing it to be oppressive towards individuals and
as damaging to the environment if it suits . A collective responsibility for improving health and making cities and towns more healthy places to live in is
arguably necessary as individual interventions alone does not prevent ‘ some
cities making you sick ’  [ 28 ]  . 
Individualists and libertarians believe in negative liberty and that individuals have a right to pursue their own activities without interference from
the state , providing others are not harmed [ 27 ]  . They call for an increase in
individual responsibility through informed choice . They argue that this can
achieve ‘ healthism ’  , which at its most powerful facilitates the domination of
individuals away from the ‘ experts ’  . 
This requirement to consider one ’ s own ideological perspective as a practitioner can facilitate an understanding of how much one ’ s own personal perspective actually influences the way care is delivered to the client groups . This
also has an enormous impact when working with a group of professionals from
different agencies , all with differing attitudes and values on top of individual
ideological perspectives . This can be a challenge and is not always addressed
when multi-agency work is being planned and implemented . 
The role of the statutory bodies : the statutory and mandatory
aspects of SCPHN registration
Most countries have a legal definition of the title ‘ nurse ’ and some also have
a legal definition of ‘ nursing ’  . In the UK there is no legal definition of ‘ nursing ’  , 
Public Health Nursing 27
but ‘ registered nursing care ’ has been defined by the Health and Social Care
Act 2001 [ 2 ] in such a way that it can be distinguished from ‘ social care ’ or
 ‘ personal care ’ for the purpose of defining responsibility for its provision and
eligibility for funding . This legislative definition , however , does not relate in
any way to professional definitions or to specifications of the nurse ’ s scope of
practice [ 2 ]  . 
The NMC
The NMC was established under the Nursing and Midwifery Order 2001 [ 29 ] 
and came into being on 1 April 2002 as the successor to the United Kingdom
Central Council for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visitors ( UKCC ) and the
four National Boards for Nurses , Midwives and Health Visitors for England , 
Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales . One of the principal functions of the
NMC is to establish and monitor standards of education and training and
assess conduct and performance for nurses and midwives . This will ensure
the maintenance of standards and importantly safeguard the health and wellbeing of persons using or needing the services of nurses and midwives on the
register [ 29 ]  . 
The NMC is responsible for regulating and assuring the public of safe , effective nursing and midwifery practice and has set standards for registration to
provide the mechanism through which the NMC can exercise its main function
of protecting the public [ 30 ]  . The NMC maintain that whilst pre-registration
education provides nurses with the knowledge , skills and attitudes to give
safe and effective care , professional practice alone following registration is
not enough to meet the additional needs of specialist practitioners . Standards
have been set for both community specialist practice [ 31 ]  , which remains a
recordable qualification , and specialist community public health nursing [ 3 ]  , 
which is a qualification , which requires registration as the NMC takes the view
that this form of practice has distinct characteristics that require public protection [ 3 ]  . Those who achieve the standards of proficiency are eligible to
apply to enter the third part of the NMC register for SCPHNs . The context in
which the standards are achieved defines the scope of professional practice
within each practitioner ’ s identified area of community public health nursing 
[ 3 ]  . 
Standards of proficiency for specialist community public
health nursing [ 3 ] 
The programme preparing the SCPHN is guided by four main principles taken
from the health visiting principles [ 32 ] which establish the philosophy and
values underpinning the profession and are outlined in brief : 
 Preparation : Ensuring nurses are fit to practice – developed through
practice-centred learning , theory and practice integration and evidencebased practice and learning . 
28 Public Health Nursing
 Service : Ensuring nurses are fit for purpose developed through the management of community public health services which are provided on a needs
basis , focused on social groups , whilst acknowledging the practitioner ’ s need
to extend the scope of practice through lifelong learning . 
 Recognition : Ensuring nurses are fit for the award through the provision
of high-quality academic programmes of no less than degree level in a
practice-centred educational environment . 
 Responsibility : Ensuring nurses are fit for professional standing through
adherence to the NMC code of professional conduct , performance and ethics 
[ 30 ]  . 
These principles provide the foundation for SCPHN programmes ensuring
the standards of proficiency for entry to the register are achieved . Article 5 ( a )  
[ 2 ] of the Order [ 29 ] requires the NMC to : 
establish the standards of proficiency necessary to be admitted to the different parts of the register being the standards it considers necessary for
safe and effective practice under that part of the register .  [ 3 , p . 9 ] 
These standards of proficiency [ 3 ]  ( Table 2 . 1 ) underpin the ten key principles
of public health practice in the context of specialist community public health
nursing . They are grouped into four domains containing 23 standards which
students must achieve proficiency , competence and confidence in : 
 Search for health needs
 Stimulation of awareness of health needs
 Influence on policies affecting health
 Facilitation of health-enhancing activities
The role of professional bodies
There are numerous professional bodies supporting public health nurses in a
field of nursing distinct from the other routes straddling medicine , education , 
the workplace and children ’ s social services . These professional bodies provide
support in various ways , some with union services and membership . All the
groups work closely with key decision makers in the Department of Health , 
NHS trusts across the UK and other professional and political organisations . 
The RCN
The RCN represents nurses from all disciplines of the profession and is their
voice locally , nationally and internationally . Amongst its aims is to promote
excellence in practice and shape health policies ; influence and lobby governments and others to develop and implement policy that improves the quality
Public Health Nursing 29
Table 2 . 1 Standards of proficiency for entry to the register . 
Principle Domain
Search for health needs
Surveillance and
assessment of the
population ’ s health
and well-being
Collect and structure data and information on the
health and well-being and related needs of a defined
population
Analyse , interpret and communicate data and
information on the health and well-being and
related needs of a defined population
Develop and sustain relationships with groups and
individuals with the aim of improving health and
social well-being
Identify individuals , families and groups who are at
risk and in need of further support
Undertake screening of individuals and populations
and respond appropriately to findings
Stimulation of awareness of health needs
Collaborative
working for health
and well-being
Raise awareness about health and social well-being
and related factors , services and resources
Develop , sustain and evaluate collaborative work
Working with , and
for , communities to
improve health and
well-being
Communicate with individuals , groups and
communities about promoting their health and
well-being
Raise awareness about the actions that groups and
individuals can take to improve their health and
social well-being
Develop capacity and confidence of individuals and
groups , including families and communities , to
influence and use available services , information
and skills , acting as advocate where appropriate
Work with others to protect the public ’ s health and
well-being from specific risks
Influence on policies affecting health on policies
affecting health
Developing health
programmes and
services and
reducing
inequalities
Work with others to plan , implement and evaluate
programmes and projects to improve health and
well-being
Identify and evaluate service provision and support
networks for individuals , families and groups in the
local area or setting
Policy and strategy
development and
implementation to
improve health and
well-being
Appraise policies and recommend changes to
improve health and well-being
Interpret and apply health and safety legislation
and approved codes of practice with regard for the
environment , well-being and protection of those
who work with the wider community
Contribute to policy development 
( Continued ) 
30 Public Health Nursing
Table 2 . 2 ( Continued ) 
Principle Domain
Research and
development to
improve health and
well-being
Develop , implement , evaluate and improve practice
on the basis of research , evidence and evaluation
Facilitation of health-enhancing activities
Promoting and
protecting the
population ’ s health
and well-being
Work in partnership with others to prevent the
occurrence of needs and risks related to health and
well-being
Work in partnership with others to protect the
public ’ s health and well-being from specific risks
Prevent , identify and minimise risk of interpersonal
abuse or violence , safeguarding children and other
vulnerable people , initiating the management of
cases involving actual or potential abuse or
violence where needed
Developing quality
and risk
management within
an evaluative
culture
Prevent , identify and minimise risk of interpersonal
abuse or violence , safeguarding children and other
vulnerable people , initiating the management of
cases involving actual or potential abuse or
violence where needed
Strategic leadership
for health and
well-being
Apply leadership skills and manage projects to
improve health and well-being
Plan , deliver and evaluate programmes to improve
the health and well-being of individuals and groups
Ethically managing
self , people and
resources to
improve health and
well-being
Manage teams , individuals and resources ethically
and effectively
of patient care and health outcomes , and builds on the importance of nurses , 
health care assistants and nursing students . As well as this , they have an important role to play in supporting and protecting the value of nursing staff
in all their diversity and educating nurses professionally and academically , 
building a resource of professional expertise and leadership . It is the largest
nursing union . There are over 30 professional forums an RCN member can
join , bringing like-minded professionals together to debate key issues . Interestingly , there is no forum specifically dedicated to public health nurses . 
The Community Practitioners and Health Visitors Association
The Community Practitioners and Health Visitors Association ( CPHVA ) is the
UK professional body that represents registered nurses and HVs who work in
a primary or community health setting and recently suitably qualified nursery
Public Health Nursing 31
nurses have been able to join the CPHVA . It is part of the Unite trade union
with two million members nationwide . Unite was formed by an amalgamation of Amicus and the Transport and General Workers ’ Union and is the third
largest professional nursing union . Unite / CPHVA campaigns to protect the status of the community practitioner and the services they deliver . Unite / CPHVA
influences policy decisions by the production of high-quality reports and consultation documents , as well as by the staging of conferences and seminars . 
Professional forums
The three pathways also have professional forums . The United Kingdom Standing Conference ( UKSC ) is a body representing public health nursing in the UK , 
but was primarily developed to meet HV education and development needs . 
It provides a forum for discussion , exchange of information and news about
meetings , conferences , seminars , workshops and other events on topics related to public health nursing education and practice and links to resources
containing research and other information of interest from the four countries . 
A number of issues have recently been identified by UKSC for debate and
research and at present these remain health visiting focused . These include : 
 The focus of health visiting activity
 The goals for health visiting
 The core activities for health visiting
 The pre-requisites for effective practice
 Preparation for the role
The Association of Occupational Health Nurse Educators ( AOHNEs ) in the
UK is an organisation for teachers of occupational health nursing at higher
education institutions in UK . The organisation exists to promote best practice and education in occupational health nursing . It works closely with the
NMC , the RCN and other professional and statutory bodies in order to ensure
that education in occupational health reflects the needs of the workplace in
a changing society . Through practice educators and mentors , AOHNE also
collaborates with employers and their representatives in order to ensure the
highest level of training , both in theory and practice . 
The National Forum for School Health Educators ( NFSHEs ) is an organisation
for teachers of school nursing in higher education institutions . Among the
forum ’ s aims are to inform and advise appropriate bodies at local , regional
and national levels on issues relating to the education and training of school
health practitioners in a bid to establish equity and parity of educational
standards and to raise the profile of the work of school health practitioners . 
Other associations are available for practitioners such as the School and
Public Health Nurses Association ( SAPHNA )  , which was officially launched on
1 January 2006 , to provide a professional organisation that is dedicated to
public health nurses ’ professional needs . It is dedicated to the promotion of
excellence in practice , taking forward the public health agenda by working in
32 Public Health Nursing
partnerships for the benefit of children and young people and the communities
where they live and learn . This is facilitated through the dissemination of a
journal , conference / events , bulletins , website , research and other activities
with key stakeholder groups . 
Specialist occupational health bodies include the Association of Occupational Health Nurse Practitioners which has a marvellous website devoted
to courses , events , related documents and developments in the field and a
members-only section offering special offers and discounts . The Federation
of Occupational Health Nurses in Europe is also a useful resource for the OHN . 
The developing role of public health : prevention
and health promotion
In the nineteenth century , public health work became more about improving
social conditions and preventive medicine became focused on environmental
health issues , understanding the effects of environment on health and of the
link between poverty and health . In the early twentieth century , concern was
placed on maternal and child health and community nursing services such as
health visiting , district nursing and school nursing began to grow as health
education and health inequalities became important . Around the same time , 
there was a focus on the health of workers and early inspections of health
and safety was being addressed by at first doctors and then industrial nurses . 
The World War II became the final catalyst to push the country towards a
welfare state . The evacuees pouring from London were in very poor health , 
infested and undernourished and it prompted a public outcry . War brought
cohesion and even the wealthy had to accept the need to care for one ’ s own
countrymen . The 1942 Beveridge Report [ 33 ] on social services pleaded for
the eradication of the five giants on the road to reconstruction – Want , Squalor , 
Idleness , Ignorance and Disease . This report amongst others recommended
the creation of the NHS and the welfare state – a system of care that was
comprehensive , inclusive and free at the point of delivery . 
Public health medicine is traditionally associated with the prevention of
disease through epidemiology and surveillance , what we perceive as a medical
model of health . The independent inquiry into inequalities in health [ 34 ] took
a social model of health and made 39 recommendations . Thirty-six of these
ranged across the whole spectrum of government policy that influenced health
inequalities . A cross-cutting review on health inequalities was then conducted
by the Treasury with the participation of 18 government departments and
agencies . 
There are three domains in the modern faculty of public health work according to the Health Protection Agency : 
 Health protection – protecting people from hazards , which damage their
health : infectious diseases , chemicals and poisons , radiation , environmental
health hazards , emergency response
Public Health Nursing 33
 Health improvement – tackling inequalities , education , housing , employment , family / community issues , lifestyles , surveillance and monitoring of
specific diseases and risk factors , screening
 Service improvement – clinical effectiveness , efficiency , service planning , 
audit and evaluation , clinical governance
The SCPHN role in health promotion
Prevention and health promotion remain key roles for nurses ; prevention of
disease , disability or illness , and it is well recognised that they are in an ideal
position to deliver health promotion programmes both within hospital and
in the wider community , successfully contributing to the development of a
healthy population [ 11 , 12 , 35–37 ]  . Enabling and empowering individuals and
groups is a key construct in the health-promoting role of nurses . Tones and
Green [ 38 ] suggest that health promotion emerged in response to meeting
the environmental and behavioural determinants of health ‘ making healthy
choices easy choices ’  . They offer a formula : Health Promotion = Healthy Public Policy × Health Education , which requires a symbiotic relationship between
education , social and political change . They assert that health promotion is
on the one hand the prevention and control of premature death and disease , 
and on the other hand the promotion of well-being and control over health
through empowerment and enabling of individuals [ 38 ]  . However , complex
psychosocial and socioeconomic factors , such as financial standing , education and motivation , can make it difficult for individuals to make healthy
choices . It is purported that telling people how we think they should live is
a moral and political process and educating people about their health should
be done through public forums , which highlight the inequalities in health and
the inequity in power distribution [ 39 ]  . Arguably , people who can exercise
the greatest degree of autonomy will enjoy improved health [ 39 , p . 302 ]  . 
Laverack [ 40 ] also discusses the role power plays in health promotion and
public health and provides a useful guide on improving clients ’ power base
arguing that clients who have more power will gain more control over their
lives . 
The NMC [ 3 , p . 10 ] standards require the SCPHN to : 
Develop and sustain relationships with groups and individuals with the aim of
improving health and social well-being ; and develop capacity and confidence
of individuals and groups , including families and communities , to influence
and use available services , information and skills , acting as advocate where
appropriate . 
The above skills and competence are vital if clients and communities are to
take on board health-promoting messages which will prevent illness , disease
or disability . Public health nursing should also operate at the ‘ pre-need ’ stage , 
with public health nurses proactively addressing health need by identifying
self-declared , recognised and unrecognised health needs of individuals and
34 Public Health Nursing
social groups . Particular attention needs to be paid to disadvantaged or vulnerable populations , health inequalities and other factors that contribute to
health and well-being in the context of people ’ s lives [ 3 ]  . 
Prevention and the SCPHN
Preventative programmes in the last century in the UK have included improved
sanitation , water supply and quality of food , housing and workplace conditions 
[ 41 ]  . The pattern of health and illness has changed and historic infectious diseases such as cholera and smallpox are no longer a threat ; however , chronic
ill health and long-term conditions have replaced these concerns . Prevention
of infectious diseases has been addressed via successful immunisation programmes in the UK ; however , in other less developed countries diseases such
as cholera , typhoid , measles , tuberculosis and malaria are still very much major killers . In the UK , we still live with the threat of tuberculosis especially as
wide-scale immunisation has ceased . Of course , infectious disease is still with
us from different types of infectious disease – MRSA , Clostridiums difficile
and sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV / AIDS . Arguably , with increased
globalisation and people travelling both for pleasure and for business and / or
working abroad , there is an increasing risk of infectious diseases being brought
to the UK population . 
In addition to all these , at the top of the health care agenda are the chronic
illnesses from our modern lifestyle , which are arguably more difficult to
prevent : 
 Obesity leading to circulatory disease and diabetes
 Smoking leading to lung cancer
 Increased drinking leading to liver cirrhosis
 Complex societal factors leading to mental health issues such as stressrelated illnesses of anxiety and depression
Prevention of these modern life-threatening illnesses depends upon the action
and motivations of the individual , although community interventions such as
the ‘ smoking in public places ban ’ will help the fight against the effects of
passive smoking . Beaglehole and Bonita [ 42 ] argue that with coronary heart
disease becoming a leading cause of death in developed countries by 2020 , 
the need for public health practice to maintain and strengthen the response to
the modern non-communicable diseases of cancer , heart disease , stroke and
diabetes requires a broad and sustained approach which takes into account
the influence of socioeconomic factors . 
There are four types of prevention that public health practitioners are involved in delivering – primordial , primary , secondary and tertiary . The first
two relate to the prevention of disease and the second two in the promotion
of quality of life . These are outlined below . 
Public Health Nursing 35
Primordial prevention
Primordial prevention is considered to be work that is carried out to prevent
the development of disease at its earliest stages or early intervention work
with those considered at increased risk in the first place . Its aim is to avoid
the emergence and establishment of socioeconomic and cultural lifestyles
that contribute to disease and includes the involvement of national and crosscutting government policy [ 43 ]  . A review was carried out to consider how
having knowledge of the genetic causes of early cardiovascular disease can
lead to directed screening and better treatment of high-risk individuals [ 44 ]  . 
The study argued that while gene therapy would be the most ‘ primordial ’ approach to prevention of some diseases its practical application remains on
the horizon and the use of epidemiology is integral to primordial prevention 
[ 44 ]  . The collection of epidemiological data such as mortality and morbidity
rates allows mapping of the incidence and spread and relates to known causes
of disease , thus allowing priorities to be set which provides key information
for public health practitioners to plan and implement primary prevention programmes [ 44 ]  . They go on to argue that data must be collected , analysed
and utilised in a regular and systematic way and can provide a prediction of
the future disease burden and evaluate the success of disease prevention and
health-promoting programmes . A good example of primordial prevention is
the National Food in Schools Programme [ 45 ] implemented by the Department for Education and Skills which influences healthier food consumption in
children and young people . 
Primary prevention
This is aimed at limiting the incidence of disease by controlling specific causes
and risk factors and is usually aimed at whole population groups or high-risk
groups [ 43 ]  . Good examples of primary prevention programmes are immunisations which provide immunity to diseases and prevent the onset of disease . 
The new HPV vaccine is a good example of such a vaccine which will prevent cervical cancer . Health promotion and advice programmes are also an
example of primary prevention . 
Secondary prevention
This aims to reduce the serious consequences of disease through early diagnosis and treatment [ 43 ]  . These are measures that detect diseases early
and commence strategies which will prevent its further progression . This
is successful with diseases that have an early onset period that is not lifethreatening such as screening programmes for cervical cancer where abnormal cells can be identified and effective action taken to prevent progression . 
Other good examples are screening programmes such as vision and hearing
in workplaces and schools . 
Tertiary prevention
This is aimed at reducing the progress or complications associated with the
disease or illness by modifying behaviour and lifestyle and ensuring effective
36 Public Health Nursing
drug / nursing / medical intervention . This is an important aspect of the therapeutic role of the nurse in reducing suffering and rehabilitating clients back
to work or to adjusting to living a life with chronic disease . There will be more
about this in Chapters 7 and 8 . 
The challenges for public health nursing
Delivering the public health agenda requires a workforce that is skilled and
equipped to address the complex issues affecting the health of the public . The
chief medical officer promotes three tiers in the public health workforce [ 46 ]  : 
 The general public health workforce – any one in the business of promoting
health for instance nurses , doctors , social workers , teachers , police and
others
 Public health practitioners – those spending a major part of their time in
public health practice such as SCPHNs , other public health nurses and public
health practitioners
 Public health specialists – specialist medical officers , specialist registrars
and those senior strategists in public health
Skills , knowledge and competencies
SCPHNs practice in this complex and multi-layered environment and as nurses
they form one of the largest groups of professionals promoting public health . 
It is , therefore , particularly important that they have skills and competencies
in this field [ 47 , 48 ]  . Measurement of skills is arguably complex , yet there are
tools which can assess and audit these skills . Elliston and Wilkinson produced
and piloted a tool , which all practitioners could use to assess skills and identify
training needs [ 47 ]  . Their audit highlighted the need for management and
leadership skills , resource issues , education , training and development . The
paper called for mentorship , greater connectivity between regional and local
practice , multi-professional education and a fresh look at the level of support
for public health nurses . 
A small unpublished qualitative research project carried out in 2006 [ 49 ] 
used a focus group approach to explore the knowledge , understanding and
views of registered SCPHNs who are all active practice teachers for students
undertaking the degree programme leading to the qualification . Participants
were taken from health visiting , occupational health nursing and school nursing and were asked to explore three key areas : 
 Their public health role
 What the influences on that role are
 What they felt the solutions were to enhance this aspect of their role
The results of the research showed that the participants were knowledgeable about their role as public health nurses , but were influenced by lack of
Public Health Nursing 37
resources , poor understanding from others of their role and tensions with
managers and the wider team as to the importance of their public health role . 
They offered solutions including role clarity for the skill mix team , a clear and
joint vision for practice , and debated the idea of one member of the team
taking on a specific public health nurse role . However , as it is unpublished and
not yet peer reviewed its results should be interpreted with caution . 
Lack of educational preparation is a theme throughout the literature and
Danielson et al .  [ 21 ] acknowledged this in their work and have developed a
new educational framework for developing public health nurses with the key
constructs being to develop skills in health needs assessment , epidemiology , 
health promotion , empowerment , advocacy , policy development , collaboration and evaluation . These are all reflected in the standards set by the NMC
for SCPHNs and supported unanimously by other literature [ 3 , 16 , 21 , 49–56 ] 
suggesting nurses working in public health require the theoretical skills and
practical knowledge to work in community partnerships and interdisciplinary
teams ; to facilitate change ; conduct population and community health needs
assessments ; develop and improve health promotion and disease prevention
programmes ; and advocate politically to help communities fulfil their health
potential . 
Plews et al .  ’ s [ 54 ] research with nurses , lead nurses and managers revealed
a limited knowledge and skills in public health promotion ; that the interpretation of what public health is , was variable ; the lack of collaboration between
and within organisations and disciplines and community trusts was variable ; 
and they were a long way off audit and evaluation of public health work . A
common theme through the literature revealed nurses ’ feelings of being undervalued and underutilised , and Hemstrom ( cited in Ref .  [ 50 ]  ) suggests that
this may be due to under publishing of successful work and to the obscurity
of public health work in a highly technical biomedicalised health care system . 
There is also a common view that it is women ’ s work , third rate and low graded 
[ 51 , 55 ]  . It is argued that the difficulties faced by community and public health
nurses are due to the culture and paradigm of public health – the prevention
of illness and promotion of health within a deep sociopolitical dimension , in
competition with a prevailing illness model [ 57 ]  . Also , in addition , the medical
focus of general practitioners being on infection control and epidemiology , all
of which serve to make public health more difficult to operationalise [ 54 ]  . 
The population focus
What is common to all the literature is an acceptance that public health nursing in the new public health arena is population-based and prevention-focused
with a number of challenges represented by the population it serves . Yet , 
Grumbach et al .  ’ s [ 52 ] research found that the population focus is not reflected in public health nurses practice activities , management priorities or
education preparation and in fact there was little systematic evidence of what
constituted public health nursing practice at all . Holistic health and well-being
must be achieved by the majority in the pursuit and promotion of a healthy
38 Public Health Nursing
population and this requires a shift in the acknowledgment that preventative
medicine alone is not sufficient . An increased awareness of the need for social and community care , which takes into account the social and financial
determinants and inequities of communities , is required . This was explored
and highlighted by Black in 1980 [ 58 ] and Acheson in 1989 [ 59 ] and 1998 [ 34 ]  , 
with policy and politics playing a major role in the promotion of health . Recent
government documentation exploring each of the disciplines separately will
be addressed in more detail in later chapters but there are several key documents which explore the delivery of HV , OH and SN services in the twenty-first
century [ 60 , 62 ]  . The Tackling Health Inequalities : 2007 Status Report on the
Programme for Action [ 63 ] pursues this paradigm as health and social inequalities continue to exist well into the twenty-first century and ‘ remain stubborn , 
persistent and difficult to change ’  ( p . 3 ) and provides up-to-date information
on a range of key indicators as can be seen in the brief examples given in Box
2 . 1 . These have been chosen as these represent key health promotion work
for public health nurses . 
Box 2 . 1 Summary of progress against national
indicators
The big killers – Improvements in cancer and circulatory disease death
rates since 1995–1997 ( including for the most disadvantaged areas )  , with
a narrowing of inequalities in absolute terms for both . No significant
change in relative terms for cancer , but there has been a widening in
inequalities in relative terms for circulatory diseases . 
Teenage pregnancy – 13 . 3% drop in the rate of under-18 conceptions
between 1998 and 2006 ( with the average rate for the most disadvantaged areas also falling )  , with a slight narrowing of inequalities in
absolute terms but no significant narrowing in relative terms . 
Road accident casualties – Improvements in child road accident casualty rates since 1998 ( including for the most disadvantaged areas )  . 
There has been a narrowing of inequalities in absolute terms , but no
significant change in relative terms . 
Smoking – Since 1998 , smoking prevalence among all adults has fallen 
( including among manual groups )  , but there has been no significant
change in inequalities for manual groups compared to non-manual
groups or all adults in absolute terms , with some signs of a widening
in relative terms . 
Between 2000 and 2005 , the overall prevalence of smoking throughout pregnancy decreased slightly , including a large fall in prevalence
among women in the ‘ never worked ’ category but a slight increase
among routine and manual groups . There were some signs of a widening
of inequalities for routine and manual groups . 
Public Health Nursing 39
Fruit and vegetable consumption – Between 2001 and 2006 , consumption of five or more portions of fruit and vegetables per day increased 
( including for households with the lowest incomes )  , but there was no
significant change in inequalities between households with the lowest
incomes and households with the highest incomes or the average for all
households . 
Clinical work versus public health work
The difficulties faced by public health nurses are increased by the tension in
delivering the clinical role and the public health role , which was discussed by
all my focus group participants and is also seen in Elliston and Wilkinson ’ s 
[ 47 ] study which identified an emerging conflict of role – clinical caseload
versus implementation and participation in public health practice . DeBell and
Tomkins [ 64 ] argue that the literature and research from within public health
nursing practice suggests that the terms public health , health promotion and
health education are often used interchangeably . Although many nurses do
carry out health-promoting initiatives , these are often aimed at the individual
rather than the population , or they may be aimed at structural or organisational change . But they argue that most work is aimed at personal decision
making and ensuring individuals have access to accurate information . Health
surveillance is a key public health nursing role and is prevalent within the three
key disciplines , for some groups it may require the skill of a specialist nurse
whilst in other areas it is argued by practitioners as a task which can be taken
on within the skill mix team and prevents more proactive work being carried
out . 
There have been crucial policy drivers in reorienting the NHS and Primary
Care Trusts ( PCTs ) towards health promotion [ 10–16 , 46 ] with nurses being integral to shifting the focus of public health from a medical / clinical perspective , 
to a community level , which takes into account the broader social health of the
public and provides a framework to consider the social and political agenda . 
However , even with £1b financial input [ 65 ] to support new public health nursing roles , the ‘ non ring fencing ’ of this money meant it was diverted and has
resulted in PCTs lacking the capacity to undertake public health work despite
it being high on the policy agenda [ 65 ]  . For OH delivery outside of the NHS this
may not be seen as a major challenge but working outside of the NHS brings
with it many other constraints which have been discussed and highlighted in
Dame Carol Black ’ s recent review of the health of Britain ’ s working population 
[ 61 ]  . 
Improving the role – what are the solutions ? 
The literature [ 21 , 49–55 ] offers various solutions for improving the public
health contribution of nurses : 
40 Public Health Nursing
 Marketing of skills and increased publication and research output
 Strategic health authorities and PCTs taking a critical appraisal of organisational and financial constraints
 Commissioners needing to define the public health role of its service
providers
 Education programmes needing to educate for population health management , publication , research and marketing of the role and the skills to work
in partnership and collaboration
 Managers needing to be clear on the future of public health nursing and
ensure capacity , restructuring and reprioritisation
The skills for health agency and the NMC have addressed the need for competence through the setting of standards of proficiency for the education of
new public health nurses and for managing the performance of current public
health practitioners [ 3 ]  . All SCPHNs are educated to the new NMC [ 3 ] standards and locally programmes in practice and in universities are offering public
health education and training , which are developing skills and knowledge in
practitioners . 
The UK Public Health Skills and Career Framework is a tool developed by the
Public Health Resource Unit for describing the skills and knowledge needed
across all levels of the public health workforce . It was developed to aid collaboration and coherence across the diverse public health workforce , in order
to maximise its collective contribution and underpin the influence of public
health in the UK . Wright et al . are reviewing the usefulness of the tool for facilitating a shared approach to strengthening public health competence within
and across countries . 
Societal trends and the predicted needs of the health care system encourage a focus on community collaboration in an effort to improve the health
of communities [ 50 ]  . Fisher Robertson [ 50 ] asserts one of the most sophisticated skills required by health care providers is population health management , which McAlearney ( cited in Ref .  [ 50 , p . 495 ]  ) purports ‘ involves the use
of population-focussed health promotion and disease prevention interventions .  .  . designed to improve a community ’ s .  .  . health status in cost effective
ways ’  . It is also argued that a theoretical restructuring of health provision
to encapsulate the environment and provide extensive interdisciplinary models of delivery is required [ 56 ] along with skills in leadership , responsibility
and power being given to front-line practitioners and a financial framework
conducive to public health interventions [ 65 ]  . 
Ethics of public health
The above dialogue has made the presumption that the state has a responsibility towards reducing ill health and inequalities ; reducing the causes of ill
health ; protecting and promoting the health of children and vulnerable people ; 
helping people avoid unhealthy behaviours and ensuring healthy choices are
Public Health Nursing 41
the easiest choices . However , within these challenges it is also important that
public health programmes should : 
 Not attempt to coerce adults to lead healthy lives . Yet this is difficult in
the working environment where in some workplaces health surveillance is
statutory in order to comply with the 1974 Health and Safety at Work Act 
[ 67 ] 
 Minimise using any measure without consultation
 Minimise intrusion on personal lifestyle choices
Sir Muir Gray , the chief knowledge officer of the NHS , argues that ‘ In the
21st century , knowledge is the key element to improving health . In the same
way that people need clean , clear water , they have a right to clean , clear
knowledge ’  . At a presentation at the CPHVA conference in 2007 [ 68 ]  , he
suggested there are varying issues in the provision of health care in the UK : 
 Poor quality of health care
 Waste
 Unknowing variations in policy and practice
 Poor patient experience
 Overenthusiastic adoption of interventions of low value
 Failure to get new evidence into practice
 Failure to manage uncertainty
Surely then the aim of public health nursing practice is to help to overcome
these challenges with effective collaboration , planning and engagement with
the client groups they serve . 
Summary
The NMC standards [ 3 ] and the cited literature suggest that SCPHNs require
the theoretical skills and practical knowledge to work in community partnerships and interdisciplinary teams ; to facilitate change ; conduct population
and community health needs assessments ; develop and improve health promotion and disease prevention programmes ; and advocate politically to help
communities fulfil their health potential . Despite the barriers and challenges
discussed , there are many examples of excellent work and innovation and creativity within public health nursing . However , sustainability of these innovative
practices is a concern . Attention to addressing some of the above solutions
offered could ensure that innovative work that is based on a preventative and
social model of health would be sustainable in the future and achieve a reduction in health inequalities and an improvement in public health and well-being . 
Questions that remain open to debate and discussion are whether it is actually necessary to have a public health nursing qualification in order to practice
effectively as a public health nurse ? For OHN and some SN working outside of
the NHS , employers may not be that interested in having a public health nurse
42 Public Health Nursing
as long as it is a nurse who can deliver the services they require . However , this
can lead to reactive health care provision rather than true proactive health
promotion . Truly proactive health promotion can address problems before
they occur and working upstream , preventing people jumping into troubled
waters , is for many the best place for nurses to be . 
References
1 Haycock-Stuart EA . Public health nursing : issues for practice , research and
policy . Community Practitioner 2004 ; 77 : 9 . 
2 Royal College of Nursing . Defining Nursing . London : Royal College of Nursing , 
2003 . 
3 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist
Community Public Health Nurses . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 
2004 . 
4 Turton P . Public health : the professional response . In : Costello J , Haggart M , 
eds . Public Health and Society . Hampshire : Palgrave Macmillan , 2003 , pp . 151–
69 . 
5 Butt Y . Accessed June 2006 on www . publichealth . com . 
6 Department of Health . Essence of Care for Health Promotion . London : HMSO , 
The Stationery Office , 2006 . 
7 Elliott L , Crombie IK , Irvine L , Cantrell J , Taylor J . The effectiveness of public
health nursing : the problems and solutions in carrying out a review of systematic reviews . Journal of Advanced Nursing 2004 ; 45 ( 2 )  : 117–25 . 
8 Coverdale GE , Taylor DP , Elliott R . Specialist Community Public Health Nursing
Degree Course Handbook . Leeds : Leeds Metropolitan University , 2004 . 
9 World Health Organization . Health Promotion Glossary . Geneva : World Health
Organization , 1998 . 
10 Department of Health . Making a Difference : A Consultation Paper . London : 
HMSO , The Stationery Office , 1998 . 
11 Department of Health . Saving Lives – Our Healthier Nation . London : The Stationery Office , 1999 . 
12 Department of Health . Making a Difference : Strengthening the Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting Contributions to Health and Healthcare . London : 
HMSO , The Stationery Office , 1999 . 
13 Department of Health . The NHS Plan – A Plan for Investment , a Plan for Reform . 
London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2000 . 
14 Department of Health . Liberating the Talents : How PCT ’ s and Nurses Can Deliver the NHS Plan . London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2002 . 
15 Community Practitioners and Health Visitor ’ s Association and Department of
Health . Liberating the Public Health Talents of Community Practitioners and
Health Visitors . London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2003 . 
16 Department of Health . Choosing Health – Making Healthier Choices Easier . 
London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2004 . 
17 Department of Health . The Chief Nursing Officer ’ s Review of the Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting Contribution to Vulnerable Children and Young People . London : Department of Health , 2004 . 
18 Department of Health . Our Health , Our Care , Our Say . London : HMSO , The
Stationery Office , 2006 . 
Public Health Nursing 43
19 Department of Health . School Nurse Practice Development Resource Pack , 
Rev . edn . London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2006 . 
20 World Health Organization . Ottowa Charter for Health Promotion . First International Conference in Health Promotion , Ottowa . Copenhagen : World Health
Organization , 1986 . 
21 Danielson E , Krogerus-Therman I , Siverston B , Sourtzi P . Nursing and public health in Europe – a new continuous education programme . International
Nursing Review 2005 ; 52 : 32–8 . 
22 Richman J . Holding public health up for inspection . In : Costello J , Haggart
M , eds . Public Health and Society . Hampshire : Palgrave Macmillan , 2003 , 
pp . 3–21 . 
23 Scriven A , Orme J . eds . Health Promotion : Professional Perspectives , 2nd edn . 
Hampshire : Palgrave Macmillan , 2001 . 
24 Coverdale GE , Lancaster K . HNA : the theory practice gap recedes . Journal of
Community Nursing 2006 ; 20 ( 8 )  : 10–16 . 
25 Hooper J , Longworth P . Health Needs Assessment in Primary Health Care
Workbook , Version 2 . London : Health Development Agency , 1998 . 
26 National Institute for Clinical Excellence . Health Needs Assessment – A Practical
Guide ( available at www . nice . org . uk )  . London : Health Development Agency , 
2005 . 
27 Baggott R . Public Health : Policy and Politics . London : Routledge , 2000 . 
28 Kawachi I . Cities that make you sick . In : UKPHA Conference , March 2007 , 
Edinburgh , 2007 . 
29 Nursing and Midwifery Council . The Nursing and Midwifery Order 2001 ( SI
2002 / 253 )  ( available at www . hmso . gov . uk )  . Norwich : The Stationery Office , 
2001 . 
30 Nursing and Midwifery Council . The Code : Standards of Conduct , Performance
and Ethics for Nurses and Midwives . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 
2008 . 
31 United Kingdom Central Council . Standards for Specialist Education and Practice . London : HMSO , 2001 . 
32 Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors ( CETHV )  . An Investigation into the Principles of Health Visiting . London : CETHV , 1977 . 
33 Sir William Beveridge . Social Insurance and Allied Services Report . London : 
HMSO , 1942 . 
34 Acheson D . Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health . Accessed November
2003 on ; 1998 . 
35 Wainwright P , Thomas J , Jones M . Health promotion and the role of the school
nurse : a systematic review . Journal of Advanced Nursing 2000 ; 32 ( 5 )  : 1083–91 . 
36 Madge H , Franklin A . Change , Challenge and School Nursing . London : CPHVA , 
2003 . 
37 Lightfoot J , Bines W . Working to keep school children healthy : the complementary roles of school staff and school nurses . Journal of Public Health Medicine
2000 ; 22 ( 1 )  : 74–80 . 
38 Tones K , Green J . Health Promotion : Planning and Strategies . London : Sage , 
2004 . 
39 Buchanan DR . A new ethic for health promotion : reflections on a philosophy of
health education for the 21st century . Health Education and Behaviour 2006 ; 
33 ( 3 )  : 290–304 . 
40 Laverack G . Public Health : Power , Empowerment and Professional Practice . 
Hampshire : Palgrave Macmillan , 2005 . 
44 Public Health Nursing
41 Farmer R , Miller D . Lecture Notes on Epidemiology and Public Health Medicine , 
3rd edn , Oxford : Blackwell Scientific Publications , 1991 . 
42 Beaglehole R , Bonita R . Challenges for public health in the global context –
prevention and surveillance . Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 2001 ; 29 : 
81–3 . 
43 Bonita R , Beaglehole R , Tord Kjellstr¨om . Basic Epidemiology . Geneva : World
Health Organization , 2006 . 
44 Williams RR , Hopkins PN , Stephenson S , Wu L , Hunt SC . Primordial prevention
of cardiovascular disease through applied genetics . Preventive Medicine 1999 ; 
29 ( 6 , Pt 2 )  : S41–9 . 
45 Department of Children , Schools and Families . Establishing a Food Partnership . 
Accessed on nership . pdf ; 2003 . 
46 Department of Health . Report of the Chief Medical Officer ’ s Project to
Strengthen the Public Health Function . London : HMSO , 2001 . 
47 Elliston K , Wilkinson J . Supporting public health practitioners . Primary Health
Care 2006 ; 16 ( 6 )  : 18–20 . 
48 Cross S , Block D , LaVohn J , Reckinger D , Olson Keller L , Strohschein S et al . Development of the public health nursing competency instrument . Public Health
Nursing 2006 ; 23 ( 2 )  : 108–14 . 
49 Coverdale GE . Public Health Nurses – Fit for Practice ? Research Dissertation , 
University of Leeds . Pending publication , 2007 . 
50 Fisher Robertson J . Does advanced community / public health nursing practice
have a future ? Public Health Nursing 2004 ; 21 ( 5 )  : 495–500 . 
51 Croghan E , Johnson C , Aveyard P . School nurses : policies , working practices , 
roles and value perceptions . Nursing and Health Care Management and Policy
2004 ; 47 ( 4 )  : 377–85 . 
52 Grumbach K , Miller J , Mertz E , Finnochio L . How much public health in public
health nursing practice ? Public Health Nursing 2004 ; 21 ( 3 )  : 266–76 . 
53 Yamashita M , Miyaji F , Akimoto R . The public health nursing role in rural Japan . 
Public Health Nursing 2005 ; 22 ( 2 )  : 156–65 . 
54 Plews C , Billingham K , Rowe A . Public health nursing : barriers and opportunities . 
Health and Social Care in the Community 2000 ; 8 ( 2 )  : 138–46 . 
55 McMurray R , Cheater F . Vision , permission and action : a bottom up perspective
on the management of public health nursing . Journal of Nursing Management
2004 ; 12 : 43–50 . 
56 Uosukainen L . Promotion of the good life by public health nurses . Public Health
Nursing 2001 ; 18 ( 6 )  : 375–84 . 
57 Keleher H . Repeating history ? Public and community health nursing in
Australia . Nursing Enquiry 2000 ; 7 ( 4 )  : 258–65 . 
58 Department of Health and Social Security . Inequalities in Health : Report of a
Research Working Group Chaired by Sir Douglas Black . London : Department of
Health and Social Security , 1980 . 
59 Acheson D . Committee of Enquiry into the Future Development of the Public
Health Function . London : HMSO , 1988 . 
60 Department of Health . Facing the Future : A Review of the Role of Health Visitor ’ s . Accessed on www . dh . gov . uk / cno . London : Department of Health , 2007 . 
61 Dame Carol Black . Working for a Healthier Tomorrow . A Review of the Health of
Britain ’ s Working Age Population . London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2008 . 
62 Department of Health and Department for Education and Skills . Looking for a
School Nurse ? London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 2006 . 
Public Health Nursing 45
63 Department of Health . The Tackling Health Inequalities : 2007 Status Report
on the Programme for Action . London : HMSO , 2007 . 
64 DeBell D , Tomkins AS . Discovering the Future of School Nursing . The Evidence
Base . London : Amicus , CPHVA , 2006 . 
65 Baggott R . From sickness to health ? Public health in England . Public Money
and Management 2005 ; 25 ( 4 )  : 229–36 . 
66 Wright J , Rao M , Walker K . The UK public health skills and career framework –
could it help to make public health the business of every workforce ? Public
Health 2008 ; 122 : 541–4 . 
67 Health and Safety Executive . Health and Safety at Work etc . Act 1974 . Accessed
18 August 2008 on ; 1974 . 
68 Sir Muir Gray . CPHVA Conference , Torquay , 2007 . 
Chapter 3
Theoretical Perspectives of
Health Visiting
Faith Muir and Paul Reynolds
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Appreciate the role of the health visitor and identify how practice
has evolved
 Understand how the principles of health visiting underpin specialist
community public health practice ( health visiting ) 
 Explore health interpretation and need in relation to health inequalities and sustainable health
 Understand the value of health promotion and the health visitor ’ s
pivotal role within the community
Introduction
The practice of health visiting is an intimate endeavour requiring insight far
in excess of traditional nursing practice ; health visitors are privileged , they
observe family transition , tradition and change . Effective practice involves
public health enablement and collaborative undertakings . Working with and
within the community allows health visitors to consolidate their practice and
in doing so blend new and existing knowledge , to form the foundations of practical experience . Health visiting is exciting , vibrant , emotional and challenging ; 
moreover , this vibrancy is the dominion of specialist community public health
nursing which is the cornerstone of health visiting practice . 
Historical perspective
From a historical perspective , health visiting has developed from a personal
service into a public health service which incorporates elements of the original
role and is reflective of practice today [ 1 , 2 ]  . 
46
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 47
Manchester and Salford Sanitary Association was founded to contract maternal ignorance and increasing infant mortality in 1862 , whereby , Manchester
and Salford Ladies Health Society appointed the first health visitor . These
women were ideally placed to help and enable women improve their health
and well-being , increase their understanding of the importance of childcare in
the hope that infant mortality would be reduced significantly [ 3 ]  . They would
visit the poor in their own homes and promote health and hygiene ; moreover , 
this approach provided a unique service that focused on wellness rather than
sickness . It is clear that health visitor ’ s main function was dominated by the
social events of the industrial revolution . They were first coined as ‘ sanitary
missionaries ’  , ladies who interacted with the public in improving public health
education supported by local government at a time when infant mortality was
rising , and public health had become increasingly poor as communicable diseases were on the increase . The Public Health Act of 1848 showed interest
not only in the nation ’ s health but introduced a means by which this could be
addressed . It was clear at this time that health was moving into a new era in
relation to health care in this country . Indeed , it was administered with the
sole aim of reducing infant mortality but also intended to reform the existing fragmented services [ 4 ]  . It is clear from the early literature that public
health and well-being was at the fore regarding this pioneering venture [ 5 ]  , 
and eventually the Health Visitors Association was formed in 1896 ; furthermore , health visiting remains true to its ideology regarding social and public
health endeavours . At this time , those appointed as health visitors came from
a variety of backgrounds including doctors , nurses and graduates [ 6 ]  . Historically , prevention and health education proved to be the main focus of public
health practice at this time and this was embraced by the newly appointed
health visitors . Clearly , it was believed that there was a direct correlation between infant mortality and social conditions , limited education , malnutrition
and poverty ; in addition , improved health care was dependent upon a collaborative approach including a general awareness raising , an ability to control
and treat infection and improve social conditions . The idea of improved family
welfare was central to this provision of care [ 7 ]  . 
Sanitary women : the way ahead
 ‘ Sanitary women ’ proved beneficial and it was soon realised that the role had
great possibility . Nevertheless , it was not until the turn of the century that the
potential of health visiting was realised and London was the first borough to
formalise a training programme for health visitors ’  ‘ sanitary ladies ’ allowing
them to educate families in their own home and in 1914 health visiting was
formally recognised . Furthermore , following an Act of Parliament in 1918 , the
Maternity and Child Welfare Act gave local authorities the power to address
welfare work . This resulted in significantly reduced parameters of care and
education as health visitors now focused on child health as opposed to family
welfare ; nevertheless , work undertaken by health visitors across the country
proved variable based on local need [ 8 ]  . 
48 Public Health Nursing
The National Health Service ( 1948 )  : health visiting practice
re-considered
The inception of the National Health Service ( NHS ) in 1948 signified change
and the potential of health visiting was re-visited whereby , prevention and
family health exploring the social implications of family welfare were reinstated [ 9 ]  . Progress and development in the field of health visiting moved
forward and in 1956 the Jameson Report [ 10 ]  , an enquiry into health visiting
practice examined both nursing and health visiting perspectives . The report
recommended the setting up of integrated nurse education courses which included both basic nursing and health visiting . The value government placed on
health visiting marked a change in direction ; moreover , it highlighted current
need within society , therefore , a less restrictive practice was favoured which
required health visiting practice to be more family centred . Jameson in 1956
described health visiting practice at this time as a means to procure both
social and educational support for families in the community . 
Health visiting practice arrives , the defining moment
This report [ 10 ] was pivotal and as a consequence , the Council for the Training of Health Visitors ( CTHVs ) was set up which later became the Council
for the Education and Training of Health Visitors ( CETHVs )  . The CETHV published a seminal document which defined health visiting training and education [ 11 ]  ; moreover , this document provided the framework for successive
re-examinations and remains stoic in its resolve to underpin health visiting 
[ 12 , 13 ]  . More recently , however , Cowley and Frost [ 14 ] have updated the 1992
principles of health visiting [ 15 ] to reflect a more contemporary approach to
health visitor ’ s public health practice in the twenty-first century . 
Health visiting appraisal and organisational change
Health visiting has constantly re-examined and re-evaluated practice and is
not without its critics , furthermore , despite criticisms has maintained focus
and forbearing [ 16 ]  . It has been argued that Jameson in 1956 did health visiting a disservice by confusing the role of the social worker and health visitor , 
suggesting that in an attempt to legitimise the profession the association with
nursing was in hindsight a retrograde step [ 9 ]  . Nonetheless , a state-registered
qualification was required as a pre-requisite for health visitor training and in
1962 the CTHV led the way in health visitor education and in subsequent years
set new standards of entry establishing courses in higher educational institutes , acknowledging practitioners in their own right [ 4 ]  . In 1983 , the CETHV
ceased and its duties were embraced by the United Kingdom Central Council
for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting ( UKCC ) and the four National Boards 
( England , Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales )  [ 17–19 ]  . In 1992 , the boards
were disbanded and restructured [ 20 ]  , whereupon , health visitor training or
specialist community health care nursing often referred to as specialist practitioner qualification , became an integral component of the post-registration
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 49
nursing framework [ 21 ]  . In addition , the final role of the UKCC was to commission a detailed analysis to establish requirements for pre-registration health
visitor education and training . Once completed , this analysis was presented to
and accepted by the UKCC ( final meeting ) in 2002 , whereupon , implementation was agreed at the inaugural meeting of the Nursing and Midwifery Council 
( NMC ) in 2002 [ 14 ]  . 
Internalising and re-affirming practice is quite a radical perspective ; and despite changes , health visiting has always focused upon need and a reduction in
health inequality and inequity [ 22 ]  . What is clear is that this journey does not
diminish health visiting practice but strengthens it , and serves to show how
integral health visiting practice is to family and community public health [ 23 ]  ; 
furthermore , health visitors can reach the privileged and the needy within
society . This philosophy is engrained into public health practice , which guides
and informs current thinking and underpins health visiting practice potential [ 24 ]  , and identifies health visitors as specialist community public health
practitioners . 
Health visiting in context : the current debate
Health visiting practice is controversial , dynamic and integral to public health ; 
nevertheless , the role has been the cause of much debate resulting in recent
reviews [ 25 , 26 ]  . The antecedent to these was the publication of a document
re-affirming health visiting practice principles [ 14 ] which set the scene for
a much improved service in the twenty-first century . However , parallels can
be drawn from earlier literature revealing that health visiting practice has
continually had to demonstrate its value and worth ; here , Twinn [ 16 ] engaged
the profession in a judicious debate responding to Goodwin [ 27 ] who suggested
health visiting practice had become methodical and prescriptive . Arguably , 
any process that questions professional practice is contentious [ 28 ] and this
provides a timely reminder that the dilemma experienced by the health visiting
profession today is contiguous and needs to be addressed . 
Health visitor ’ s public health role : a concept of practice
Public health is by its very nature capricious and health visitors have responded accordingly and in spite of known fragilities with regard to role clarity . 
In response , health visitors have acquired the skill and knowledge which has
led to academic , educational and professional fulfilment . Health visitors in the
twenty-first century need to continue and consolidate this learning of worth
to secure and produce ‘ situation knowledge ’  , undertake practice evaluation , 
engage in research and publish the findings . This educational progression is
both valued and recognised and will provide structure to support practice
development ; moreover , it will improve role transparency and engender a
personal and professional satisfaction . It could be argued that health visitors
could become a passive observant of their own demise if this interaction does
not occur ; such is the enormity of the health visiting contribution to public
50 Public Health Nursing
health in the twenty-first century [ 14 ]  . Responsible health visiting requires politically astute health visitors who can actively respond to public health needs ; 
engage in health visiting / health visitor development , and embrace collaborative public health endeavours to secure health improvements and address
health inequalities [ 14 , 29 ]  . In addition , role continuance requires active and
proactive and political health visitors who regard research and education as
pivotal to health visiting success to secure their future development in the
public health arena . 
Furthermore , health visiting is an investment in the future ; it is sustainable , 
responsive and significantly contributes to society ’ s health and well-being by
working with and within communities [ 30 ]  . This is health visitor ’ s strength , the
ability to identify and respond to the needs , demands and challenges of the
community and to stimulate and create new directions in practice [ 14 ]  . 
New directions : a focus for research
Health visitors are a valuable commodity and proponents of health visiting
practice recognise their value within public health and health promotion [ 25 ]  . 
As discussed previously , health visitors have the capacity to ameliorate the
known causes of conflict , clarify their role and reduce the likelihood of professional ambivalence towards them [ 31 ]  . Health visitors have the capability
to realise support through practice endeavours and research into practice . 
Reciprocity and trust from allied professionals is fundamental if effective
health visiting practice is to be realised . Also , health visitors have to recognise disparity within their own profession if collaborative relationships are to
improve ; moreover , increasing competency , proficiency and skill will facilitate
this change and reduce role confusion . 
Cowley and Frost [ 14 ] define health visiting in terms of activities which are
proactive to address need that is both recognised and unrecognised . Similarly , 
Twinn [ 16 ] suggested that health visiting was identified specifically through
domains such as individual , environmental , psychological and emancipatory ; 
clearly , this quorate approach reinforces and underpins the principles established in 1977 [ 11 ]  , re-defined by Twinn and Cowley [ 15 ] and invigorated by
Cowley and Frost [ 14 ]  . This grounded approach to health visiting remains
apposite and vital . The principles remain vibrant , and distinguished , placing
health visiting in a pivotal position at the centre of public life , focusing on community , charged with the responsibility to ensure the public ’ s health potential
is realised and sustained . 
Extending the boundaries
The principles of health visiting : the mantra of health visiting practice
 The search for health needs
 The stimulation of an awareness of health needs
 The influence on policies affecting health
 The facilitation of an awareness of health needs
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 51
Activity 3 . 1
Take time to read and consider the principles in their entirety . This
philosophy embraced by health visitors is fundamental to all their public
health practice . A broader and more enduring understanding will enable
you to challenge and consider the importance of policy , practice and
research . 
Health visiting review
A review of the role of health visitors [ 25 ] placed the principles at the fore once
again and set out clearly defined structures to further frame and consolidate
health visiting practice in the twenty-first century . This document defined the
perpetual change within society and provided a health visiting response to
parallel these needs evidenced within society reflecting the valuable contribution health visitors can make to improve the public ’ s health . The parameters
and scope of practice are specific and public health improvement remains pivotal in all work undertaken by health visitors . Clearly , this aspect of a health
visitor ’ s role is unique and sets it apart from any other professional group
working in the community and this has been further underpinned in this document . There remains an even greater emphasis upon research , publishing
and evidence-based practice to inform best practice , policies to strengthen
future practice and emphasis on a universal service set within a targeted
service framework . This document acknowledges the changes within society , 
such as family structure , increasing diversity , excluded families and children , 
a greater emphasis is placed upon vulnerability , minorities within minorities , 
changing environments and public expectation . In addition , the document acknowledges this diversity and emphasises that the health visiting service will
contribute significantly and endeavour to meet those needs both professionally and collaboratively . The integrity of the profession has been realised and
the potential acknowledged ; moreover , the government ’ s response [ 26 ] suggests that health visiting will play a vital role in shaping the public ’ s health
and play a key role in tackling the social determinants of health and improve
health and well-being . 
Improved public health , health education and health promotion is the
essence of health visiting practice [ 14 ]  . The Darzi Report [ 30 ] further consolidates the role of community practitioners and recognises the need for improved care and quality within the NHS ; furthermore , the report highlighted a
collaborative approach to public health improvements and development , suggesting that an empowered workforce can deliver and sustain the most important elements of public health practice relying on nurses , midwives and health
visitors to deliver that care and improve well-being . Inequalities in health care
remain the focus for all primary and community health care practitioners ; furthermore [ 24 ]  , if inequalities are to be addressed then it is vital that health
52 Public Health Nursing
visitors re-establish their priorities and consolidate practice of work to ensure
the principles are adhered to and underpin all future work . Highlighting need
and unmet need remains an essential attribute of public health practice and
is engrained within the health visiting role . Health visitors working with and
within the community ensure that the wider determinants that affect health , 
inequity and inequality are addressed . 
The correlation between the rhetoric and practice of health visiting
The health needs agenda is and remains the focus of public health practice 
[ 32 ]  . Health visitors are required to embrace this philosophy and apply the
rhetoric from a community perspective . This emphasis on a traditional approach to health visiting ( universal service ) in the formative years enables
health visitors to prioritise their work and manage their workload . Ostensibly , health visitors have profiled their areas in an attempt to clarify their
work but also to highlight need and unmet need within an area . Getting to
know your patch is certainly one of the most fundamental components of a
health visitor ’ s role ; without an accurate picture of the community setting or
geographical area , the needs of the community cannot be fully realised or assessed [ 33 ]  . Public health measures including mortality and morbidity figures
and the demographics are an essential part of practice ; however , these may
only reflect key areas of need and may not truly represent the community as a
whole [ 34 ]  . This is not to say that the information is not accurate ; nonetheless , 
they may only serve to show determinants that have targeted and quality of
life issues may go unchecked . This unmet need from a population perspective
is a key area of public health practice and requires a collaborative approach if
society ’ s health is to be improved and sustained [ 35 ]  . 
Community health visiting
The principles of health visiting provide a framework and underpin all work
undertaken in the community and are comparable to the public health agenda 
[ 14 ]  ; moreover , it is becoming increasingly important to recognise that no
one professional group can tackle the ills of society , and health visitors must
engage and seek out others in the community to further and sustain community working to improve outcomes that are measurable and evaluative [ 36 ]  . 
Public health is central to health visiting practice ; therefore , it is important
to consider how health is experienced and expressed in order to understand
what influences choice and how best to facilitate and enable families and
communities to engage with their health . Part of this process is being aware of
what inhibits change and limits choices [ 24 ]  . The wider social determinants of
health contribute to health choices and this knowledge provides health visitors
with a much broader capacity to engage with families and communities and
to understand how change can be achieved . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 53
Clearly , it is important that health visitors and health visiting practice reflect
the diversity of the population it serves by providing dynamic and proactive
health initiatives to engage with an ever-increasing public expectation . Integral to this is providing new and innovative ways of addressing need which
can be far reaching and complex [ 37 ]  . Health visitors need to clearly understand their role and how the principles frame practice , justify and defend the
health requirements of their community and contribute to the wider social
and political determinants that pervade public life [ 38 ]  . 
Health visitors are ideally placed to ensure that all children and families receive optimum health promotion and guidance at specific times , for example , 
throughout a child ’ s formative years and when dealing with vulnerable groups
within society . Child development potential needs to be seen from a broader
perspective in terms of sustainability ; furthermore , surveillance has been replaced by the child health promotion programme [ 39 , 40 ] which facilitates a
broader capacity to engage in child health education [ 41 ]  . Health visiting has
the capability to tackle the problems faced by society today if the principles of
health visiting [ 14 ] can be facilitated and coordinated across a broader spectrum exploring intersectoral , collaborative , partnership working . Furthermore , 
health visitors have the skill and knowledge to engage and deliver improved
care once need has been identified . 
Defining community
In order to apply the principles in practice [ 14 ] the health visitor must identify
what community means to them . 
Activity 3 . 2
What does community mean to you ? Consider this statement and take
time to reflect upon your response before continuing . 
Community is a place that is identifiable and familiar , a place where we belong
but equally it may be somewhere we dislike and wish to move away from . 
Skidmore [ 42 ] suggested that community could be deemed a myth , whereby
society had been conditioned to think there is a shared identity and purpose . 
Arguably , the notion of community suggests coherence and collaboration but
these are just words to identify a location , one that could be fragmented
and disagreeable . Putnam [ 43 ] explores in depth the notion of a shared identity , communities and discusses commonalities of reciprocity and identifiable
collegiate goals as a means to improve health and well-being . Community is
by its very nature diverse , evolving , and as such the known dynamics can
change and the landscape alter , but what is important to realise is that the
community is made up of people , individuals , families , groups and organisations ; collectively , they are termed ‘ community ’  . In theory , communities
54 Public Health Nursing
include everyone , infants , young people , those in midlife , the old and vulnerable within society ; however , communities include the socially excluded and
mentally ill and the disadvantaged which is a far more realistic representation
of a community [ 44 ]  . In addition , community is a geographical area , a shared
environment or region ; however , community may only reflect a similarity of
space . 
Forging links with the community is an integral part of health visiting practice , and in an attempt to promote and engage with the health and health
needs of this diverse population group the complexities of ‘ community ’ must
be understood . 
How does community equate to health visiting practice ? 
Health visitors work in a variety of areas ( settings )  . 
These could include : 
 Geographical
 General practitioner ( GP ) attached
 Corporate
 Urban area
 Rural area
 Hospital based 
( other areas include prisons , mother and baby units , refuges , hostels and
homeless shelters )  . 
Health visitors work with and allied to other professional groups in and
within the community . If we look at the GP-attached health visitor in a rural
setting you are more likely to work closely with the practice nurse , school
nurse , social worker , community psychiatric nurse , midwife , GP , practice manager , community paediatrician , speech and language therapist and learning
disability nurse ( this list is not exhaustive )  . 
You may have responsibility towards the under five / four population and
their families , antenatal commitment , mother and baby clinic , rural outreach
clinics , postnatal support groups , child health promotion , health promotion
sessions for families and elderly groups ( to name a few )  . As a health visitor , you may have a specialist interest in child protection ( in addition to
your normal caseload )  , you may be involved in a domestic abuse forum 
( or a refuge if one is in your area )  , you may be on the local council medical committee , meet regularly with social services and be involved in other
collaborative endeavours to promote health and well-being in your community and / or new initiatives in your area to address health inequalities , 
need and perception of need . Some examples could include ( a safe play
area , teenage mothers or parenting support , improved housing or access to
counsellors ; similarly , you may want to improve existing services )  . In order
to understand need consideration must be given to the lay perspective of
health . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 55
The lay perspective of health : a health visiting view
Health interpretation is variable as it means different things to different people . Firstly , it is worthwhile considering what health means to you . 
Activity 3 . 3
How would you define health ? Consider this from a personal and professional perspective . Take time to reflect upon this . 
Most of us would concede that being healthy refers to the fact that we are
 ‘ fit and well ’ and have no medically defined illness . Arguably , the term ‘ health ’ 
could be considered as abstract , and is a concept that requires further scrutiny . 
Blaxter [ 45 ] suggests that the way in which we experience the world reflects
our interpretation of it ; moreover , reflecting on work undertaken by Foucault , 
she argues that perception is a systematic social discourse which is by definition subjective . In addition , she cites studies which infer that health interpretation is based on gender , age and social class . Laverack [ 46 ] supports this
claim suggesting that multiple interpretations are reflective of both personal
and cultural experience . In addition , he goes on to cite work by Labonte [ 47 ] 
reinforcing the complexities of interpretation stating that self-esteem impacts
on definition ; moreover , health can also be viewed as functional , in so much as
persons may have a disease ( diabetes mellitus )  , for example , yet regard themselves as fit and able . What is clear is that health is experienced in differing
ways and interpretation is representative of ‘ real life experiences ’ irrespective of culture , ethnicity , gender or race [ 36 ]  . Furthermore , it is important
to realise that health interpretation reflects a far more diverse , complex and
enduring problem which needs to be carefully appraised . In addition , health
interpretation can be viewed as relative and absolute [ 48 ]  , reinforcing cultural belief and experience . In conclusion , health is personal and cannot be
separated from the experience . 
Activity 3 . 4
What can influence health interpretation ? Consider this sentence and
write down what you consider is important and provide a rationale . 
The important thing to remember is that despite all the rhetoric that surrounds health interpretation , health is a political issue because of the health
divide , inequality and inequity [ 24 ]  . Health is a resource and has a cost and
therefore , good health is dependent upon political will and determination ; 
moreover , political intervention can in part remedy the inequalities that exist
by targeting the social determinants of health which requires political action 
[ 49 ]  . As cited earlier , improved access to services , improved housing , safe play
56 Public Health Nursing
and activities for children and adolescents , health is not just about improving
screening uptakes and providing immunisations ; it is about quality of life and
improving lifestyles which impacts on health outcomes [ 50 ]  . Stress and the
predisposition to mental health , employment opportunity , improved nutrition
in early life , work-life balance , transport and road safety ; all of these are politically driven and can significantly contribute to the entitlement of good health
prospects [ 51 ]  . 
Meeting unmet need and what this actually means : 
a health visiting perspective
Activity 3 . 5
How would you best describe need ? What characteristics do you think
are integral to need and how can these be justified from a health visiting
perspective ? 
Need is an ambiguous word and it is not unlike health in its interpretation 
[ 33 ]  . Need conjures up all kinds of thoughts to suggest we understand the
concept . We may think of need in terms of material objects ; however , this
could be deemed as a requirement and not necessarily reflect need . We all need
food and water , the basics to sustain life , and material possessions may be
considered desirable but not necessary or needed to survive . Need is therefore
a relative concept requiring a more in-depth appraisal to underpin and direct
health visiting practice and effectively tackle disparities in health [ 52 ]  . 
As discussed earlier , need has been described as a necessity without which
human life could not be sustained [ 44 ]  ; therefore , consideration must be given
to basic needs and how to differentiate between essential and social needs . 
Maslow [ 53 ]  ( see Box 3 . 1 ) attempted to distinguish need in terms of essential
elements and likened need to a hierarchal system , starting with physiological
needs being addressed first which would enable the individual to progress ; 
moreover , each individual need would have to be satisfied in order to progress
to the next stage and so on ( to achieve self-actualisation )  . 
Box 3 . 1 Maslow hierarchy of need 
( 5 ) Self-actualisation 
( 4 ) Esteem needs ↑ 
( 3 ) Belongingness and love needs ↑ 
( 2 ) Safety needs ↑ 
( 1 ) Physiological ( essential needs , i . e . shelter , water and food ) 
Adapted from Maslow [ 53 ]  . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 57
The complexity of need is explored here in more detail by Bradshaw [ 54 ]  . 
This taxonomy of need is divided into four ( normative , felt , expressed and
comparative )  , reflecting both the individual and population expectation of
health and the capacity to change . Examples cited reflect health visiting
practice : 
Normative need : It is generally agreed that normative need is categorised by a
professional , for example there may be some safety issues in a home which
the professional feels requires attention . A good example of this would be
the absence of a fireguard and the associated risk . The procurement of a
fireguard is a desired outcome ( a need ) to prevent accidental injury . You
could argue that it is a valued judgement on behalf of the professional
involved ; however , child safety is paramount and the family may not have
the necessary funds . Clearly , this area of practice is fraught with difficulty ; 
yet , the professional in their opinion feels a guard is needed . 
Felt need : Felt need differs from normative need as it is instigated by an
individual , family or group and not a professional and can be equated with
want . Felt need and expectation are inextricably linked and often perceived
as need . An example of this could be when a parent ’ s perception of care
differs with that of the professional ; they may feel they need more help . 
Here an expectation or a want is confused with a need . This felt need can
be at a variance with what is actually available and this can cause problems
for the professional ; furthermore , this type of need is relative . 
Expressed need : This is when a felt need becomes a demand . An example
could be a request for a housing letter as a family wants a property with
more bedrooms and a garden . This expressed need is when a felt need
translates into a desire . 
Comparative need : This is when individuals , families or groups do not receive
the same level of care and they feel there is a disparity . This can sometimes
be seen when you compare similar groups in rural and urban areas . The
agreed standard falls short and there is a need . 
What is evident is ‘ need ’ will be interpreted in different ways by professionals , lay people and organisations . Clearly , tensions exist and the definition of need requires a more holistic approach to encapsulate the social , 
environmental and political determinants of health needs assessment . Part
of the health visitor ’ s role is to address need and unmet need in their community but in order to do this , health visitors must be cognisant of health
interpretation if identified need is to prove meaningful ; obviously , lay perception is key to determining how health and well-being are perceived by the
population or community . Public health is central to health visiting practice ; 
therefore , it is important to consider how health is experienced , what influences choice and how best to facilitate and enable families and communities
to engage with their health . Part of this process is being aware of what inhibits
change and limits choices [ 55 ]  . The wider social determinants of health contribute to health choices and this knowledge provides health visitors with a
58 Public Health Nursing
much broader capacity to engage with families and communities and to understand how change can be achieved [ 24 ]  . Clearly , the level of need and unmet
need will reflect the diversity of the community and direct practice and this
will provide the focus for practice , increase ownership and will enable health
visitors to reconnect to the community . 
Determinants of health
These are a variety of factors that can inhibit or promote health ; they include
personal , economic and environmental factors . As stated earlier , factors that
influence health and well-being impact significantly on outcomes and can reduce or restrict choice . Dahlgren and Whitehead [ 56 ]  ( Box 3 . 2 ) suggested
that certain factors exist that are inevitable such as gender and age ; however , social , cultural , lifestyle and economic position may be variable but are
modifiable . How each of these influences one another has been examined extensively in the literature . However , Davies and Macdowall [ 48 ] conclude that
each individual determinant is significant and can vary at each stage of all our
lives ; moreover , interactions between the determinants can impact on health
outcomes . 
Box 3 . 2 Determinants
General socioeconomic , cultural and environmental conditions
 Agriculture and food production
 Work environment
 Living and working conditions
 Unemployment
 Water and sanitation
 Health care services
 Housing
Social and community networks
Individual lifestyle factors
Age , sex and hereditary factors
Adapted from Dahlgren and Whitehead [ 56 ]  . 
Activity 3 . 6
Health and childhood nutrition : Make brief notes on why nutrition is
important in childhood and how this can impact on health outcomes ? Do
any other determinants influence choice , and consider what influences
our understanding of health . Remember , health , its interpretation and
perceptions are personal . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 59
Nutrition can significantly affect health outcomes . Improving infant nutrition is one of the most important determinants of health and development . An
inappropriate or inadequate diet in childhood can significantly affect health in
later life . Socially disadvantaged families are more likely to feed their children
inadequate diets ; however , the rise in obesity suggests that prevalence may
also be due to environmental and social factors too ( see Chapter 1 )  . 
Health visiting diaries : what health visitors need to know
Health visitors ’ public health potential
The concept of public health has been open to scrutiny and interpretation ; 
yet , it is widely accepted that public health refers to a collective collaboration
engendered to improve and facilitate the health and well-being of the population . Therefore , public health can be defined as an attempt to improve the
functioning and longevity of populations [ 57 ]  . The Department of Health [ 50 ] 
supports this notion and goes on to suggest that good health and the potential of healthier outcomes are inextricably linked to lifestyle , opportunities for
health gain and the way in which people live their lives . Furthermore , health
improvement has been linked to many factors such as improved standards of
living , better education , enhanced nutrition and housing . This aspect of public
health as the primary focus of all intervention parallels the ideology of change
that was so vigorously challenged to control and treat infectious diseases , 
raise educational and economic standards in order to reduce the numbers of
premature deaths in the 1860s [ 58 ]  . Arguably , the nature of the illness may
have changed but the primary focus of public health remains the same : to
improve and sustain the quality of that life . Nevertheless , the breadth and
complexity of public health could be considered a weakness as attempts are
made to improve the quality of the population ’ s health by adopting a blame
culture inferring that unhealthy activity is avoidable without considering the
ramifications of social factors that may inhibit choice or make life more tolerable . Such is the complexity of public health that it is clear , as with health
visiting , some groups may consider problems within society in differing ways 
[ 59 ]  ; therefore , consideration must be given to such opinions and considered
accordingly [ 37 ]  . 
Health promotion : a health visiting endeavour
Health promotion is seen as the central focus of public health [ 60 , 61 ] and a
means to improve and sustain health . The Ottawa Charter [ 60 ] stated that
health is a resource for everyday living and the Bangkok Charter [ 61 ] reaffirmed this stating that good health is a fundamental right without discrimination . Improving health potential and promoting healthier lifestyles requires
political will and innovative health visitors . 
60 Public Health Nursing
Health visiting practice recognises the validity of sustainability , empowerment as cited in the Ottawa Charter and this endeavour is upheld within health
visiting philosophy [ 14 ]  . Moreover , addressing health inequality is the focus of
all health visiting practice and social determinants remain the cornerstone of
needs assessment in practice [ 62 ]  . Furthermore , the terms health promotion
and health education have been used synonymously without a clear understanding ; therefore , clarity is required [ 63 ]  . Health education is viewed as the
process involved in providing information to facilitate change and by design
facilitate improved health . This is usually undertaken on an individual basis requiring partnership and a willingness to engage , an enablement process , but it
is also an essential attribute of health promotion . Health promotion , however , 
explores the concept and risk associated with lifestyles , health behaviour and
the broader determinants that impinge on health and health choices such as
deprivation , unemployment , poor or inadequate housing , education and diet 
[ 48 ]  . In many ways it is not unlike health in its interpretation as is difficult
to define . Furthermore , health promotional activity is politically and socially
driven ; challenging , encompassing public health policy , culture , environmental
and social issues in contemporary society [ 64 ]  . 
Activity 3 . 7
Improving the public ’ s health is high on the political agenda . Social , 
economic and environmental factors can have an enduring effect upon
health and deepen health inequalities . Consider current practice and how
this is influenced by policy . 
Health promotion is by its very nature interwoven and complex ; therefore , 
health promotional activities can be expressed in many ways ( a health visiting
perspective )  : 
 Individual ( mental health and well-being ; child health promotion ) 
 Group ( women ’ s health ; mental health awareness ; teenage mothers ; local
campaigns to improve awareness of domestic abuse ) 
 Broader public health campaigns ( improving access to services for isolated
groups ) 
 Population health ( smoking ban ; safer sex ; immunisations ) 
Health promotion in primary care focuses on the social , environmental and
economic factors . To summarise , health promotion is a phrase that can be
used interchangeably with terms such as health education , health protection , 
health enhancement and health maintenance [ 35 ]  . Health promotion is all of
these but more specifically it is a means to achieve optimum health . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 61
The challenge of health promotion : health visiting practice
Assessing need in primary care can be challenging . Some of the evidence
does not reflect the true nature of incidence as numbers may be too small ; 
similarly , areas have been assessed collectively which is not representative of
need and fails to identify pockets of deprivation and / or inequality [ 35 ]  . Often , 
figures presented are the ones that are easily identifiable and not necessarily
reflective of unmet need . Difficulties arise in measuring the unmeasurable
such as continuity and effective communication . 
Activity 3 . 8
Therefore , health visitors must consider : how can you measure effective
health promotion in the short term [ 65 ]  ? What mechanisms do you have
in place to assess and evaluate practice ? 
In order to plan and engage in any type of health promotional activity a
full assessment of need is required as a pre-requisite to enable services to be
targeted appropriately [ 66 ]  , being mindful that the aspiration is good health
and the predisposition to poorer health and disease is determined primarily
by socioeconomic and environmental influences [ 24 ]  . Resultant behaviour is
often as a consequence of this and determined by the perception of need , 
health potential and an understanding of enablement , and influential external
forces such as the determinants of health . Health promotion is therefore an
integral component of public health and improved health gain , one which
health visitors need to be mindful of [ 67 ]  . Clearly , it is important that health
visitors and health visiting practice reflect the diversity of the population it
serves by providing dynamic and proactive health initiatives to engage with
an ever-increasing public expectation . Integral to this is providing new and
innovative ways of addressing need which can be far reaching and complex . 
Health visitors need to clearly understand their role and how the principles
frame practice , justify and defend the health requirements of their community
and contribute to the wider social and political determinants that pervade
public life . 
Health visiting in action : the ability to reflect – a mirror for practice
Reflection is an integral part of health visiting practice as it allows practitioners to internalise experiences and explore them in more depth [ 68 ]  . Reflection
also facilitates change and can consolidate practice experience . Furthermore , 
reflection is an antecedent to improve practice . Reflection is something most
people do regularly , it is inevitable and it can have a positive or a negative
influence . The ability to internalise and disseminate practice , however , is what
sets it apart from other reflective episodes [ 69 ]  . Reflection is the causal link
between theory , practice and growth in a professional field [ 70 ]  . Health visitors need to be able to critically reflect in order to defend and justify actions , 
62 Public Health Nursing
utilising research to underpin practice and sometimes internalise ethical decisions or dilemmas . Specialist practitioners ( student health visitors ) are required to reflect independently , collectively and openly in order to facilitate
change and demonstrate progression and understanding . Reflection can appear superficial , yet it opens up potential and possibility . Reflection is also an
enabling process when challenges or limitations in practice require further
scrutiny [ 71 ]  . To summarise , health visitors need to challenge and promote , 
defend and articulate decisions and substantiate actions regularly ; moreover , 
health visitors are advocates and as such must adhere to the NMC [ 72 ] code of
professional conduct requiring them to be accountable for practice ; therefore , 
reflection is both challenging and worthwhile . 
The concept of empowerment : the raison d ’ etre ˆ
of health promotion
The four principles of health visiting reflect health visiting practice and incorporate the premise of empowerment as a central theme [ 14 ]  . Working in
partnership with and within the community , health visitors enable and empower individuals , communities and groups to engage in their own health 
[ 73 ]  . The potential of an empowered community is far reaching and adheres
to the assertion laid down in the Ottawa Charter [ 60 ] and reaffirmed in the
Bangkok Charter [ 61 ]  . Increasingly , the discussion and research surrounding
the notion of empowered individuals and communities suggests that this is
more effective if health potential is to be realised [ 74 ]  . Advocacy and selfempowerment through enablement parallels partnership working and collaborative endeavours ; moreover , increasing community knowledge and supporting healthy campaigns underpins the empowerment philosophy enabling the
potential of change to be realised [ 75 ]  . Confidence , knowledge empowerment , 
partnership and collaborative initiatives are cyclical requiring support and
resources to engender improved healthy outcomes [ 46 ]  . 
Empowerment is central to health promotion and was defined in the Ottawa
Charter [ 60 , p . 1 ]  ‘ as the process of enabling people to increase control over , 
and to improve , their health ’  . Part of this declaration included the idea of ‘ realising aspirations ’  ,  ‘ satisfying needs ’ and ‘ health should be seen as a resource
for everyday life and not necessarily the object of living .  ’ 
Irrespective of health promotional endeavours , the concept of empowerment is difficult to define ; moreover , it is often easier to discuss powerlessness than empowerment . Similarly , to empower an individual or group one
has to assume there is a desire to be empowered or the capacity to be empowered is present [ 76 ]  . Self-determination is a key element to empowerment
and is fundamental to health promotional policies [ 77 ]  ; moreover , individuals
and / or groups will only become empowered if they have the desire to change
and it is viewed as a realistic goal . Furthermore , parallels can be drawn from
Maslow ’ s [ 53 ] hierarchical framework of need when we consider empowerment strategies , antecedents such as desire , capacity and a willingness to
change are central to the empowerment process [ 78 ]  . This ability to change
and become empowered may be a gradual process and not necessarily the
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 63
outcome itself ; therefore , in order to achieve the ideal state of empowerment , 
individuals , groups and communities must be cognisant of the benefits , explore
the rationale and engage in the process to actualise health improvement that
is sustainable and transparent [ 46 ]  . In addition , Laverack [ 46 ] suggests that
practitioners and people must work together if empowerment is to be realised , 
and suggests that the transformative use of power by practitioners makes the
link . Clearly , disparity is inevitable and multifarious ; in addition , measuring
empowerment is formidable , yet possible ; nonetheless , limitations may endure due to culture , race , gender and education ( to name a few )  , but more
importantly , health visitors must consider how practice can overcome such
challenges or barriers which may inhibit the empowerment potential [ 79 ]  . 
An understanding of health promotional models : 
the application of theory
Health improvement as part of health promotion uses models and approaches
to enable and facilitate improved health , moreover , guides the potential development of health promotional activities . These models are based upon a
medical approach , behavioural change , social change , empowerment theory
and educational improvement [ 80 ]  . The key principle is the model provides
the framework essential to determine behaviour and decision making ; therefore , models have evolved from health psychology and the study of human
behaviour . Models are a change agent requiring collaboration and partnership
if the outcomes are to prove favourable [ 48 ]  . From a practical point of view
these models are inextricably linked , share common features and aspirations ; 
moreover , they are principally determined by their use of language which can
be quite confusing [ 37 ]  . In essence , health visiting has focused upon an applied
approach in practice , which reflects the philosophy of health promotion in action . Health promotion explores health potential , embraces the perspective
of equity , for that reason , models are a figurative expression or an abstract
of change that can address need and direct action to improve health ; additionally , a model is a construct to examine and explain outcomes that can be
evaluated [ 36 ]  . 
Clearly , health promotion encompasses a variety of activities involving individuals , groups , organisations , communities and nations ; yet , sometimes
confusion remains regarding their application in primary care . Specific models have been used to tackle individual and / or group approaches to behaviour
change , an example of their usage is in smoking cessation adapting the stages
of change model [ 81 ]  ; however , in order to gain a deeper and more enduring
understanding of models health visitors must engage more in their usage . 
As cited previously , models are not rigid structures , they can and have been
adapted in order to best reflect the needs of individual groups , communities etc .  , what they do provide is a realistic representation of the potential
of partnership working required to effectively promote and evaluate health
outcomes . In Activity 3 . 9 , there are some examples of models used by health
visitors and adapted for health promotional activities . 
64 Public Health Nursing
Activity 3 . 9
Further reading on models is recommended : Have a look at the following
texts in the library or carry out a search on the net : health belief model 
[ 82 ]  ; stages of change model [ 81 ]  ; theory of reasoned action [ 83 ]  ; 
social cognitive theory [ 84 ]  . 
The prospect and scope of health visiting : an assessment of
health and inequalities
The assessment of need in a community can be undertaken by all professionals
working collaboratively ; however , in real terms new or newly appointed health
visitors need to be cognisant of the ‘ population ’  , existing health services , mortality and morbidity data , current infrastructure and resources including all
proposed and future health planning ( a considerable amount of this information can be accessed from the Annual Report of the Director of Public
Health in your area and Primary Care Trusts )  . In order to truly understand
recognised and unrecognised need , health visitors must ensure this process
is re-visited ( if a profile already exists )  , or reinstate ( if absent )  . The Annual
Report of the Director of Public Health and Census Data will provide insight
into current health trends , include success and inequity in your area / region
and social configuration ; but as cited earlier , this may not reflect the true
diversity of your community and practitioners need to be mindful of this [ 35 ]  . 
Often , data are limited or difficult to record particularly in rural or hard to
reach groups ; therefore , what this report will do is provide the primary focus
for your initial foray . In some areas the type of information may only reveal
what is measurable and may not reflect small pockets of deprivation , inequity
or disparity ; therefore , it may be difficult to draw any conclusions . This type
of practice avoids assumptions and rhetoric , moreover , attempts to improve
health for all . Clearly , profiling creates opportunities for further scrutiny . Addressing local health needs ( community )  , by demonstrating an awareness of
unrecognised and recognised need is an integral part of health visiting practice
and reflects government ’ s policy for improved health opportunities [ 14 ]  . A
community profile will enable you to frame and define your practice area , 
highlight inequality and help you to construct a community ‘ picture ’  , which
will allow you to start thinking about health visiting practice objectives and
more importantly , adheres to the principle of evidence-based practice [ 85 ]  . 
Social capital : the myth of a collective and cohesive partnership
Social capital is not a new phenomenon ; however , its prominence is now central to public health , health visiting and health policy to ensure the health
and well-being of individuals , families , groups and communities are realised
and maintained [ 86 ]  . Social capital is referred to as social interaction , social
cohesiveness , connectivity , group membership , including the shared norms of
reciprocity and trust , including , formal and informal social networks in and
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 65
within communities [ 87 ]  . This current interest has been attributed to the work
of Robert Putnam [ 43 ] who initially explored the concept of social capital in
Italy . Putnam suggested that a society that has no shared identity or common
beliefs or goals has limited health potential ; therefore , by improving social
capital within communities by increasing levels of connectivity using social
networks , they were more likely to have improved health gains [ 88 ]  . This social connectivity significantly affects the health of all members of the community ; it is the ‘ glue ’ that connects people and communities together , affording
protection against the adverse effects of poverty and deprivation . Putnam argued that factors that contributed to poor health gain included communities
with little or no social support , fewer social networks , included fragmented
and isolated families , increasing social mobility , leaving in its wake isolated
groups , with little or no interest in the community and its surrounding areas . 
In conclusion , such factors contribute to the social decline of a community and
this spiralling effect engenders indifference , apathy , negativity and ultimately
social exclusion [ 24 ]  . 
Putnam [ 43 ] has been criticised , suggesting that this utopia of a caring
community is unobtainable and fails to consider ethnic and cultural disparity
and class differences which can limit the potential for cohesion [ 89 ]  . Nevertheless , social capital cannot be ignored as a positive health measure in an
increasingly isolated society where poverty and deprivation , vulnerability and
exclusion , inequality and inequity are prevalent [ 90 ]  . The potential benefits
of collaborative endeavours , participation and social networking in communities can never be underestimated and can have a significant impact on health
and well-being [ 91 ]  ; therefore , the concept of social capital and connectivity is
certainly a worthy aspiration in community health visiting practice . 
Poverty and child health : the myriad of health visiting
Poverty and child health is not far from our conscience on a daily basis and as
health visitors we need to explore this concept in more detail in an attempt to
understand the ramifications for health visiting practice [ 92 ]  . 
Activity 3 . 10
Do children have choices ? Does poverty mean deprived ? Think about
these questions for a couple of minutes before you continue reading . 
What do you read in the papers or hear on the news about poverty ? 
Consider your experiences to date . 
Poverty is an international problem and needs to be considered in the context of the experience [ 93 , 94 ]  . Poverty is subjective and it is political . Poverty
and social deprivation significantly contribute to ill health and a reduction in
life expectancy [ 24 ]  . Poverty is defined as absolute or relative [ 95 ]  . Absolute
poverty is seen as an inability to provide the basics of life , food , clothing , housing and heating ; whereas , relative poverty is a perception of inequality based
upon society ’ s norms . Living in a deprived area , being unemployed , having
66 Public Health Nursing
poor or inadequate housing , limited education or educational opportunities ; 
disability and the prevalence of mental health all significantly contributes to
deprivation and health inequality [ 90 ]  . Clearly , poverty is a lived experience
with no boundaries with any one solution ; moreover , the social and economic
divide between the rich and poorer members of society are increasing and
health inequity between such groups remains . The health of the poorest has
improved ; however , the health of the more affluent members in society has
increased , escalating the health divide still further [ 96 ]  . 
Health visitors need to be mindful of the ramifications of deprivation and
poverty and its strain on family life [ 97 , 98 ]  . In order to realise their potential , 
health visitors must concede that despite their best efforts , change takes time
and often practice outcomes do not reflect work undertaken and evaluation
is not factored into practice [ 99 ]  . 
Child health promotion : health visiting opportunities
Child health promotion and child protection is a significant part of health visiting practice and a central component of public health policy and practice . 
Promoting child health , child mental health [ 100 ] and welfare involves government legislation and national policy , as well as health resources at community
level [ 41 ]  . Partnership working is an essential attribute of public health practice and reflects the principles of health visiting . Partnership working involves
individuals , families , communities and allied agencies . The Ottawa Charter 
[ 60 ] frames all child health and welfare ; furthermore , the National Service
Framework for Children , Young People and Maternity Services ( Children ’ s
NSF )  [ 39 , 101 ] and Every Child Matters ( ECM )  [ 102 ] acknowledge the enduring
nature of child and adolescent health and health potential . Essential to health
visiting practice is the adherence to the children ’ s NSF [ 101 ] and ECM [ 102 ]  ; 
moreover , contributing to improved child services and care is a pivotal role of
practice and this is underpinned by the principles of health visiting practice 
[ 14 ]  . Poverty and the risks associated with deprivation provide a platform for
health visiting practice , as is an awareness of the social and economic factors
that significantly limit and reduce choice ; working with families and communities to protect children and increase their health opportunities is integral to
the health visiting philosophy . 
Activity 3 . 11
Families that endure poverty and who have limited educational opportunity would benefit from health visitor intervention . Consider this statement and make notes . Reflect on your current experience and practice ; 
consider Dahlgren and Whiteheads framework again [ 56 ]  . Think about
the relationship between poverty and child health . Are families who are
disadvantaged limited still further and what can health visitor ’ s do to
reduce / limit inequalities and improve child welfare and is this a realistic
expectation of practice ? 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 67
Public health policy : the reality of health visiting practice
Public health policy is designed to improve the public ’ s health and in doing so
has focused attention on key aspects of health and health improvement [ 50 ]  . 
The government has produced a comprehensive health agenda to reduce
health inequalities for the twenty-first century . Saving Lives : Our Healthier
Nation [ 103 ]  , this provided the foundation for an improved service and better
health care . A report commissioned by the government , Wanless [ 96 ] reinforced the value of engaging the public in health choices , stating that health
care provision would be more cost-effective and success more likely if society were to be more fully engaged ; furthermore , he criticised time spent
on analysing problems rather than focusing on practical solutions . Choosing health [ 50 ] adhered to this participatory theme , acknowledging a need for
greater public involvement ( engagement ) in changing lifestyle . In addition , this
paper argued that disadvantaged and marginalised groups within society must
be provided with opportunities to make health changes to improve their health , 
formally acknowledging that inequalities determine health choices , reflecting
a far more realistic representation of the realities of life . Choosing health [ 50 ] 
refers to sustainable and cost-effective health care , arguing that existing problems require a fresh approach ; furthermore , disparity in health is increasing
despite current measures , therefore new and more innovative ways of engaging the public and delivering health care must be considered by health visitors . 
Choosing health [ 50 ] describes some of the following as ‘ pointers ’ for future
health care practice : 
 A reduction in smoking ( biggest preventable cause of ill health ) 
 Improved sexual health awareness and a reduction in sexually transmitted
diseases ( Chlamydia , which can cause infertility ) 
 Improvements in mental health problems , focusing on young people
 A reduction in the number of suicides , the commonest cause of death in
males under 35 years of age
 Improving nutrition and a reduction in obesity
The White Paper ,  ‘ Our health , our care , our say ’  [ 51 ] recommends collaborative endeavours to improve health , proposing health and social care initiatives , 
improved educational opportunities and improved services to poorer areas to
close the health divide . Meeting the needs of the local community ( in local settings ) is the main focus of this paper , overseen by Directors of Public Health . 
This paper embraces the ideology of Our Healthier Nation [ 103 ]  , Wanless [ 96 ] 
and Choosing Health [ 50 ]  , building on current services and promoting health
and well-being locally , suggesting health promotion should be integrated and
responsive in nature and certainly an integral part of health visiting practice . 
 ‘ Our health , our care , our say ’  [ 51 ] explores the potential of : 
 Health promotion and education ( prevention ) 
 Improved access to health and social care
 Increased community services
 Needs-based care
 Increased parity of services
68 Public Health Nursing
Clearly , the role of government is to improve access to services and the
quality of that care , furthermore , create opportunities through collaborative
endeavours and partnership working . To affect change , health visitors have a
vital role to play , none more so than working with communities to facilitate
improved health opportunities and actively seek out unrecognised need in
their area [ 14 ]  . Facilitating the potential for change in individuals , groups and
communities enables and creates opportunity for health gain and reflects the
philosophy of health visiting . 
Activity 3 . 12
Think about current policy . Health visitors need to consider what changes
need to be made and how change could be achieved . Get involved in local
organisations , and community groups . If you want to improve family nutrition you need to see what is already available in your locality . Where
do families shop ? Existing provision , local supermarkets , markets ( including fast food outlets )  , and transport services . Health promotional
opportunities need to be real and reflect local needs , find out what families want , have they already made changes , what could you add to this ? 
Are any other agencies already providing input that you could join ? 
Educational and health promotional opportunities may require a more
proactive stance . 
Summary
The reality of health visiting practice : public health in the
twenty-first century
Health inequalities exist and remain part of the fabric of our society [ 90 ]  . 
Despite government rhetoric and policies influencing public health practice , 
inequalities cannot be solved by simply improving or redirecting health care
provision . Factors such as poor or inadequate housing , unemployment , low
wages and deprivation contribute to inequalities requiring policies to address
them . Health is political and must be viewed as such if inequality , inequity and
disparity are truly to be addressed . Health visitors need to be mindful of this
and their valuable contribution . 
The Darzi Report [ 30 ] discusses improved services and focuses on quality
and health care , choices and partnership working . All of these attributes are
commendable ; however , if the minimum wage does not rise and investment
in social housing remains protracted then individuals and families will not feel
valued and this will inevitably lead to further inequalities whereby , families and
communities will become marginalised . In addition , families , individuals and
communities will become less inclined to participate actively in their health
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 69
choices . Health visitors need to be politically astute , and view health potential
from a broader perspective which will facilitate and enable change from within
the community , turning government rhetoric into reality . 
The full disclosure : health visiting facts
What health visitors need to do to address inequalities in health
 Assess need in your community ( apply the concept of need and build a
profile )  [ 104 ] 
 Target inequality and inequity within your community ( provide opportunities for hidden and minority groups )  [ 105 ] 
 Engage and involve the community in their health care ( build social capital ) 
 Work collaboratively ( including intersectoral working ) 
 Evaluate and justify actions / decisions ( knowledge from research )  [ 106 ] 
 Publish findings [ 107 ] 
 Share practice ( all outcomes are not necessarily favourable , nevertheless
this is a learning opportunity ) 
 Consolidate your knowledge of community public health continually ( get
involved in shared learning opportunities )  [ 108 ] 
 Remember : The health visitor ’ s public health potential has yet to be
realised [ 14 ]  . 
References
1 Robotham A , Sheldrake D . Health Visiting : Specialist and Higher Level Practice . London : Churchill Livingstone , 2000 . 
2 Robotham A , Frost M . Health Visiting : Specialist Community Public Health
Nursing , 2nd edn . London : Churchill Livingstone , 2005 . 
3 Dingwall R . Collectivism , regionalism and feminism : health visiting and British
Social Policy 1850–1975 . Journal of Social Policy 1977 ; 6 ( 3 )  : 291–315 . 
4 Cunningham P . The Principles of Health Visiting . London : Faber and Faber
Limited , 1967 . 
5 Ashton J , Seymour H . The New Public Health . Milton Keynes : Open University
Press , 1988 . 
6 Aveson J . Biblewomen and sanitary ladies . Health Visitor 1987 ; 60 : 156–61 . 
7 Douglas J , Earle S , Handsley S , Lloyd C , Spurr S . A Reader in Promoting Public
Health : Challenge and Controversy . Milton Keynes : Open University Press , and
London : Sage , 2007 . 
8 Clarke J . A Family Visitor . London : Royal College of Nursing , 1973 . 
9 White R . Health visitors : the willing horses . Health Visitor 1987 ; 60 : 163–8 . 
10 Ministry of Health . An Inquiry into Health Visiting . London : HMSO , 1956 . 
11 Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors ( CETHV )  . An Investigation into the Principles of Health Visiting . London : CETHV , 1977 . 
12 Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors ( CETHV )  . The Investigation Debate : A Commentary on ‘ An Investigation into the Principles of
Health Visiting ’  . London : CETHV , 1980 . 
13 Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitors ( CETHV )  . Principles
in Practice . London : CETHV , 1982 . 
70 Public Health Nursing
14 Cowley S , Frost M . The Principles of Health Visiting : Opening the Door to
Public Health Practice in the 21st century . London : CPHVA , 2006 . 
15 Twinn S , Cowley S . The Principles of Health Visiting : A Re-examination . 
London : HVA / UKSC , 1992 . 
16 Twinn S . Conflicting paradigms of health visiting : a continuing debate for
professional practice . Journal of Advanced Nursing 1991 ; 16 : 966–73 . 
17 Orr J . Health Visiting in Focus . London : Royal College of Nursing , 1980 . 
18 Robinson J . An Evaluation of Health Visiting . London : CETHV , 1982 . 
19 Batley N . The History of the Council for the Education and Training of Health
Visitors : The Middle Years . London : ENB , 1983 . 
20 United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing Midwifery and Health Visiting 
( UKCC )  . The Future of Professional Practice . London : UKCC , 1994 . 
21 Luker K , Orr J . Health Visiting : Towards Community Health Nursing . Oxford : 
Blackwell Scientific Publications , 1992 . 
22 Department of Health . Facing the Future : A Review of the Role of Health
Visitors . London : HMSO , 2007 . 
23 Department of Health . The Government Response to Facing the Future . 
London : HMSO , 2007 . 
24 Acheson D ( Chair )  . An Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health . London : 
The Stationery Office , 1998 . 
25 Department of Health . Facing the future : a review of the role of health visitors 
( available at www . dh . gov . uk / cno )  ; 2007 . 
26 Department of Health . The government response to facing the future : a review
of the role of health visitors ( available at )  ; 
2007 . 
27 Goodwin S . Whiter health visiting ? Health Visitor 1988 ; 61 ( 12 )  : 22–5 . 
28 Brocklehurst N . The new health visiting : thriving at the edge of chaos . Community Practitioner 2004 ; 77 ( 4 )  : 135–9 . 
29 Cowley S . Public Health in Policy and Practice : A Sourcebook for Health Visitors and Community Nurses . Edinburgh : Bailliere Tindall , 2002 . 
30 Department of Health . High Quality Care for All : Next Stage Review Final
Report ( Darzi Report )  . London : HMSO , 2008 . 
31 Brocklehurst N . Is health visiting ‘ fully engaged ’ in its own future well-being ? 
Community Practitioner 2004 ; 77 ( 6 )  : 214–18 . 
32 Carr S , Unwin N , Pless-Mulloli T . An Introduction to Public Health and Epidemiology , 2nd edn . Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2007 . 
33 Macdowall W , Bonell C , Davies M . Health Promotion Practice : Understanding
Public Health . Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2006 . 
34 Scriven A , Garman S . Public Health : Social Context and Action . Maidenhead : 
Open University Press , 2007 . 
35 Pencheon D , Guest C , Melzer D , Muir Gray J . Oxford Handbook of Public Health
Practice , 2nd edn . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2006 . 
36 Tones K , Green J . Health Promotion : Planning and Strategies . London : Sage , 
2004 . 
37 Corcoran N . Communicating Health : Strategies for Health Promotion . London : 
Sage , 2007 . 
38 Ewles L . Key Topics in Public Health : Essential Briefings on Prevention and
Health Promotion . London : Elsevier Churchill Livingstone , 2005 . 
39 Department of Health . Children ’ s health , our future : a review of progress
against the National Service Framework for Children , Young People
and Maternity Services 2004 ( available at www . dh . gov . uk / publications )  ; 
2007 . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 71
40 Hall D , Elliman D . Health for All Children , 4th edn . Oxford : Oxford University
Press , 2003 . 
41 Department of Health . The Child Health Promotion Programme : Pregnancy
and the first five years of life ( available at www . dh . gov . uk / publications )  ; 
2008 . 
42 Skidmore D . The Ideology of Community Care . London : Chapman & Hall , 1994 . 
43 Putnam R . Bowling Alone : The Collapse and Revival of American Community . 
New York : Simon & Schuster , 2000 . 
44 Fitzpatrick T . Welfare Theory : An Introduction . Basingstoke : Palgrave , 2001 . 
45 Blaxter M . How health is experienced ? In : Douglas J , Earle S , Handsley
S , Lloyd C , Spurr S , eds . A Reader in Promoting Public Health : Challenge
and Controversy . Milton Keynes : Open University Press , and London : Sage , 
pp . 19–32 , 2007 . 
46 Laverack G . Health Promotion Practice : Building Empowered Communities . 
Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2007 . 
47 Labonte R . Health promotion and empowerment : reflections on professional
practice . Health Education Quarterly 1994 ; 21 ( 2 )  : 253–68 . 
48 Davies M , Macdowell W . Health Promotion Theory : Understanding Public
Health . Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2006 . 
49 Gillam S , Yates J , Badrinath P . Essential Public Health : Theory and Practice . 
Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 2007 . 
50 Department of Health . Choosing Health : Making Healthier Choices Easier . 
London : HMSO , 2004 . 
51 Department of Health . Our Health , Our Care , Our Say : A New Direction for
Community Services . London : HMSO , 2006 . 
52 Chalmers K . Searching for health needs : the work of health visiting , Journal
of Advanced Nursing 1993 ; 18 : 900–11 . 
53 Maslow A . Motivation and Personality . New York : Harper , 1954 . 
54 Bradshaw J .  ‘ The concept of social need ’  . New Society , 30 March , 1972 . 
55 Hooper J . Health needs assessment : helping change happen . Community
Practitioner 1999 ; 72 ( 9 )  : 286–8 . 
56 Dahlgren G , Whitehead M . Policies and Strategies to Promote Social Equity in
Health . Stockholm : Institute for Futures Studies , 1991 . 
57 Bayer R , Gostin L , Jennings B , Steinbock B . Public Health Ethics : Theory , 
Policy and Practice . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2007 . 
58 Orme J , Powell J , Taylor P , Harrison T , Grey M . Public Health for the 21st
Century : New Perspectives on Policy , Participation and Practice . Maidenhead : 
Open University Press , 2003 . 
59 Power R , French R , Connelly J , George S , Hawes D , Hinton T et al . Health , 
health promotion and homelessness . BMJ 1999 ; 318 : 590–92 . 
60 World Health Organization . Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion . First International Conference on Health Promotion , Ottawa 17–21 November . Copenhagen : WHO Regional Office for Europe , 1986 . 
61 World Health Organization . The Bangkok Charter for Health Promotion in
a Globalized World . 6th Global Conference on Health Promotion . Bangkok : 
WHO , 2005 . 
62 Housten A , Cowley S . An empowerment approach to needs assessment in
health visiting practice . Journal of Clinical Nursing 2002 ; 11 : 640–50 . 
63 Whitehead D . Health promotion and health education : advancing the concepts . Journal of Advanced Nursing 2004 ; 47 ( 3 )  : 311–20 . 
64 Tones K , Tilford S . Health Promotion : Effectiveness , Efficiency and Equity , 
3rd edn . Cheltenham : Chapman & Hall , 2001 . 
72 Public Health Nursing
65 Smith S , Sinclair D , Raine R , Reeves B . Health Care Evaluation : Understanding
Public Health . Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2005 . 
66 Department of Health . The Health Visitor and School Nurse Development
Programme : Health Visitor Practice Development Resource Pack ( available at 
)  . London : Department of Health , 2001 . 
67 Almond P . An analysis of the concept of equity and its application to health
visiting . Journal of Advanced Nursing 2002 ; 37 ( 6 )  : 598–606 . 
68 Burns S , Bulman C . Reflective Practice in Nursing : The Growth of the Professional Practitioner , 2nd edn . Oxford : Blackwell Science Limited , 2000 . 
69 Moon J . Reflection in Learning & Professional Development : Theory & Practice . London : Kogan Page Limited , 1999 . 
70 Kember D et al . Reflective Teaching & Learning in the Health Professionals . 
Oxford : Blackwell Science , 2001 . 
71 Johns C . Becoming a Reflective Practitioner , 2nd edn . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing Limited , 2004 . 
72 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards to Support Learning and Assessment in Practice . London : NMC , 2008 . 
73 Smith M . Health visiting : the public health role . Journal of Advanced Nursing
2004 ; 45 ( 1 )  : 17–25 . 
74 Rissell C . Empowerment : the holy grail of health promotion ? Health Promotion
International 1994 ; 9 ( 1 )  : 39–47 . 
75 Kendall S . Health and Empowerment : Research and Practice . London : Arnold
Publishers , 1998 . 
76 Gibson C . A concept analysis of empowerment . Journal of Advanced Nursing
1991 ; 16 : 354–61 . 
77 Wallerstein N , Bernstein E . Empowerment education : Friere ’ s ideas adapted
to health education . Health Education Quarterly 1988 ; 15 ( 4 )  : 379–94 . 
78 Wallerstein N . Powerlessness , empowerment and health : implications for
health promotion programmes . American Journal of Health Promotion 1992 ; 
6 ( 3 )  : 197–205 . 
79 Wallerstein N . What Is the Evidence on Effectiveness of Empowerment to
Improve Health ? Copenhagen : WHO regional Office for Europe , 2006 . 
80 Nutbeam D , Harris E . Theory in a Nutshell : A Practical Guide to Health Promotion Theories , 2nd edn . Sydney : McGraw-Hill , 2004 . 
81 Prochaska J , DiClimente C . The transtheoretical ( stages of change ) model . In : 
Nutbeam D , Harris E , eds . Theory in a Nutshell : A Practical Guide to Health
Promotion Theories , 2nd edn . Sydney : McGraw-Hill , 1984 . 
82 Becker MH , ed . The health belief model and personal health behavior . Health
Education Monography 1974 ; 2 : 324–473 . 
83 Ajzen L , Fishbein M . Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behavior . 
Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall , 1980 . 
84 Bandura A . Social Foundations of Thoughts and Actions : A Social Cognitive
Theory . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall , 1986 . 
85 Rycroft-Malone J , Seers K , Tichen A , Harvey G , Kitson A , McCormack B . What
counts as evidence in evidenced based practice ? Journal of Advanced Nursing
2004 ; 47 ( 1 )  : 81–90 . 
86 Cooper H , Arber S , Fee L , Ginn J . The Influence of Social Support and Social
Capital on Health : A Review and Analysis of British Data . London : Health
Education Authority , 1999 . 
87 Morgan A , Popay J . Community participation for health : reducing health inequalities and building social capital . In : Scriven A , Garmen S , eds . Public
Health : Social Context and Action . Maidenhead : Open University Health , 2007 . 
Theoretical Perspectives of Health Visiting 73
88 Campbell C , Wood R , Kelly M . Social Capital for Health . London : Health Education Authority , 1999 . 
89 Gibson A . Does social capital have a role to play in the health of communities ? 
In : Douglas J , Earle S , Handsley S , Lloyd C , Spurr S , eds . A Reader in Promoting
Public Health : Challenge and Controversy . Milton Keynes : Open University
Press , and London : Sage , 2007 . 
90 Graham H . Unequal Lives : Health and Socioeconomic Inequalities . Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2007 . 
91 Naidoo J , Wills J . Public Health and Health Promotion : Developing Practice , 
2nd edn . London : Bailliere Tindall , 2005 . 
92 Alcock P . Understanding Poverty , 3rd edn . London : Palgrave Macmillan , 2006 . 
93 Graham H . Poverty and health : global and national patterns . In : Douglas J , 
Earle S , Handsley S , Lloyd C , Spurr S , eds . A Reader in Promoting Public
Health : Challenge and Controversy . Milton Keynes : Open University Press , 
and London : Sage , 2007 . 
94 World Health Organization . Preventing Child Maltreatment : A Guide to Taking
Action and Generating Evidence . Geneva : WHO , 2006 . 
95 Blakemore K , Griggs E . Social Policy : An Introduction , 3rd edn . Maidenhead : 
Open University Press , 2007 . 
96 Wanless D . Securing Good Health for the Whole Population . Final Report . 
London : HM Treasury and Department of Health , 2004 . 
97 Corby B . Child protection work . In : Child Abuse : Towards a Knowledge Base . 
Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2006 , pp . 238–45 . 
98 Gidley B . Sure start : an upstream approach to reducing health inequalities . 
In : Scriven A , Garmen S , eds . Public Health : Social Context and Action . Maidenhead : Open University Health , 2007 . 
99 Nutbeam D , Bauman A . Evaluation in a Nutshell : A Practical Guide to the
Evaluation of Health Promotional Programmes . Sydney : McGraw-Hill , 2006 . 
100 Reynolds M , Blackstock P . A public health approach for preventing child sexual
abuse . Community Practitioner 2007 ; 80 ( 2 )  : 14–15 . 
101 Department of Health . National Service Framework for Children , Young People and Maternity Services . London : HMSO , 2004 . 
102 Department for Education and Skills . Every Child Matters : Change for Children . London : HMSO , 2004 . 
103 Department of Health . Saving Lives : Our Healthier Nation . London : The Stationery Office , 1999 . 
104 Cowley S , Houston A . A structured health needs assessment tool : acceptability and effectiveness for health visiting . Journal of Advanced Nursing 2003 ; 
43 ( 1 )  : 82–92 . 
105 Corcoran N , Garlick J . Evidenced-based practice and communication . In : Corcoran N , ed . Communicating Health : Strategies for Health Promotion . London : 
Sage , 2007 . 
106 Bryans A . Examining health visiting expertise : combining simulation , interview
and observation . Journal of Advanced Nursing 2004 ; 47 ( 6 )  : 623–30 . 
107 Hillier D , Caan W , McVicar A . Research training and leadership for midwives
and health visitors . Community Practitioner 2007 ; 80 ( 1 )  : 28–33 . 
108 Grant R .  ‘ Micro ’ public health – the reality . Community Practitioner 2005 ; 
78 ( 5 )  : 178–82 . 
Chapter 4
Health Visiting in Practice
Faith Muir and Paul Reynolds
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Define health visiting in a public health context
 Identify the issues that have eroded the public health role of the
health visitor in the past
 Appreciate the meaning of life script and the importance of early
intervention in improving individual and community life
 Discuss the advantages of community development and recognise
the barriers that deter health visitor facilitating such projects
 Appreciate the importance of motivation , both individual and group
Introduction
Health visitors ( HVs ) have a family- and child-centred public health role and
deliver this service as part of a wider public health service . Health visiting
aims to provide universal early intervention , prevention and health promotion
programmes delivered on a continuum of support to all children , young people
and families according to need . The profession is required to work in both
partnership and collaboration with a variety of agencies and professionals in
an innovative and dynamic way that is responsive to children ’ s and families ’ 
needs and to tackle public health priorities . It is a progressive universal service
which delivers a systematic planned continuum of care and support according
to need at a neighbourhood and an individual level , in order to achieve greater
equity of outcomes for all children and families . Those with the greatest risks
and needs will receive more intensive support from the health visiting service 
[ 1 ]  . 
Health visiting practice is underpinned by the still relevant four principles
of health visiting that guide and inform professional practice [ 2 ]  . These are : 
 The search for health needs
 Stimulation of an awareness of health needs
74
Health Visiting in Practice 75
 The influence on policies affecting health
 The facilitation of health-enhancing activities
The Nursing and Midwifery Council ( NMC ) state within the proficiencies
required for Specialist Community Public Health Nursing , that public health
is still integral to the role of health visiting and draws our attention to the
vulnerable populations within society which are in need of the service . 
Public health operates at the ‘ pre-need ’ stage , by identifying and fulfilling
self-declared and recognised , as well as unrecognised , health needs of individuals and social groups . Paying particular attention to disadvantaged
or vulnerable populations , health inequalities and factors that contribute to
health and well being in the context of people ’ s lives [ 3 ]  . 
The term public health is a commonly used expression by health professionals , non-health professionals and politicians and simply speaking it is the
promotion of the health of the public . However , it does depend on numerous
factors , most of which are the remit of government , i . e . housing , environment , 
transport and food standards ( see Chapters 1 and 2 )  . It is , therefore , a much
wider matter than just medical interventions and services as is often cited by
the media . Public health , in its widest context , can be characterised by several
factors [ 4 ]  . These are : 
 Concern for the health of the whole population
 Concern for the prevention of illness
 Recognition of the social factors , which contribute to health
Yet , what at first appears a straightforward concept is in reality a complex
and broader set of issues , which the practitioner needs to be cognisant of
and will be discussed later . It could be stated that the confusion over the
components of public health has led to a narrow-minded approach by health
professionals leading to a limited and constrained delivery of the public health
agenda and that HVs as a profession have been culpable in allowing this to
occur . 
Health inequalities
Health inequalities and the increasing health divide between social groups
within the United Kingdom remain a major focus in all recent public health
reports [ 5–10 ]  . It is now a generation since the groundbreaking Black report 
[ 11 ] concluded that early childhood is a period of life when effective intervention could hopefully weaken the continuing association between health and
social class within the United Kingdom . The Acheson report [ 12 ] reinforced
this notion of the health divide and stated that the best chance of reducing widespread inequalities in mental and physical health relate directly to
76 Public Health Nursing
improving interventions to parents particularly present and future mothers , 
and their children . He recommended that this could in part be delivered by the
health visiting profession and that the role of the HV should be expanded upon
to provide social and emotional support to expectant parents and parents with
young children . The Wanless report [ 13 ] continued the debate and redefined
public health for the twenty-first century by incorporating the collective efforts of individuals and their families . 
This reappraisal allowed HVs to fully engage in the process of public health
within their practice areas and this was reinforced by the launch of the HV resource pack [ 14 ]  , which demonstrated that public health is a continuum which
allowed the practitioners to view their work with individuals , communities and
populations as part of the same scale and thereby connected as opposed to
viewing them as separate matters . As Robotham and Frost [ 15 ] state that HVs
tend to work within two models of health : the medical and social models . It is
this ability to incorporate both models into practice which allows the HV to offer a public health perspective which focuses on the prevention of illness and
disease and the promotion of health whilst acknowledging the contributing
factors of social , economic and environmental determinants of health . 
Health visitor ’ s role
Yet , it is apparent that the public health role of the HV in many areas across
the country since the turn of the century has been slowly eroded . The reasons
are varied and complex but the general consensus for this decline is that : 
 The whole time equivalent of HV hours in many trusts has been reduced
with the resultant public health issues being seen as a lesser priority by an
overstretched workforce . 
 The role of the HV in practice becoming blurred and losing its focus within
newly formed primary care organisations , with the profession itself losing
sight of its core principles and being pulled towards the medical model at
the cost of the social model . 
 A devaluation of the clinical leader ’ s role that traditionally has driven practice . 
 A lack of understanding of the HV ’ s role and the importance that early
intervention can have when dealing with public health matters . 
 The role of the HV impinged upon by other professionals and workers both
statutory and non-statutory , whose own roles have developed considerably
over the last few years . The HV is now part of a larger multi-skilled team in
the community and this has taken time to fully acknowledge the complexities
of other roles and the implications this has upon the HV ’ s role . Whilst the
growth has been broadly welcomed , it nevertheless has caused a period of
unsettlement within the profession . 
 A poor research base within the profession from which to base its public
health activities . 
Health Visiting in Practice 77
 The pressures on HVs to provide evidence of their activities has led the
practice to become a ‘ number crunching ’ exercise . In other words , quantity
over quality has become the norm in many trusts . 
It was , therefore , apposite that the review of the role of the HV [ 1 ] occurred
whereby the profession was forced to refocus its function within a public
health context and to clarify to itself as well as others , its place within the
NHS structure . Society has altered considerably over the past few decades
with key public health priorities now taking centre stage of any government
strategy . One only has to look at the areas HVs are being charged to play a
lead role upon to realise the enormity of the public health agenda . To name a
few : 
 Social exclusion in children and families
 Obesity
 Smoking cessation
 Child and family mental health
 Drug and alcohol misuse
 Accident prevention
Within the children , young people and families ’ public health service , the remit of the HV is primarily to focus on early intervention , prevention and health
promotion of children and their families through a public health approach . 
The HV will lead the Child Health Promotion Programme ( CHPP )  [ 16 ] whilst
maintaining a hand on role . This will require those practitioners with highly
developed complex skills to continue in the role they are good at and not be
drawn away from the child and family . The profession will : 
 Lead and deliver in partnership with other agencies and professionals in a
range of settings through a public health approach , the universal CHPP
 Lead and deliver wider community public health packages related to the
health and well-being of young children and their families
 Deliver intensive therapeutic programmes to the most disadvantaged young
children and families
The stage is now set for the profession to refocus its attentions onto the
varied public health issues , which currently affect individuals , communities
and population as a whole . 
Targets for health
It must be accepted that targets are a part of the NHS and within the public
health domain it is no different . The public sector agreement [ 10 ] target is
that , by 2010 , to reduce inequalities in health outcomes by 10% as measured
by infant mortality and life expectancy at birth . This is underpinned by the
objective on reducing infant mortality and by starting with children , under
78 Public Health Nursing
one year , by 2010 to reduce by at least 10% the gap in mortality between the
routine and manual group and the population as a whole . The government
views the reductions in infant mortality as a key marker in its attempts to
reduce the widening health divide . 
Influencing child health
Early childhood development is defined as the period from prenatal to eight
years of age and has been recognised by policy makers as a key social determinant of health and health inequalities [ 17 ]  . Cowley et al .  [ 18 ] acknowledge
that this is the age , which HVs have predominately focused upon , and that the
profession still uses this base to reach out to the wider community in which
children and their families live in order to influence the structural determinants of health . It is , therefore , obvious that the health visiting profession is
still central to any sustainable public health agenda , which concentrates on
the welfare of children and their families . 
Investment in early childhood is the most effective investment a country
can make , with returns over the lifetime many times the size of the original
investment . What a child experiences during its early years will set a critical
foundation for its entire life course [ 17 ]  . The term life script is becoming
commonplace and essentially this entails recognising that we all have a life
story , which will take us through to end or the final curtain . For some this
script is smooth and full of opportunity , whilst for others it is fraught with
traumas and a distinct lack of opportunity . The role of the professional is to
understand the potential life story of their client within their community and
to empower the transformation from a negative script to a positive script . 
From a childhood perspective those first few years are vital and their importance cannot be underestimated . The three broad domains of development
whether physical , social or cognitive are interconnected and are equally important for the child . Social determinants shape brain and biological development
through their influence on the qualities of stimulation and nurturance . 
Inequalities in health can be significantly reduced by the instigation of
breastfeeding and the later introduction of solids [ 19 ]  . This study concluded
that home visiting by effective HVs led to an array of health improvements in
the child and family . These were : 
 Increased breastfeeding rates
 Amelioration of behavioural problems including sleep
 Reduction in non-accidental injuries
 Increased parenting skills
 Increased intellectual abilities in children
It must be reiterated that the term highlighted above is ‘ effective ’  . There is
little point in health visiting unless the practitioner is able to make a difference
in the family or the community in which she serves . It is not a question of just
visiting or ‘ popping in ’ but to behave in a systematic , planned manner providing
therapeutic interventions and evidence-based practice . 
Health Visiting in Practice 79
The government has as one of its core manifesto aims to redress the disadvantages of being born into a particular social class has on the individual . 
It is a sobering reminder that the association between growing up in poverty
and being poor in adulthood has strengthened since the 1970s . There is little
doubt that poverty damages children and it is surmised that by three years
of age , poverty makes a difference equivalent to nine months ’ developmental
delay . By 14 years of age the delay is nearly for 2 years . Indeed , the greater
the number of risks children face ( internal and external )  , the greater will be
their vulnerability to poorer health , developmental delay and psychological
difficulties [ 20 ]  . Evidence suggests that simply being born into a different social class will have a significant effect on the life expectancy of that individual . 
The life expectancy of a male in Glasgow city is 11 years less than for the man
in East Dorset [ 21 ]  . It may seem difficult to acknowledge that this health divide
continues within the United Kingdom and to feel that the poor are somewhat
to blame for their own predicament . However , it is worth remembering that
the non-poor in virtually every country blame the poor for their own condition , 
thereby freeing themselves of any guilt or social obligation [ 22 ]  . 
As with most public health matters , change often takes a generation to filter
through but government policy has aggressively tackled some of the major
contributing factors to health inequality , either directly such as the public
smoking ban or indirectly such as the introduction of the minimum wage . 
Whether some of these initiatives have been successful or not is debatable
and will often depend upon political perspectives . However , it has ensured that
the nation ’ s health is under constant scrutiny and that all health professionals
are charged to implement change . It is worth noting that HVs need to be
politically astute in their practice to understand the health and social policy
drivers being implemented and to be cognisant of its repercussions . Without
understanding the basics of government policy and how it relates to local
populations , the HV could be accused of disadvantaging the community and
failing to address one of the principles of practice , namely , to influence policies
affecting health . 
The continual reinforcement of the cycle of poverty occurs because children
learn poverty-induced values and attitudes from their parents . Therefore , they
learn a set of beliefs , which include apathy , resignation , fatalism , immediate
gratification , early sexual encounters and a mistrust of authority [ 23 ]  . This
learnt behaviour is challenging to overcome for all professionals as often these
values are in direct opposition to our own and we feel that we just scratching
the surface of the problem . It is notable that research coming through from
the Sure Start areas is pointing towards highly skilled practitioners delivering
the best outcomes for that community and that the family health partnership
pilot projects in various Primary Health Care Trusts are concentrating on
delivering intensive packages of therapeutic input to targeted families from
the antenatal period to when the child is two years of age . 
Stable employment of parents and sound education are the two most important routes out of poverty for children [ 24 ]  . It is vital that the HV recognises her
connectivity to both education and employment matters locally and nationally
80 Public Health Nursing
and to explore those opportunities to work collaboratively within her locality . 
This again supports the argument for early therapeutic interventions that increase the chances of children reaching their potential and increasing parental
confidence that gives communities a better chance to access work and education . The HV needs to be aware of the ‘ bigger picture ’ if she is to be a true
advocate for her community in which she works . The new practitioner has to
have a sound awareness of : 
 Social exclusion
 Social capital
 Community development
 Vulnerability
These terms are now central to practice for HVs and should inform and
guide practice . 
Social exclusion
Social exclusion is what can happen when individuals suffer from a combination of linked problems such as unemployment , poor skills , low incomes , poor
housing , high crime environments , bad health and family breakdown [ 25 ]  . 
Yet , social exclusion also refers to factors resulting in people being excluded
from normal exchanges , practices and rights of modern society . Poverty is
one of the most obvious factors but social exclusion also refers to inadequate
rights in housing , education , health and access to services . A two-tier society
is becoming evident [ 26 ]  . 
Dimensions of social exclusion which the HV needs to be aware of are : 
 Economic : This takes into account factors relating to unemployment , job
insecurity , workless homes and income poverty . 
 Social : Refers to the possible breakdown of relationships , teenage pregnancies , disaffected youths and crime . 
 Neighbourhood : Decaying housing stock , collapse of social networks and
withdrawal of services from the most deprived areas because of vandalism
and fears for staff safety . 
 Political : Feelings of disempowerment , voter apathy with poor electoral
turnout and social disturbance . 
 Individual : Clients with mental and physical conditions and educationally low
achievers are more likely to find themselves socially excluded . 
 Spatial : Refers to the concentration of vulnerable groups in often quite distinct areas resulting in whole wraiths of cities and towns becoming economic
wastelands . 
 Group : Refers to the concentration of the above characteristics in particular
groups , i . e . elderly , disabled and ethnic minorities . 
When faced with a community of deprivation , the HV may feel overwhelmed
by the scale of the problems she encounters . One avenue she should take to
Health Visiting in Practice 81
gain an accurate snapshot of the issues affecting the community she works is
to do a community profile . 
Activity 4 . 1
Think about the community you work in . Can you identify families or
groups who are either socially excluded or at risk of becoming socially
excluded ? 
What are the underlying factors , which have led to this situation ? 
In an ideal world what could be done to help ? 
What can you do as a health visitor to redress this exclusion ? 
Community profiling
Profiling represents a traditional health visiting practice that has changed
little over the years . It is fair to say that it has fallen out of fashion in recent
times due to a number of reasons . Robotham and Sheldrake [ 27 ] identify that
practice has not been responsive to the identified need of the local population
because of two factors . Firstly , the organisational management of the HVs
has meant their work has been directed by local policies and management
structures which are not sensitive to the smaller communities the practitioner
may be working in . The patch covered by the profile may well be quite different
to neighbouring communities , i . e . a particularly high incidence of children with
special needs or illicit drug-using mothers . Within the realms of the Primary
Care Trusts , this may represent a relatively small concern , which may detract
from perceived more pressing matters , but within a community it could be a
significant public health issue . 
Secondly , HVs have found it difficult to work with the increasingly available
social data carried out by statutory and non-statutory agencies , which tends
to balance need with the resources available such as housing . The HV who
essentially works from an illness prevention and health promotion perspective
struggles with this type of data . 
However , the community profile is , if carried out correctly , a tremendously
useful proactive work piece which should guide practice and allows the practitioner to truly know her community . It is a comprehensive description of
the community and the health and social needs of that identified community . It should also highlight the available resources both financially and nonfinancially that exist within the community . It can draw upon both physical
and social capital within a ‘ patch ’ to highlight key assets for the community . 
Finally , an action plan can be developed to redress some of the health and
social needs of that group of people . 
Profiling is a key skill in the HV ’ s toolkit . It allows the practitioner to build
up a collection of data which identifies both the health and social needs of
the public in which they work . It should not be carried out in isolation , rather
the underpinning philosophy of any profile should be the communication and
82 Public Health Nursing
collaboration required between professional groups and more importantly the
individuals and groups of the community in question . Information that in an
academic sense would be classed as anecdotal can be very useful when building a picture of the community . An individual ’ s and a community ’ s perception
of what their environment is like can be very eye-opening . 
Activity 4 . 2
What data could be collected to carry out a community profile in your
area of work ? 
Bear in mind that social and health data is required . 
Who would you involve ? 
Where would you collect the data from and how would you present it ? 
Social capital
Social capital is a term increasingly used within the health and social arena . 
Yet , the concept has been around for over a century . Putnam [ 28 ] cites Hanifan
definition of social capital in 1916 as : 
The community as a whole will benefit by the co-operation of all its parts , 
while the individual will find in his associations , the advantages of the help , 
the sympathy and the fellowship of his neighbours . 
To clarify further , physical capital refers to the buildings and infrastructure
of a community , whilst social capital is essentially about the people within that
area . It is just as important as the physical capital yet is often overlooked when
profiling is carried out . Why is it that some communities have vibrancy about
them when you visit them ? There always seems to be events occurring , people
talking to each other and a general feel good factor . It is not necessarily about
money , it is about the people and the individuals who make up that community
and make it function . Putnam elaborates by identifying components of social
capital as social bridging and social bonding . 
Social bridging
The social bridging aspect is essentially inclusive and is outward looking and
will encompass people from diverse social backgrounds , i . e . playgroups and
schools . Whilst bonding is exclusive and refers to those groups , which by choice
or necessity are inward looking , i . e . church groups . Within a community both
are important , bridging can generate broader identities whereas bonding can
bolster the narrower self . As Putnam states that bonding is good for getting
by while bridging is crucial for getting ahead . Bonding is the superglue whilst
bridging is the oil that lubricates communities . 
Within many communities there has been a breakdown in trust and respect
for each other . The reasons are varied and complex but essentially society has
altered significantly over the past generation . As a nation , we have become
more prosperous . We now have a culture , which is of the individual rather than
Health Visiting in Practice 83
of society . Wealth has allowed us more freedom to do as we please , i . e . to go
abroad on holiday , to go to restaurants or buy a new car or the latest plasma
widescreen television with 100 channels to watch . 
Yet all this comes at a price , we are more likely to get divorced and live alone . 
We tend to work longer hours in an area away from our own home . We spend
more time travelling and we have fewer close social contacts . Or as Putnam
prefers to state ‘ we are bowling alone ’  . This expression relates to the fact that
he is American and if you remember the old films from the 1950s and 60s , often the lead characters would be seen in groups either going ten-pin bowling or
playing cards together at home . Putnam laments the demise of this culture and
noticed the correlation between the decline in social events and the decline
in society . It is commented upon that large numbers of well-educated middle class young men and women withdrew from clubs and churches , thereby
detaching themselves from strong supportive networks . This civic disengagement was passed onto their children and hence the predicament society finds
itself in . Interestingly , opting out of religion leaves a major void for individuals
which needs filling . As Stephen Fry remarked ,  ‘ stop believing in God and the
majority of people will believe in everything !  ’ 
It is proposed that communities which are high in social capital fare much
better than those which are not . By dealing with the smaller things , which
affect us , and which we have control over , then the larger problems afflicting the community will be reduced . For example , by taking an interest in the
welfare of elderly neighbours or by joining the local school board of governors , then you are actively engaged in that community . Social networks
develop and commonalities are forged . Individuals would start taking a pride
in their neighbour and keep a watch over events . If these small steps occur then the possibilities are endless . It is surmised that the following would
happen : 
 Violence reduces
 Teenage pregnancies decline
 Infant mortality rates reduce
 Low-birth-weight babies are fewer
 Poverty reduces
 Obesity rates would decline
The overall philosophy is that as individuals we lack a voice but as a group
we start to become empowered , we feel more confident and we are no longer
alone . Let us take the obesity issue from the above list . If a parent were on the
local school board of governors , he or she would be able to influence decisions
about the sporting facilities being utilised out of school hours . Potentially the
gymnasium and sports field could be hired out to interested parties or even
groups of parents who might want to set up a 5-a-side league , for example . 
The local HVs could facilitate the setting up of exercise classes . The school
with a little effort could become the central focus for the community . Instead
of having high fences around the perimeter with signs saying to keep out , it
84 Public Health Nursing
could be transformed into a meeting place . Instead of having schools which
are empty for large periods of time and run the risk of being subject to arson
attacks , which unfortunately is becoming the norm . The local population see
it as theirs and something to cherish and become involved in . The obesity
problem is at least tackled from a community perspective . 
Networking has long been a highly prized skill that HVs acquire . The HV
is ideally placed to introduce families to appropriate groups , from Smoking
Cessation Groups , a parenting group to a library parent and baby group . The
groups help parents grow in confidence and social capital . 
Social capital initiatives often require a degree of lateral thinking from HVs
but the opportunities are there to be innovative . Although it can be perceived
as being rather simplistic in its concept and some critics have declared that
social capital is an attempt to fill the void left by reduced public services . 
Undoubtedly , social capital is not the answer to all of societies ’ ills or to all of
the public health issues affecting the country but it can be enhanced to limit the
damage poverty can inflict on a community . By having repeated interactions
with fellow citizens with a neighbourhood , individuals will develop and maintain
traits that are good for society . These traits are tolerance , empathy and less
cynicism . 
Activity 4 . 3
Think of public health issue affecting the community you work in . 
How could you tackle this problem by building social capital ? 
What would you do ? 
Who would you approach ? 
Community development
Running in tandem and even overlapping social capital is the concept of community development . Although the term is probably more familiar to HVs than
social capital , there still requires clarification of its meaning . Ross [ 29 ] defines
it as : 
A process by which a community identifies its needs or objectives , ranks
these needs or objectives , develops the confidence to work at these needs
or objectives , find resources to deal with these needs or objectives , takes
action in respect to them , and in so doing extends and develops co-operative
and collaborative attitudes and practices in the community . 
HVs have often found community development difficult to become truly
engaged in , due to managerial policies requiring them to quantify their work
in measurable terms . However , from a public health perspective , community
development is a vital aspect of the profession , which should be nurtured by
managers who need to take a long-term attitude to this type of work . It is also
Health Visiting in Practice 85
fair to add that the development of Sure Start programmes across the country
has impinged upon the role of the HV in this area and that professional rivalries
and ideologies have led to some HVs being marginalised . There is evidence to
suggest that this is changing and the health input and knowledge HVs have of
a specific geographic area is of the utmost importance . 
Naidoo and Wills [ 4 ] suggest that community development is both a philosophy and a method . They cite the following points as central to the concept : 
 A commitment to equality
 An emphasis on participation and enabling the community to be heard
 Valuing people ’ s own experiences
 Collecting experiences and seeing problems as shared
 Empowering individuals and communities through education , skills development and joint action
There needs to be an underlying belief from the HV that the community
in which she serves has a fundamental right to achieve its health and social
potential . Whilst this stance may appear political in nature , it could be argued
that the health visiting profession needs to become more political astute if
they are to fully support , facilitate and empower their community . Community
development is as much to do with recognising people ’ s rights to equity of
services and potential for equality as well as the actual mechanics of the
development . 
From a HV perspective the link between strong community development
and good health seems obvious , yet the initial steps can appear daunting . All
community development takes time and this is because the main component
is , that it has to be user led . The role of the HV is as a facilitator and catalyst
and caution needs to be made to avoid the easy trap of prescribing for the
community . In others words it is common mistake for health professionals
to take one look at the problems facing a populace and to recommend a
course of action to rectify it without truly knowing the individuals or groups
involved . This approach will smack of paternalism and will rightly be met
with indignation and resentment . Management structures within NHS trusts
that require number of contacts and outcomes can often reinforce the HV ’ s
reluctance to become involved . 
Instead , the HV will need to adopt the following three traits to fully engage
in community development . These according to Naidoo and Wills [ 4 ] are : 
 To be user led and to understand the priorities a community has rather than
inflicting external priorities onto them . 
 To focus on the process of enablement . By allowing individuals and groups
to participate in identifying their own health and social needs will in itself
be a positive action . Self-esteem and confidence will be improved and these
in themselves are health-promoting factors . 
86 Public Health Nursing
 To concentrate on the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups . Instead of
focusing on individual lifestyles and running the risk of stigmatising those
individuals . Community development should be concerned with the social
determinants of ill health and be aimed at empowering people and groups to
act together to influence issues , which affect them . This may be to do with
housing , politics , crime , street lighting or even dog fouling . The main thing is
that it is about their priorities for addressing their health and social needs . 
To summarise , then , HVs need to ask the people what they think about their
community and what would make things better and remember their priorities
may be quite different from yours . 
An example of community development from health visiting practice was
the setting up of a postnatal depression group for mothers within a defined
area . It had become apparent from conversations with mothers who were
experiencing a mental health problem following the birth of their child , on
caseloads that there was a need to provide a support group for them . They
complained of feeling isolated , guilty and scared ; they felt they were the only
ones with this problem and expressed a desire to meet up with other women
going through the same process . Initially , there had been some concerns raised
from professionals and management about : 
 Risk management
 Cost
 Time required to organise
 Appropriate venue
However , these were resolved and what commenced rather tentatively with
a handful of participants and health professionals including a proactive midwife and psychiatric nurse , quickly grew to become a well-established and
well-attended postnatal depression group with a range of services aimed for
the local populace . The group rapidly moved from the safe medical perspective of explaining depression etc . to a broad social model providing emotional
support and practical help . The professionals involved understood this development and though pride might have hurt by the power shift towards the
lay community , this had to occur for the group to survive . The group after
all was theirs to do as it pleased . The health professionals still maintained a
therapeutic input , particularly for new attendees and were still a resource of
expert knowledge but the balance had shifted . The mothers themselves : 
 Organised a telephone support helpline
 Raised money via a number of charity events , which helped fund cr ` eche
facilities and transport
 Appeared on local television to highlight the plight of depressed women in
society
 Presented at a conference
Health Visiting in Practice 87
 Lobbied the local Primary Care Trust and Social Services for additional
funds
What at first seemed like a major task for the health professionals , very
quickly turned out to be the most rewarding aspect of their job . The evaluation
of the project revealed that the time spent setting up the project was repaid
many times over by the success of it . Not only was the HV ’ s time spent on
maternal mental health issues reduced but also it was concluded that the
GP , midwife and community psychiatric nurses ’ time was saved as well . The
mothers ’ mental illness was obviously a priority to be addressed by the group
but the dynamics of the group itself helped increase the individual ’ s selfesteem , confidence and provide a sense of belonging when they felt adrift in
a sea of despair . Whilst the health professionals were trying their best to cope
with these women on an individual basis , they could never hope to match what
the women could provide for each other . In reality , HVs struggle to provide an
hour a week to someone of their caseload who is depressed . Yet a supportive
group with befriending facilities from women who have either gone through
the experience themselves or were going through it also , could provide a
significant amount of time , which the HV could never match . 
What must be remembered is that not all projects or community development will be successful and that is to be expected . What must be allowed , 
however , is that it is directed by the community and is supported by the HV in
collaboration with other professional and agencies . 
True collaboration requires the HV to have the following attitudes and aptitudes [ 30 ]  : 
 Reciprocal approach
 Flexibility
 Integrity
As well as the following skills : 
 Open communication
 Relational skills
 Organisational skills
 Helping manner
Barriers to collaboration should be tackled both on an individual level and
on an organisational level . 
Barriers to communication : 
 Professional tribalism
 Spending constraints
 Different accountabilities
 Core beliefs of individuals involved
 Looking at things from one angle
88 Public Health Nursing
Activity 4 . 4
Think of the advantages and disadvantages of community development . 
How could you persuade your line manager that you should be involved
in a community development project around road safety issues ? 
What would the health benefits be ? 
Vulnerability
The concept of vulnerability is commonplace in discussions of adult and child
protection and in health and welfare provision more generally . Indeed many
services are planned and organised around the provision of services to vulnerable groups . It could be argued that the notion of vulnerability widely
permeates contemporary models of health promotion and social inclusion . 
However , the precise meaning of the term can lead to confusion , as it is not
always made clear when an individual or group is deemed vulnerable . At the
level of service delivery , risk assessment plays a disproportionate role in the
diagnosis of vulnerability . Although risk assessment is clearly important it
must be considered in relation to the context and situation before vulnerability is measured . A definition , however , is important and the following from the
Department of Health [ 31 ] is a useful starting point . Vulnerability is : 
A person who is in need of community care services by reason of mental or
other disabilities , age or illness and who is or may be unable to take care
of themselves or unable to protect themselves against significant harm or
exploitation . 
It has been suggested that we are becoming more vulnerable as a society 
[ 32 ] yet what components make up vulnerability ? Lessick et al .  [ 33 ] suggest
that our inborn characteristics determine a threshold of vulnerability and
this is unique to each individual . If the level of vulnerability remains below
the threshold level , the person is able to cope , adapt and remain healthy . 
Conversely , if the threshold level is exceeded then harm will occur to that
person . In other words , vulnerability is a continuum on which we are all placed . 
Some cope better than others with stressful situations but it is an individual
matter . It would be unfair to say that all elderly people in the United Kingdom
are vulnerable . Clearly , this is not the case . We know that some are and some
are not whilst others move in and out of states of vulnerability . 
Aday [ 34 ] identified seven determinants of vulnerability in relation to ill
health . These include : 
 Age
 Gender
 Race and ethnicity
 Social support
 Education
Health Visiting in Practice 89
 Life change
 Income
She continues to differentiate between vulnerability states on the basis of
whether the danger comes from within or is environmental . Internal refers to
the person who is genetically predisposed to illness or who has little motivation . Environmental refers to external factors often beyond the control of the
individual , i . e . marital disharmony or homelessness . Yet it is often the case
that the vulnerability threshold is breeched by a number of contributing factors coming from within and without . Appleton [ 35 ] agrees and in the context
of child and adult protection argues that it is rarely one factor , which places
a child or adult at risk of harm . However , it is important to note that not all
risks are equal and some factors may have a spiralling effect on the child and
family . 
The notion of interplay is now widely employed and is reproduced within
the concept of a risk triangle . The idea being that vulnerability is a function of
three interrelated elements . These are : 
 Risk factors
 Resources
 Life experiences
Altering any one of these factors can alter the individual ’ s susceptibility to
harm and their capacity to recover . 
Risk factors
The importance of knowing about risk factors is that they act as the yardstick
for prevention . However , referring to an individual or group as vulnerable
is meaningless unless we can be precise about their predisposition to harm . 
Vulnerability is often based on averages and general descriptors of risk such
as a lack of social support or being female or being elderly . Whilst theses
are starting points to understanding the social problem of abuse or neglect , 
risk factors in themselves are not absolute predictors of harm . Interestingly , 
if a vulnerable family does not meet the typical profile of being at risk , then
they may be overlooked or their predicament may be discounted in favour of
another family who more accurately reflects the victim profile . 
Spiers [ 36 ] stresses that if vulnerability is defined predominately in terms
of deficits , needs and a functional incapacity to protect oneself from harm the
protection strategies may lead to : 
 Fragmentation of care
 Potential to blame victims for their situation
 Stereotyping
The advantage of viewing vulnerability as a lived experience is that it avoids
regarding individuals susceptible to harm as being an inevitable consequence
90 Public Health Nursing
of gender , socioeconomic status or age . Instead , vulnerability can be measured in terms of an individual ’ s self-perception and is an estimate of their
coping skills and level of empowerment . This broadens our understanding of
vulnerability and leads the health professional to promote an individualistic
approach to assessment and also focuses on vulnerability as a dimension of
the quality of life . 
A narrow view of vulnerability as a series of risk factors promotes a tick
box approach to the diagnosis of vulnerability . The effects of being labelled
vulnerable can be extremely stigmatising to children , families and individual
adults , and act as a form of social control . This labelling can in itself be a disempowering factor to families and the child could become more disadvantaged . 
It is interesting to note that vulnerable families and hard-to-reach families are
less likely to accept health visiting support or intervention unless services are
seen as a universal entitlement [ 37 ]  . Families who fear stigmatisation within
the community they reside see this narrow targeting as a policing approach . 
An alternative and arguably preferable way to address vulnerability is to focus
on the experience of vulnerability and to assess strengths and coping capacity
rather than deficits and dependency . 
The increasing pressure on agencies to use vulnerability as a conceptual
paradigm against which needs can be prioritised , should be resisted on the
grounds that normative need is contested and vulnerability is variable . 
Activity 4 . 5
Read the following scenario and consider your response as a HV . 
Take into account the welfare of the child and examine the options
available to you within your role . 
You visit a family who has recently moved into the area . On your visit
the young single mother of a two-year-old girl reveals to you that she is
an illicit drug user . She is , however , on a methadone programme and is
being monitored by the drug outreach team from the local hospital . She
is finding the programme challenging and is prone to moodswings . 
The family moved to your patch to be closer to the maternal grandparents who are taking an active role in the care of the girl . They visit on a
daily basis and sometimes the child spends weekends at the grandparent ’ s house to give the mother a break . 
There appears to be a sound attachment between the mother and child
and the child ’ s development appears to be within the normal range for
this age . 
The child has no contact with her father . 
What are the main factors within this family ? 
Who do you discuss this situation with ? 
Is this family vulnerable ? 
Is the child at significant risk ? 
Health Visiting in Practice 91
Motivation
When working with many families who are deemed vulnerable one of the main
challenges facing the HV can be the family ’ s lack of motivation or desire to
change potentially health-damaging activities . We have all faced the family
whose diet is nutritionally lacking . Or the smokers who knowing the risks to
themselves and their children insist on their daily nicotine fix . Or the mother
whose child refuses to go to bed and despite your best attempts to instigate a
bedtime routine and action plan for when the child gets up finds it impossible
to do even one night of this new regime . So what is happening here ? Why do
we all engage in activities , which we know deep down is harmful to us or is
affecting the quality if our life and relationships , but we still fail to deal with it ? 
Changing behaviour
The shelves at the local library are full of self-help books for those of us
wanting to change our lifestyles . But we still fail to follow through on that
healthy guidance which is written in black and white . How many times have
you said to yourself that once things have settled down you were going to join
that gym , go on that diet , take up a new hobby and learn a foreign language ? 
We have all been there and for most of us those good intentions stay as
simply that . There have been a variety of models looking at motivation and
change . Perhaps one of the most famous has been Prochaska and DiClemente 
[ 38 ] cycle of change model . This is often used in association with smokers to
assess whether they are ready to alter their behaviour . Briefly , it is broken
down into five stages where the smoker will be . They are : 
 Pre-contemplation : This is where the smoker is not even thinking about
quitting . They are often quite happy smoking and see no reason to alter . 
 Contemplation : This is where the smoker is just starting to think about
changing their behaviour . Something may have triggered this stage which
has caused them to think about their actions , i . e . a new relationship or a
health scare . 
 Preparation : This is where behaviour is changing albeit off and on . They
will be seeking out information about quitting and seeking out professionals
and groups they can utilise . 
 Action : This is where behaviour has changed consistently for a short period
of time , usually for up to six months . They well may be prone to relapse at
times of stress . 
 Maintenance : It is the final stage when any change has been maintained
for over six months and the person now views himself or herself as a nonsmoker . 
Some smokers move quickly through these stages whilst others never shift
from the first stage . Yet as a HV how do you motivate individuals generally 
( not just smokers )  ? 
92 Public Health Nursing
Motivation can be simplified into people who are ready to change . A highly
motivated person is ready to change whilst a poorly motivated person is not
ready to alter . As Johnson [ 39 ] states the two key components to motivation
are : 
 Importance
 Confidence
By increasing the importance , to a client of changing behaviour , this can
lead to an increase in motivation and by creating more motivation moves the
client faster through the stages of change , whereas by increasing confidence
that the client can change a behaviour will create more motivation . 
The first component relates to those individuals who often have the confidence to change but do not see the importance of it , whilst the second
component refers to the majority of people who acknowledge the importance
of changing but lack the confidence to carry this through . 
This strategy can relate to any health behaviour , such as exercising , smoking
or parenting . 
The role of the HV often in behavioural change is to understand where the
client is in relation to the change model and to work in partnership with them
to understand their needs fuller . It is not as simple as to say stop smoking
or lose weight , because as we know , often logical reasons to do something
will often fail to motivate . The competent practitioner should be able to draw
upon her diagnostic and assessment skills to ascertain what would really make
something important enough to alter behaviour . Let us imagine the following
scenario , which is a fairly common situation of a young mother with a threeyear-old child with a disturbed sleep pattern . The mother has called for your
advice because she is at the end of her tether . She is tired and tearful and
has tried a number of times to correct his sleep pattern . He used to be a good
sleeper but since a bout of chickenpox some time ago , he has altered . The
family is obviously quite fraught . 
The HV can ascertain fairly quickly that the mother is aware of how important it is for the child and the family that the child gets into a regular sleep
pattern . It would appear that she has lost confidence in her ability to carry
out the sleep programme necessary . The mother believes that she has tried
the sleep programme and it just has not worked for her child . The HV ’ s role is
to boost her confidence and to support her through this trying process . Great
care is needed not to erode the mother ’ s confidence further by making her
feel a failure for not being able to carry the process through to its conclusion . 
This is not necessarily about motivating her about sleep but to motivate her
about her parenting , which has taken a knock in confidence . It will take time
but she will achieve her goal of a good night ’ s sleep . 
In another situation , you are called to see a mother at home . She has had
complaints from other parents at mother and toddler group because her little
girl is becoming aggressive . She tells you that her child cannot concentrate on
anything and tires herself out that much with crying that she sleeps most of the
Health Visiting in Practice 93
afternoon , she is worried that her child has attention deficit disorder . When you
visit and take a history , you discover that the child is staying up very late with
her mother and falling asleep on mum ’ s lap , sometimes as late as midnight , the
mother cherishes this time as it is the only time the child is calm and loving . In
this case the mother has not seen the importance of a regular sleep pattern
and therefore the HV needs to work with her to identify something about
altering the behaviour , which the mother would see as important , and clearly
it would be her worries about the child ’ s behaviour . If the child slept better she
could improve her behaviour . This scenario is far more complex than the first
case ; however , the key to change is still finding that motivation for change . The
mother will benefit by implementing a sleep programme when she has a less
disruptive child who is calmer and she can enjoy loving moments throughout
the day instead of late at night when they are both probably exhausted . 
Activity 4 . 6
You visit a family whose children are on the child protection register for
neglect . It has come to your notice that the children have not been taken
recently for their speech therapy appointments or immunisations . When
questioned , the parents claim that they think the children ’ s speech will
improve naturally and children have too many injections now . 
How do you tackle this situation from a motivational aspect ? 
Assessing need
Activity 4 . 7
Take a good look at Figure 4 . 1 . 
It is a piece of contemporary art , which is entitled Home and Garden . 
What do you see in the painting ? 
What do you think it is painted with ? 
What does it say to you ? 
What do you think influenced the artist ’ s decisions ? 
Are your comments influenced by its title ? 
What colours do you think the artist used ? 
Art has been used a lot in the public health arena ; however , this is not the
purpose for dropping in Figure 4 . 1 . If you are a student it will be useful to ask
one of your fellow students what they answered to the questions posed . It
will soon become clear that we all look at things differently and the only thing
you may agree on is that you are looking at the same image . The shapes may
fascinate one of you and how they work with each other and in some cases
94 Public Health Nursing
Figure 4 . 1
oppose each other . One may see chaos and disorder , another may see a busy
cheerful painting or you may merely dismiss it as a waste of space . There will
be many reasons why each of us sees different things when we look at the
painting . We all come from different backgrounds : some come from families
who are very creative and have had a childhood surrounded by art and visits
to galleries ; others will have never set foot in a gallery . Perhaps someone who
is reading this has a fine art qualification or is an amateur artist . Whatever
your opinion do not take these differences lightly , as it is not just art that
individuals see differently and have different opinions about . 
When we look at families we see different things . I wager that if you asked ten
different professionals what they saw , they would all say something different . 
Some would focus upon the child and how the child looked and was dressed . 
Others would look at the family dynamics and the relationships . For example , 
is the mother close to her child ? Is she looking at him or her ? Do they seem
happy or is that smile fixed and potentially covering something ? Others would
concentrate on the environment . Do they appear disadvantaged ? Is this a
family in social decline ? There are a myriad of questions , which could be
asked , and avenues of thought which could be taken . 
Health Visiting in Practice 95
It is fair to say that when we assess anything on a snapshot situation like
this , then what we are doing is drawing upon years of experience and knowledge sometimes consciously and sometimes subconsciously . We may also be
making stereotypical judgements on the families . Who is right ? Well , they all
are . We all see different things and draw different conclusions but it is important to recognise that as HVs , your opinion is as valid as the next because
unlike many other professions , you will have visited or had contact with this
family on numerous occasions and have drawn upon a number of assessments
to reach your conclusion . Individuals , families and communities are constantly
changing and the role of the HV is to facilitate those changes . As in the painting
pictured , often what we see initially in a family or a community is confusing , 
disjointed , and indeed scary but in collaboration with others and the family
or community themselves and an open mind an understanding of the issues , 
which affect this family or the community , will become apparent . It is important to recognise , however , that when we work with other agencies there are
two types of models . The first is the developmental model where staff works
together for the common good of the client . The second and perhaps most
common is the contingency model , which is influenced by workloads , structures and the qualities of staff [ 40 ]  . Whilst the first model is preferred , it is
necessary to understand why the second occurs ? 
The seven core capabilities for HVs
To be an effective public health practitioner a variety of skills and traits are
required . 
The seven core capabilities for HVs [ 41 ] as outlined in Scotland provide a
solid framework from which to practice . They are : 
 Assessing the health needs of young children , families and communities : 
This requires the HV to assess the child ’ s health and developmental needs
and to set the child within the context of its family and environment and
will include those who are disadvantaged , vulnerable or at risk . There is
an expectation that the HV will work in partnership within an integrated
team to assess the community needs ( profiling ) and to develop outcomes
to address those needs . 
 Promoting health and safeguarding the welfare of the young child : To work
in partnership delivering programmes designed to promote health and address key public health issues and inequalities . To ensure that there is an
appropriate response to children and families in need of protection from
abuse . 
 Therapeutic interventions : This will require the HV to provide a range of
therapeutic interventions , which will maximise health gain and minimise risk . 
Evidence-based practice will be central to this concept and would involve
independent non-medical prescribing , parenting programmes , behavioural
modification , cognitive behavioural therapy , listening visits to name but a
few . 
96 Public Health Nursing
 Leadership : There is an expectation that HVs need to lead and facilitate
health visiting and children ’ s centre teams to implement policies that takes
practice forward . Leadership skills should include seizing opportunities to
shape and influence the development of strategies related to improving
health and reducing inequalities . 
 Integrated working and partnership : Maintaining effective working relationships with families , communities , colleagues and other agencies . Diversity
and equality should be the goal respecting race , gender , disability , cultural
and sexuality differences . 
 Enhancing and developing practice : Continually auditing and evaluating the
effectiveness of services for children and families and implementing action
plans to support change . There should be a process in place to gain feedback
from both stakeholders and clients which would inform and enhance service
delivery
 Professional development and learning : The practitioner should be seeking self-improvement through a variety of methods . These could be reflective practice , clinical supervision and individual performance reviews which
would link into local and national initiatives . 
Whilst this list is not exhaustive it does allow the practitioner to reflect upon
there own practice as a HV and provides both the novice and expert worker
with a range of skills required to achieve best practice . 
Activity 4 . 8
Spend some time looking at the scenarios below . Try and identify the
areas in this chapter that can help you answer the task set . It can be
helpful to make some notes . 
Scenario 1
It has been brought to your attention that the local infant schools are
concerned about the number of overweight children now attending their
reception class and have asked you and the school nurse to tackle the
problem from a health perspective . You are obviously aware that this is
a delicate situation and call a planning meeting with interested agencies
to discuss the situation . 
Consider a course of action for addressing this issue keeping in mind
the roles and skills of other professionals who may be involved in this
community . 
Health Visiting in Practice 97
Scenario 2
The numbers of MMR vaccinations have declined significantly within
your patch over the last two years and the PCT are concerned that the
low ‘ herd ’ immunity levels are placing the local population at risk of
developing an outbreak . 
How do you approach this matter ? 
Scenario 3
You work within a relatively deprived area and the breastfeeding rates
are disappointingly low . The rates have always been low . What approaches can you as a HV take to begin to increase breastfeeding rates ? 
Whom will you involve ? 
Summary
This chapter has covered the fact that the HV has a family- and child-centred
public health role and highlighted that investment in early childhood is the
most effective investment a country can make . It has also demonstrated that
change takes a generation to make an impact but that stable employment
of parents and sound education have been shown to be the most important
routes out of poverty for children . It has covered the various dimensions of
social exclusion , community profiling and that HVs getting involved with communities helps the community develop empowerment . HVs need to be open
and work in collaboration with others to be effective , they must assess health
needs in order to promote health and facilitate therapeutic interventions . This
required leadership qualities combined with professional development . 
References
1 Department of Health . Facing the Future : A Review of the Role of Health Visitors . London : Department of Health , 2007 . 
2 Cowley S , Frost M . The Principles of Health Visiting : Opening the Door to Public
Health Practice . London : CPHVA / UKSC , 2006 . 
3 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist Community Public Health Nursing . London : NMC , 2004 . 
4 Naidoo J , Wills J . Health Promotion : Foundations for Practice , 2nd edn . Edinburgh : Bailliere Tindall , 2000 . 
5 Wanless D . Securing Our Future Health : Taking a Long Term View . London : HM
Treasury , 2002 . 
98 Public Health Nursing
6 Department of Health . Tackling Health Inequalities : A Programme for Action . 
London : Department of Health , 2003 . 
7 Department for Work and Pensions . Working for Children . London : The Stationery Office , 2007 . 
8 Health Inequalities Unit . Tackling Health Inequalities : 2007 Status Report on
the Programme for Action . London : Health Inequalities Unit , 2008 . 
9 Department of Health . Choosing Health : Making Healthy Choices Easier . London : The Stationery Office , 2004 . 
10 Department of Health . Review of the Health Inequalities Infant Mortality PSA
Target . London : Department of Health , 2007 . 
11 Black D . Inequalities in Health : Report of a Research Working Group . London : 
Department of Health , 1980 . 
12 Acheson D . Report of the Independent Inquiry into Inequalities in Health . London : The Stationery Office , 1998 . 
13 Wanless D . Securing Good Health for the Whole Population : Final Report . London : HM Treasury , 2004 . 
14 Department of Health . Health Visitor Practice Development Resource Pack . 
London : HMSO , 2001 . 
15 Robotham A , Frost M . Health Visiting : Specialist Community Public Health Nursing , 2nd edn . Edinburgh : Elsevier Churchill Livingstone , 2005 . 
16 Department for Children , Schools and Families . Department of Health . The
Child Health Promotion Programme . Pregnancy and the First Five Years of
Life . London : Department of Health , 2008 . 
17 Irwin L , Siddiqi A , Hertzman C . Early Child Development : A Powerful Equalizer . 
Final report for the WHO commission on the social determinants of health . 
Geneva : World Health Organization , 2007 . 
18 Cowley S , Cann W , Dowling S , Weir H . What do health visitors do ? A national
survey of activities and service organisation . Public Health 2007 ; 121 ( 11 )  : 869–
79 . 
19 Elkan R , Kendrick D , Hewitt M , Robinson JJA , Tolley K , Blair M , et al . The effectiveness of domiciliary health visiting : a systematic review of international
studies and a selective review of British literature . Health Technology Assessment 2000 ; 4 ( 13 )  : 1–339 . 
20 Montgomery H , Burr R , Woodhead M . Changing Childhoods . Maidenhead : Open
University Press , 2003 . 
21 Shaw M , Smith G , Dorling D . Health inequalities and new labour : how the
promises compare with real progress . BMJ 2005 ; 330 : 1016–21 . 
22 Gans H . War Against the Poor . New York : Basic Books , 1995 . 
23 Parrillo V . Contemporary Social Problems , 5th edn . Boston : Allyn & Bacon , 
2002 . 
24 Blanden J , Gibbons S , for Joseph Rowntree Foundation . The Persistence of
Poverty Across Generations : A View from Two British Cohorts . Bristol : The
Policy Press , 2006 . 
25 Social Exclusion Unit . Social Exclusion Unit : Purpose , Work Priorities and Working Methods . London : HMSO , 1997 . 
26 Percy-Smith J . Policy Responses to Social Exclusion : Towards Inclusion ? Maidenhead : Open University Press , 2002 . 
27 Robotham A , Sheldrake D . Health Visiting : Specialist and Higher Level Practice . 
Edinburgh : Churchill Livingstone , 2000 . 
28 Putnam R . Bowling Alone : The Collapse and Revival of American Community . 
New York : Simon & Schuster , 2001 . 
Health Visiting in Practice 99
29 Ross M . Community Organisations : Theories and Principles . New York : Harper
and Brothers , 1955 . 
30 Hornby S , Atkins J . Collaborative Care : Inter Professional , Interagency , Interpersonal . London : Blackwell Scientific , 2000 . 
31 Department of Health . No Secrets : Guidance on Developing and Implementing
Multi-Agency Policies and Procedures to Protect Vulnerable Adults from Abuse . 
London : Department of Health , 2000 . 
32 Rogers A . Vulnerability , health and healthcare . Journal of Advanced Nursing
1997 ; 26 ( 1 )  : 65–72 . 
33 Lessick M , Woodring BC , Naber S , Halstead L . Vulnerability : a conceptual model
applied to perinatal and neonatal nursing . Journal of Perinatal Neonatal Nursing 1992 ; 6 ( 3 )  : 1–14 . 
34 Aday L . Health status of vulnerable populations . Annual Review of Public Health
1994 ; 15 : 487–509 . 
35 Appleton J . Working with vulnerable families : a health visitor ’ s perspective . 
Journal of Advanced Nursing 1996 ; 23 ( 5 )  : 912–18 . 
36 Spiers J . New perspectives in vulnerability using emic and etic approaches . 
Journal of Advanced Nursing 2000 ; 31 ( 3 )  : 715–21 . 
37 Apps J , Reynolds J , Ashby V , Husain F . Family Support in Sure Start Children ’ s Centres : Planning , Commissioning and Delivering . London : Family and
Parenting Institute , 2007 . 
38 Prochaska JO , DiClemente CC , Norcross JC . In search of how people change . 
American Psychologist 1992 ; 47 : 1102–14 . 
39 Johnson J . The Sixty Second Motivator . Indianapolis : Dog Ear Publishing , 2006 . 
40 Payne M . Social Work and Community Care . London : Macmillan , 1995 . 
41 NHS Education for Scotland . Supporting the Development of Advanced Nursing Practice . A Toolkit Approach . Edinburgh : CNO Directorate , Scottish Government , 2008 . 
Chapter 5
The Development of School
Nursing
Mary Smith and Sarah Sherwin
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Appreciate the historical , political , legal and social influences affecting the development of the school health services and school
nursing
 Discuss the development of legal accountability for school nurses
 Appreciate the standards required of school nurses when promoting
the health of the school-aged population
Introduction
This chapter will discuss the historical development of the school health service from its origins in the 1870s and include an exploration of how the public
health nursing role of the school nurse has evolved to what it is today in
the twenty-first-century United Kingdom ( UK )  . The relevant drivers for public health change , legislation and social policy will be considered in order to
appreciate how and why the school health services and school nursing developed . Discussion will include an exploration of the changing role of the
school nurse to meet the new agenda and a consideration of the constraints
on school nurses . The development of legal accountability for school nurses
and an exploration of legal issues relating to the school-aged population will
be considered . Finally , some of the challenges faced by school nurses since
gaining the specialist community public health nursing ( SCPHN ) qualification
will be explored . 
Preventing childhood disease , the promotion and protection of child health , 
education and welfare are not new concepts although the development of
statutory education and the school health service as a public health measure
100
The Development of School Nursing 101
to promote and meet the health needs of school-aged children has come a
long way since its inception 140 years ago . Health and education are inextricably linked and children cannot make the most of educational or employment
opportunities if their health is impaired . Arguably , there is still a long way to go
before all children and young people achieve their full health and educational
potential but progress has been significant . 
As with many other welfare developments in the UK , education and health
care provision have their origins in the late nineteenth century . The following
section uses a chronological approach to summarise significant statutory legislation relating to childhood education , the development of the school health
service and school nursing including a consideration of the related drivers for
change and implications . 
History of the school health service
Up until the end of the nineteenth century education , health care and welfare
for children was largely based on the ability of families to pay [ 1 ]  . The attitude
of British society towards the education of all children was mixed , whilst philanthropists argued for universal entitlement and some financed charitable
schools ; education was generally considered to be not only unnecessary but
inappropriate for working class children as they were required for employment 
[ 2 ]  . 
In 1870 , in spite of fierce opposition the first legislation to establish a national and mainly free system of compulsory state education for all children
in England and Wales was introduced and this required their entry into school
from the age of five years to the age of eight years ( Education Act 1870 
( Forster ’ s Education Act )  )  . Similar provision was established in Northern Ireland and in Scotland ( Scottish Education Act 1872 )  . Political drivers for legislation were twofold : firstly , the need to educate people as citizens in the
recently democratised and industrialised UK and secondly , in response to economic factors which required a literate and numerate workforce . 
Interestingly , legislation in 1876 ( Education Act 1876 ) placed a duty on parents to ensure that their children received elementary instruction in reading , 
writing and arithmetic although many families could not afford to send their
children to school and it was not until 1890 ( Elementary Education Act 1890 ) 
that grants became available to all schools to enable them to cease charging
for basic elementary education . Many children did not attend school regularly
and a report identified that sickness was the chief cause of absenteeism in
schools and that illness was believed to be caused by neglect of care for the
children ’ s minor ailments and injuries [ 3 ]  . 
From the end of the nineteenth century there was a gradual development of
services to address the health and physical condition of children . The needs of
children with special requirements were initially provided for in 1893 ( Elementary Education ( Blind and Deaf Children ) Act 1893 , Elementary Education ( Defective and Epileptic Children ) Act 1893 )  , which empowered the newly formed
102 Public Health Nursing
local education authorities ( LEAs ) to set up special schools and classes for
these children . 
By 1899 , there was a public outcry about the standard of child health and
welfare . This was in response to a newspaper article which expressed concern
about the appalling state of health of school-leavers enlisting for the army to
fight in the Boer war ( 1899–1902 )  . 
Reports in the national press claimed that two-thirds of the young men who
volunteered to fight in the South African war had been rejected because of
poor physique .  [ 4 , p . 45 ] 
This provided a surprising catalyst for change and as a consequence of
public concern , Parliament set up an Inter-departmental Committee [ 5 ] to
report on the physical deterioration of the British nation . The report drew
a shocking picture of the nation ’ s children – high rates of infant and child
mortality , infectious diseases and malnourished , thin , stunted children [ 6 ]  . 
Similar findings were noted in France and Germany ; however , they had already
implemented health and nutritional programmes for school children . When
the Lancet sent representatives to Paris , they found that free school meals of
soup , meat and vegetables were being provided for each school child [ 4 ]  . 
The Inter-departmental Committee report highlighted that good health in
childhood was as fundamental to good health in adult life and proposed a series
of public health reforms including the establishment of the school medical
services [ 5 ]  . In an effort to reduce the high infant and maternal mortality
rates the report also recommended the registration of trained midwives and
the provision of maternity care which was enacted in 1902 ( Midwives Act 1902 )  ; 
however , similar legislation for the registration of nurses would not occur until
1919 ( Nurses Registration Act 1919 )  . 
The twentieth century was a period of rapid development in both public
health and personal health . The drivers for promoting child health were once
again in direct response to a national need for healthy army recruits ,  ‘ as
many as 60 per cent of boys were found to be unfit for duty because of
poor eyesight , dental caries , heart disease and poor growth arising from poor
childhood health ’  [ 7 , p . 109 ]  . 
Consequently , new legislation was implemented which focused on the health
and development of the school child and enabled the provision of a nutritious
meal for children whilst in school ( The Education ( Provision of Meals ) Act
1906 )  . Legislation in 1907 ( Education ( Administrative Provisions ) Act 1907 ) 
identified the school as the most appropriate environment to focus on the
health needs of the school-aged child and Section 13 . 1b of the Act established
the school medical service which included the school entry medical inspection
as a statutory right for all children ; moreover , it allowed for additional inspections as necessary ( Education ( Administrative Provisions ) Act 1907 , Section
13 . 1b )  . The medical branch of the Board of Education was set up and its responsibilities included special educational treatment for handicapped children , 
establishing the school medical service , the provision of free school meals and
The Development of School Nursing 103
at a later date the provision of free school milk and the organisation and
inspection of physical training . 
Maternity and infant welfare services were also developed at this time but
were transferred to the Ministry of Health in 1919 . The aim of these changes
was primarily to reduce the infant and maternal mortality rates , to prevent
any further deterioration in their health status and to promote the health and
well-being of the child population to enable children to grow up and become
healthy adults who could contribute to the society in which they lived . The
public health focus of this service has always been based on health protection
as well as health promotion although the service was generally prescriptive in
its approach . 
The role of unregistered and often untrained ‘ school nurses ’ at this time was
predominantly in health and disease screening and working as assistants to the
school medical officers [ 2 ] although there was the potential for opportunistic
health promotion [ 8 ]  . 
Under the Education Act 1918 ( known as the Fisher Act ) attending school
became compulsory for all children up to the age of 14 years ( Education Act
1918 ( known as the Fisher Act )  ) and included the provision of additional services in schools such as medical inspections , nurseries and provision for pupils
with special needs [ 2 ]  . The Act allowed for the provision of medical treatment
for primary-aged children , including ophthalmic and dental treatment , treatment for minor aliments , enlarged tonsils and adenoids . Increased central
government involvement in education was a change in direction ; however , the
LEAs were given the power to direct the way in which the legislation was implemented ( Legislation ( www . opsi . gov . uk / legislation )  )  . Industrialists reacted
angrily to this legislation as it affected their productivity and economic wellbeing because they could no longer employ children under the age of 12 years , 
and children aged 12–14 years could only be employed for two hours a day . As
a consequence of vociferous opposition and lobbying , a significant part of the
legislation was not implemented ( Education Act 1918 )  . 
Alongside changes in childhood education and health care provision there
was increasing demand for improving the provision of medical , nursing and
midwifery services by establishing a national minimal standard of education , 
preparation and training . Health visiting originated in 1852 through the development of the Manchester and Salford Reform Association and Florence
Nightingale was instrumental in setting up national health visitor training in
the 1890s [ 9 ]  . The quality of midwifery care was also variable throughout
the UK ; therefore , legislation to standardise midwifery education , training and
practice was established and made midwifery a national registered qualification . The Central Midwives Board was established as the regulatory body
responsible for the education , training , conduct and performance of midwives 
( Midwives Act 1902 )  . 
Legislation in 1919 included the establishment of the General Nursing Council as the regulatory body responsible for the education , training , conduct
and performance of nurses ( The Nurses ’ Registration Act 1919 )  . This was a
significant development in the UK as the majority of ‘ nurses ’ including school
104 Public Health Nursing
nurses were untrained women who developed their skills whilst working in the
role . It is argued that Florence Nightingale was one of the principal movers for
this legislation as well as political acknowledgement of the crucial role that
nurses played during the World War I ( 1914–1918 )  [ 10 ]  . 
Activity 5 . 1
Consider the following : 
What were the driving forces for the introduction of the school medical
service and what was the role of the school nurse at this time ? 
What preparation did the school nurse have for undertaking this role ? 
In the 1920s , with the development of the welfare state the subjects of
health and education became sensitive , social , political and economic issues . 
The government created a series of commissions of enquiry to explore the
issues and propose ways of improving these services . In 1944 , legislation
replaced previous education laws and for the first time adopted a child-centred
approach and acknowledged the interrelationship between the child , its family
and the wider community . 
It shall be the duty of the local education authority for every area , so far as
their powers extend , to continue towards the spiritual , mental and physical
development of the community .  [ Education Act 1944 Part II , 7 ( Education
Act 1944 . Commonly known as the Butler Act )  .  ] 
Section 48 of the Education Act 1944 required all education authorities
not only to provide regular medical inspections for all children but also to
make arrangements for medical treatment ( Education Act 1944 ( commonly
known as the Butler Act )  , Section 48 )  . This was a significant development
because of the social upheaval of the time due to the World War II ( 1939–1945 ) 
where children evacuated from deprived industrialised areas were found to
be infested , generally unwell and some had severe behavioural problems as a
consequence of political neglect and educational deprivation [ 2 ]  . 
The School Health Service ( Handicapped Pupils ) Regulations 1945 outlined
the responsibilities of the health visitor within the school health services in line
with the Education Act 1944 ( The School Health Service ( Handicapped Pupils ) 
Regulations 1945 )  . Health visitors were registered nurses with additional midwifery or obstetric qualifications and had completed a post-registration nursing course in public health nursing – health visiting [ 10 ]  . 
Health visitor autonomy in developing health promotion with the schoolaged population was acknowledged in law even though the majority of their
work focused on families with pre-school-aged children . This was in stark contrast to the role of the school nurse which was specifically with the school-aged
The Development of School Nursing 105
population but this role was arguably less autonomous and variable in its nature . School nurses were employed mainly by the LEAs and their work focused
mainly on disease screening and they worked under the direction of either the
medical officers or the schools . 
The National Health Service and post-World War II
Following the World War II , the National Health Service ( NHS ) Act 1946 was
implemented in 1948 which was a major development in the universal provision of health care ( National Health Service Act 1946 )  . Section 24 of the Act
emphasised the public health nature of the work of the health visitor regarding
health promotion , disease preventive and social aspects of the role including
working with schools and the school-aged population ( National Health Service
Act 1946 , Section 24 )  ; however , the role of the school nurse had not been
acknowledged . 
As a result of government concern about the high infant mortality rates and
the incidence of childhood illnesses and diseases in 1956 the Jameson report
reviewed the role of the health visitor and made significant proposals for the
improvement of the syllabus and educational preparation for health visitors 
[ 11 ]  . The Jameson report promoted the concept of health visitors providing a
public service which spanned across the lifespan and one of its recommendations was for health visitors to play a larger part in health education in schools 
[ 9 ]  . 
As a consequence of the 1945 and 1946 Acts and the Jameson report health
visitors were designated as the named school nurses for nurseries , primary
and secondary schools in England and Wales [ 11 ] even though a significant
amount of the screening work in schools was undertaken by NHS-employed
clinic nurses who fed back their findings to the health visitors . Furthermore , 
LEA employed school nurses who were based in the schools and had developed
positive relationships with both the school children and teachers could not undertake health education sessions as this was deemed to be the responsibility
of the health visitor . This situation was very frustrating for all concerned and
continued in many areas of the UK until the 1990s . 
Thirty years of research analysing the role of the health visitor found that
the majority of the work concentrated on children from birth to five years
old , so arguably there was little opportunity to develop their public health
role with the school-aged population . There are numerous reasons for this
restriction including NHS priorities , funding arrangements for the provision of
services , the health visitor ’ s job description , carrying a large caseload , working
in areas of deprivation and having a high prevalence of vulnerable children on
their caseloads . The implications of this for the school-aged population were
significant and the recommendations of both the Jameson report and the
Council for the Education and Training of Health Visitor ( CETHV ) 1965 syllabus
were rarely realised in practice , so the public health and health promotion
needs of the school-aged population were largely ignored . 
106 Public Health Nursing
Changes in schools
In 1965 , the Labour government issued a circular which encouraged LEAs
in England and Wales to move away from the selective form of secondary
schooling and adopt a more comprehensive approach [ 12 ]  . The governmentappointed committee in 1967 recommended the end of selective grouping of
children by their abilities (  ‘ streaming ’  ) and a return to a more child-centred
and humanitarian approaches to primary schooling which was evident prior
to 1939 [ 13 ]  . 
By 1988 , legislation required every school to provide a nine-subject national
curriculum and to ensure that every child attending school had the full range of
the national curriculum ( Education Reform Act 1988 )  . This provided an exciting
opportunity for school nurses to work closely with teachers to develop child
health promotion within this framework . 
The responsibility for the school health service , the employment of medical
officers and school nurses came within the remit of LEAs ; however , this was
found to be both isolating and problematic , as other health colleagues were
employed by the NHS resulting in liaison , referrals and meeting difficulties . In
1974 , school nurses and medical officers transferred their employment to the
NHS although LEAs became responsible for the coordination of all child health
services , but by 1982 , this responsibility was also transferred to the district
health authorities as a result of the ‘ Patient First ’ reorganisation ( National
Health Service ( Reorganisation ) Act 1974 )  . 
the aim of this new health service for children was to bring together health
professionals .  .  . in order to provide preschool , school health , hospital and
specialist services .  [ 8 , p . 110 ] 
Some LEAs chose to employ school nurses directly and this situation persists in areas of the UK although their role remains significantly different to
that of school nurses employed by the NHS [ 14 ]  . The separation of education
and health has created some relationship difficulties as the school health service is no longer directly under the control of the LEA . Trying to gain access
to the schools , school children and appropriate facilities for school medicals , 
screening tests and health promotion activities has on occasion been a challenge for some school nurses . This requires effective multi-agency working
and interpersonal relationships with the school staff to maximise the effectiveness and efficiency of both services . Whilst the majority of schools value
the contribution of the school health service and school nurses there are
clearly educational priorities that take precedence . 
In 1976 , the court report acknowledged the difficulties inherent in agencies
working together and cooperating to meet the needs of the child and stressed
that the connection between health and education was vital for child health 
[ 15 ]  . 
The report argued that child health should be at the centre of planning and
rather than having all services in the school they should also be available in the
The Development of School Nursing 107
community and in the children ’ s own homes ; however , this approach was not
implemented and in 1995 , the Polnay report again reiterated this crucial point
when identifying the health needs of the school-aged children and making very
detailed recommendations for the provision of school health services [ 16 ]  . 
Legislative aspects
When considering the development of school nursing the effects of legislation
and policies had a significant impact on the direction of the service . This is
particularly relevant when the regulatory body changed and established the
potential for specialist practice in school nursing through the Nurses , Midwives
and Health Visitors Act 1979 . 
The act has generated a larger professional base , and has made progress in
equating the governance of nurses , midwives and health visitors with that
of doctors in key respects of autonomy , registration , specified training and
standards of practice .  [ 17 , p . 161 ] 
Following deliberation , lobbying from nurses and protests regarding the development of community nursing in 1994 the UKCC published their standards
for qualified and registered nurses , midwives and health visitors known as the
post-registration education and practice project ( PREPP )  . This included a wide
range of requirements for professional development and competence for all
registered practitioners and specifically included the reform of community
nursing education [ 18 ]  ( see Chapter 9 )  . 
This had significant implications for the development of school nursing as
it enabled universities and approved higher education institutions to set up
post-registration nursing degree courses in community nursing which included
a UKCC-recorded specialist community practitioner qualification for eight discrete areas of community nursing including school nursing . This created a
route for school nurses to achieve academic and clinical qualifications in specialist professional practice and was an important milestone . At last there was
acknowledgement from the UKCC that school nursing was an important area
of community nursing warranting specialist knowledge , skills and expertise . 
School nurses whether they were employed by LEAs , health authorities , independent schools or charitable organisations were required to be registered
with the UKCC as nurses [ 19 ]  . However , the level of nurse registration or what
branch of nursing the school nurse was registered under was not specified
by either the employers or the UKCC . There is no available data identifying
what post-registration qualifications , if any , these school nurses had . Arguably , 
many school nurses working in a range of settings had no specific education , 
training or preparation in child health , health promotion or public health nursing to undertake this unique role . This was in stark contrast to health visiting
where only UKCC-registered health visitors could be employed in that specific
role following an approved post-registration course [ 18 ]  . 
108 Public Health Nursing
Very few employers required school nurses to have specific qualifications
so the availability of specialist practitioner courses in school nursing received
a mixed reception amongst employers . Before agreeing to releasing school
nurses on to these courses employers would have to consider the cost and
implications for their service provision . 
The National Assembly for Wales ( NAW ) saw the value in developing the
knowledge , skills and expertise of their health care workforce and agreed
to fund the community nursing degree courses for health visitors , district nurses , practice nurses , community learning disability nurses , community children ’ s nurses , community mental health nurses and school nurses 
( National Assembly for Wales ( now called Welsh Assembly Government ; 
www . assemblywales . org )  )  . The NAW also agreed to reimburse NHS trusts who
released these nurses to undertake the course to enable them to employ replacement staff for the duration of the course [ 20 ] – this is commonly known
as backfill replacement costs . The availability of funding for England , Scotland and Northern Ireland was variable , with students in some areas having to
self-fund the course . 
England , Scotland and Northern Ireland provided a range of courses for
school nurses but in Wales there were no degree courses specifically focusing on the professional practice of school nursing until the commencement
of the BSc ( Hons ) in community health nursing at the University of Glamorgan in 1999 . This included a school nursing pathway and enabled successful
graduates to record their SPQ with the UKCC . Whilst the course was made
available to all school nurses , eligibility for NAW funding was restricted to
those employed by the NHS and disappointingly to date , there have not been
any non-NHS-employed school nurses accessing the course . Within two years , 
school nursing degree courses were established throughout Wales . 
The Cumberlege report
At this time , a number of policies came into effect which had an impact on child
health and service provision . The Cumberlege report [ 21 ] reviewed the way in
which community nursing was organised and envisaged teams of nurses with
a mixture of skills and expertise working together to meet the health needs of
the population . The need for partnership between all professional impacting
on the health of a given population was emphasised and focused on moving
these teams away from general practice ( GP )  . Thirteen recommendations were
made and included three arguments for moving nursing teams away from GP .  
( 1 ) District nurses , health visitors and school nurses working in a team could be
a major force for change and improvement in community health services .  
( 2 ) Apart from other benefits , the neighbourhood nursing service would bring
school nursing in from the periphery of primary care arguing that the needs
of a neighbourhood ’ s children would be brought into focus and would make
it easier to take a more integrated , family-based approach to the health
care of children and young people . 
The Development of School Nursing 109 
( 3 ) Following an assessment of particular health needs the neighbourhood
nursing team could bring the issues to the GP who would be able to access
more nursing skills than would be traditionally available . 
GP reluctance to accept these changes and lose control of the nursing
teams resulted in the report not being fully implemented , although it could
be argued that when developing the family nursing model in Scotland the
recommendations of Cumberlege were considered [ 22 ]  . 
Activity 5 . 2
 Consider what were the driving forces for the professional development of the school nurse ? 
 What preparation did the school nurse have to undertake this role ? 
School nursing in the twenty-first century
Since 1974 the National Health Service Act has been the subject to a constant
stream of political reform . Recently , the numerous NHS Acts have been
consolidated into the NHS Act 2006 which came into effect in March 2007 , 
but effects little change .  [ 23 , p . 20 ] 
As a result of devolution in Wales , Scotland and Northern Ireland , child
health services have changed throughout the UK and the school health services have developed slightly differently in each country . In many areas of the
UK the stereotypical image of a school nurse based in a single school working
with a wide job description has been replaced by a school nurse employed by
the NHS who has responsibilities for a number of schools and has a more focused public health and health promotion role . However , the Royal College of
Nursing ( RCN ) survey identified five main categories of school nurse defined
by their job title and location of work and the variations in the role [ 14 ]  . Whilst
being mindful of addressing local needs this survey highlighted that a more
universal standard of school nursing was required [ 14 ]  . 
The chief nursing officer in 2006 [ 24 ] acknowledged that school nurses are
well placed to deliver on a range of public health outcomes and have two key
responsibilities : 
 To assess , protect and promote the health and well-being of school-aged
children and young people
 To offer advice , care and treatment to individuals and groups of children , 
young people and the adults who care for them [ 25 ] 
This was a watershed in the development of school nursing as it publicised
to head – teachers , governors and others that school nurses are a valuable
110 Public Health Nursing
resource and the actual and potential areas of child public health that school
nursing should be engaging in . 
Throughout the UK the role of the school nurse has changed significantly
over the past 140 years to one where she or he works as an autonomous public
health practitioner . As the scope of practice increases so does the demand
for professional and legal accountability by measuring the effectiveness and
efficiency of the service provided as well as the competency of the school
nurse . This is why the incorporation of clinical governance , reflection , clinical
supervision and accountability for practice are crucial in the development of
school nursing . 
Accountability
Accountability and school nurses
The Nursing and Midwifery Council ( NMC ) states in the code that : 
As a professional , you are personally accountable for actions and omissions
in your practice and must always be able to justify your decisions .  [ 26 , p . 1 ] 
Activity 5 . 3
 Consider the purpose of holding school nurses accountable for their
actions and write down what you believe you are accountable for . 
 Does the level or breadth of accountability differ according to your
grade ? 
Accountability is therefore defined as being answerable for your personal
acts and omissions to a higher authority with whom you have a legal relationship .  [ 27 , p . 32 ] 
School nurses are personally accountable for their behaviour and this includes ethical , moral and legal dimensions . The moral dimension is one of the
reasons why reflective practice is so important for school nurses . Chapter
2 identified that all SCPHNs are legally and professionally accountable for
their actions and omissions so the discussion below will focus specifically on
accountability for school nurses . 
Griffith and Tengnah [ 27 ] explain that accountability has four functions : 
 A protective function : To protect the public if someone falls below the
standard required of them in law . 
 A deterrent function : To act as a deterrent by discouraging nurses to act
illegally or unprofessionally . 
The Development of School Nursing 111
 A regulatory function : To regulate behaviour by making it clear the standard of conduct and competence that registered nurses must comply with . 
 An educative function : To educate society and practitioners about what
the standards of professional practice are . 
Ignorantia legis neminem excusat ( Ignorance of the law excuses
no one ) 
It is not acceptable for a school nurse to plead ignorance as she may not escape
liability for breaking the law just because she was unaware of it . People have
a presumed knowledge of the law so a school nurse must know the laws that
relate to her practice . Knowledge of related law is a positive thing and can
prevent harm so that your actions protect society , children , young people and
their families , colleagues , the profession and yourself . Dimond [ 28 ] states that
the four arenas of legal accountability are : 
 To the public through criminal law and the criminal courts
 To the patient through civil law and the civil courts
 To the employer through the contract of employment and the employment
tribunal
 To the profession through the NMC [ 26 ] code and in disciplinary proceedings
before the committees of the NMC
School nurses are legally accountable to the public , to the school child or
young person and their families , to the profession , their employer and the
schools ; however , it is unusual for a school nurse to be called to account
in all four arenas at the same time although the potential is there . Whilst
anyone may have to justify their actions to others the standards used in law
to measure a person ’ s actions varies considerably between these four arenas
of law . 
Accountability to the public
School nurses are subject to the same statutory laws ( Acts of Parliament ) 
as other members of society , for example , all householders must ensure that
their premises are safe for visitors and if a law is broken then action in the
criminal courts may be the consequence ( Occupiers Liability Act 1957 and
Occupiers Liability Act 1984 )  [ 29 ]  . School Nurses are also subject to specific
laws relating to their professional practice , for example , during childhood
vaccination sessions a range of legislation apply ( Health and Safety at Work
etc . Act 1974 , Medicines Act 1968 , Children Act 1989 and Children Act 2004 )  . 
Criminal charges in relation to school nursing specifically are thankfully rare ; 
however , charges against other nurses working with children are not unheard
of , for example Beverley Allitt , an Enrolled Nurse working on a children ’ s ward
was brought before the High Court and found guilty of murdering four children , 
attempting to murder three other children and of causing grievous bodily
harm to six other children . She was given nine life sentences and minimum of
112 Public Health Nursing
30 years imprisonment [ 30 ]  . The consequences of her actions meant that she
was also brought to account in civil law , employment law and professional law . 
Accountability to the school child or young person
Children are the focus of the public health role of the school nurse and are a
particularly vulnerable group in society . Statutory law acknowledges this and
sets out clear standards and responsibilities for all agencies involved in caring
for children and in safeguarding and protecting them from harm . The principles
contained in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child is the
first legally binding international instrument to incorporate the full range of
human rights for children and young people in UK law [ 31 ]  . 
The core principles of the Convention are : 
 Non-discrimination
 Devotion to the best interests of the child
 The right to life
 Survival and development
 Respect for the views of the child
The Convention protects children ’ s rights by setting standards in health
care , education , and legal , civil and social services and most of the articles
were incorporated into UK law . For example , Article 19 of the Convention
states that children have the right to protection from abuse and the Children
Act 1989 and Children Act 2004 provide the legislative framework for this . As a
consequence everyone working with children has a legal obligation to promote
and uphold children ’ s rights ; this includes school nurses who have a key role
in safeguarding children and promoting their health , welfare and autonomy . 
Autonomy , consent and the child
Respect for autonomy is valued as an ethical principle in nursing , midwifery
and SCPHN practice and practitioners should have a working knowledge of
legal and ethical issues relating to autonomy and consent to treatment [ 26 , 
32 ]  . See summary of the definition and requirements of consent in Box 5 . 1 . 
Box 5 . 1 Consent
Consent can be defined as ‘ a patient ’ s agreement for a health professional to provide care ’  [ 33 ]  . 
For consent to be valid the patient must : 
 Be competent to take a particular decision
 Have received sufficient information to take it
 Not be acting under duress
The Development of School Nursing 113
School nurses undertake a range of public health , health promotion and
health care interventions with children and young people therefore it is essential that any advice , treatment or care is undertaken within the confines
of the law . Obtaining consent and upholding confidentiality are an essential
requirement and mentally competent adults are able to make autonomous
decisions regarding their health and welfare [ 33 ]  . The development of autonomy is a gradual process and children and young people require support and
protection in law until they are sufficiently mature enough to make informed
choices . The principles governing the legal capacities of children , the responsibilities of parents and the limits of state intervention have largely been developed in the context of medical decision-making as health is the most basic
and essential consideration in protecting child welfare [ 23 ]  . Courts recognise
that children are not autonomous adults but do have rights to give their own
consent to treatment as they develop and mature [ 34 ]  . School nurses must be
aware of the law and their responsibilities to children regarding consent and
confidentiality . 
Consent and the 16 and 17 year old
The Family Law Reform Act 1969 defines an adult as a person aged 18 years or
over , so a minor is a person who has not yet achieved her or his 18th birthday 
( Family Law Reform Act 1969 , Section 1 )  . 
This Act also acknowledges that 16 and 17 year olds have sufficient autonomy
to give their own consent to medical , surgical and dental treatment ( Family
Law Reform Act 1969 , Section 1 , Section 8 ( 1 )  ) and investigations ( Family Law
Reform Act 1969 , Section 1 , Section 8 ( 2 )  ) without reference to their parents . 
This presumption is also included in the Mental Health Act 1983 . The Family
Law Reform Act 1969 does not prevent an unconscious 16 or 17 year old from
being given life-saving treatment in an emergency [ 28 ] or the parents of an
incapacitated young person from giving consent by proxy ( Family Law Reform
Act 1969 , Section 8 ( 3 )  )  . 
One area of concern is when a 16 or 17 year old refuses to give consent
for treatment or care . Challenges to their autonomy have resulted in legal
action , for example , in Re W ( a minor : medical treatment )  [ 1992 ] the Court
of Appeal overruled W ’ s refusal to receive life-saving treatment [ 35 ]  . Equally , 
since the implementation of the Mental Health Act 2007 in October 2008 , 
parents can no longer give consent for their 16–17 year old to be admitted to a
psychiatric unit for treatment ( Mental Health Act 2007 )  . So whilst adults are
able to determine whether or not to receive treatment the same standards do
not apply to 16–17 year olds who are deemed to be autonomous if they agree
to have treatment but not if they refuse . 
Consent and the child under 16 years old
Where a child lacks capacity to consent , then any one person with ‘ parental
responsibility ’ or by the court can give that consent on behalf of the child ( by
proxy )  . Parental responsibility is a legal concept introduced by the Children
Act 1989 and is defined as , 
114 Public Health Nursing
All the rights , duties , powers , responsibility and authority which by law a
parent of a child has in relation to the child and his property .  
( Children Act 1989 , Section 3 ( 1 )  ) 
Activity 5 . 4
Consider who has parental responsibility and what it means ? 
What are the limitations of parental responsibility ? 
Automatic parental responsibility is conferred upon the mother of the child 
( Children Act 1989 , Section 3 ( 1 )  , Section 2 ) and on the father if he was married
to the mother at the time of the child ’ s birth or shortly after ( Children Act
1989 , Section 3 ( 1 )  , Section 1 )  . Single fathers did not have parental responsibility as an automatic right and arguably most of these fathers did not realise it . 
From a school nurse ’ s perspective this was problematic when trying to gain
consent for immunisation or any other health care intervention . This situation
remained for 12 years until the Adoption and Children Act 2002 was implemented in December 2003 ( England and Wales ) so that the unmarried father
if he jointly registers the birth with the mother also has parental responsibility 
( Adoption and Children Act 2002 )  . School nurses need to be aware that this
change in parental responsibility is not retrospective so does not apply to
unmarried fathers of children born before December 2003 . 
Other people may also have parental responsibility such as legal guardians , 
person ( s ) with a residence order , adoptive parents ( when the birth mother
permanently loses parental responsibility as part of the adoption process )  . 
Parental responsibility is not lost when parents divorce and most parents
retain this when a child is accommodated by the local authority or police . 
The welfare principle means that parental responsibility is only valid if the
parent is acting in the best interests of the child . 
Parental responsibility diminishes as children mature and ceases when a
child reaches 18 years of age in England , Wales and Northern Ireland . In Scotland parental responsibility ceases when a child reaches 16 but parents can still
give guidance until they are 18 [ 36 ]  . Children grow and develop at varying rates
and as the precedent from Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority [ 1986 ] identified competent minors can consent to treatment or care
on their own behalf if the child could achieve sufficient comprehension to understand completely the treatment proposed , with both its benefits and side
effects [ 37 ]  . However , they still cannot refuse treatment which may be needed
in life-saving situations . Getting the child to agree to the involvement of the
parents in the decision-making process is desirable but not always achievable . 
Lord Fraser ( Law Lord ) developed a set of criteria that must apply when
health professionals are offering contraceptive services to minors less than 16
years of age . The criteria are used to establish the competence of the minor . 
An important consideration for school nurses when assessing competence
The Development of School Nursing 115
using the Fraser guidelines is that it is not an on / off procedure , a child may
be deemed competent for a specific form of treatment but not for another , 
and therefore the assessment would need carried out on each occasion . See
Box 5 . 2 for a summary of the Fraser guidelines . 
Box 5 . 2 The Fraser guidelines 
( 1 ) The young person understands the health professional ’ s advice 
( 2 ) The health professional cannot persuade the young person to inform
his or her parents or allow the doctor to inform the parents that he
or she is seeking contraceptive advice 
( 3 ) The young person is very likely to begin or continue having intercourse with or without contraceptive treatment 
( 4 ) Unless he or she receives contraceptive advice or treatment , the
young person ’ s physical or mental health ( or both ) is likely to suffer 
( 5 ) The young person ’ s best interests require the health professional
to give contraceptive advice , treatment or both without parental
consent
Department of Health [ 38 ]  . Reproduced with permission . 
School nurses need to be aware that a child who is deemed to be a mature
minor is also entitled to an obligation of confidentiality , unless the school
nurse believes that maintaining confidentiality may be harmful for that child
or others . 
Safeguarding children
Because of the nature of their role school nurses may be the first to identify
that a child is distressed or at risk of being harmed . The school nurse must
have the knowledge , skills and expertise to deal with the situation effectively
and , if appropriate , implement the child protection procedures . A school nurse
who does not honour the requirements set out in the Children Act 1989 , the
Children Act 2004 or the Local Child Protection procedures would be liable . 
Safeguarding children and young people is a major part of the school nurse ’ s
role . In line with the Chief Nursing Officer ’ s review in 2004 [ 39 ] there are now
a wider range of nurses taking up posts as child protection nurses , a number of
whom have a school nurse background . School nurses can act as key workers
in ensuring the needs of the child is foremost and the model of ‘ team around
the child ’ is one that is increasing . 
Children and young people in the looked after system are considered already
vulnerable , disadvantaged and probably living in poverty and could possibly
be viewed as a group , which , due to their circumstances , are unable to respond
116 Public Health Nursing
to health promotion messages . Mayall in 1976 ( cited in Ref .  [ 40 ]  ) describes a
model in which at one end of a very long continuum is the school of thought
that ill health is viewed as being a direct consequence of poverty and at the
other end , the view that in whatever social circumstances individuals may
find themselves in , they have the ability to change their health behaviour . Of
course , linked intrinsically with this is the individual development and maturity
of the child or young person , and their ability to make healthy choices within
the family unit in which they live . 
Vulnerable groups
Children and young people are one of the most vulnerable groups within the
community , and they have public health needs that are significantly different
to those of adults [ 39 ]  . However , some children and young people are deemed
to be more vulnerable than others . It is estimated that approximately three
million children in England alone are vulnerable . See Box 5 . 3 for categories of
vulnerability . 
Box 5 . 3 Vulnerable children
Those being looked after by local authorities
Young offenders
Children of refugees or asylum seekers
Those living in poverty
Those who misuse substances
Those who have behavioural difficulties
Homeless young people
Those with disabilities
Young teenage parents
Travelling families
Those from ethnic minority backgrounds
Young carers
Young men in general also require additional input from health and
youth services
From a school nursing perspective active recruitment of male school nurses
and those from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds may help to engage
some of these children and young people . Appleton [ 41 ] suggests that vulnerable school-aged children and young people are increasingly defined as
those where there is concern about their welfare . But whatever the definition
vulnerable children and young people are more at risk of suffering negative
outcomes in relation to their health in its broadest sense , i . e . mentally , physically and socially . 
The Development of School Nursing 117
DeBell and Everett [ 42 ] highlight that school nurses are clearly able to
recognise distress in children , and this can be particularly highlighted in relation to child protection and mental health issues . These are two key areas , 
which are both complex and demanding areas of practice . The school nurse
may be the first person the child or young person has either disclosed allegations of abuse to or has sought a ‘ listening ear ’ to share their physical and
emotional distress . In these situations the school nurse can play a significant
role both in supporting and safeguarding the child as well as acting as their
advocate . 
Young people not attending mainstream school
There are children and young people who do not regularly attend mainstream
school who may have been excluded or who are educated at home for a variety
of reasons . They may be disadvantaged further in that they are not offered an
equitable service in comparison to their peer group in the same area . Those
not attending school are considered to be more at risk of becoming involved
in risk-taking behaviours , which are detrimental to health [ 43 ] and are often
more vulnerable who still need access to high quality , accurate information . 
Children and young people who are looked after by local authorities are ten
times more likely to be excluded from school [ 44 ]  , which has a significant
impact on their health , employment opportunities and economic well-being . 
 ‘ Hard-to-reach ’ groups
The use of technology such as websites and text messaging are vital methods
of communicating with today ’ s young people particularly those deemed to be
 ‘ hard to reach ’  . However , this term in itself is debatable as it is professionals who believe such groups are considered ‘ hard to reach ’  . But should this
be turned on its head and may be it is the professionals and services who
are actually ‘ hard to access ’ by some client groups such as young people not
attending school ? Therefore , we need to take positive steps to develop and
provide services that meet people where they are in a way that is more suitable to them . It is important to start from the perspective of the vulnerable
children / groups themselves , in designing appropriate services that meet their
specific health needs . It is the quality of the intervention and its appropriateness and acceptability to the client group that are crucial . 
Activity 5 . 5
Consider how you see your role / your team ’ s role in supporting children
and young people outside of the school setting . Justify your involvement
and consider how you could provide evidence to commissioners of your / 
your team ’ s effectiveness . 
118 Public Health Nursing
Working together
Article 24 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child states
that children have a right to the highest obtainable standard of health possible
and this requires adequate health care to meet their needs . Article 24 . 2 ( e )  [ 45 ] 
includes the duty to ensure that parents and children have information regarding child health and nutrition . This requires school nurses to work closely with
teachers , school governors and other agencies to formulate and implement
understandable , developmentally appropriate health promotion programmes
which enable and empower children , young people and their parents to improve their nutritional status . 
Civil law focuses on the rights of an individual to redress . If an individual
believes he or she has been harmed then he or she ( or his or her representative ) is entitled to make a claim and take legal action against the person who
he or she believes caused that harm . The laws of tort include issues such as
consent , confidentiality , trespass and negligence and if the person proves the
case then he or she will be given financial compensation from the person who
caused the harm . In order to succeed in a case of negligence there are four
elements that need to be established : 
 The defendant has a duty of care to the claimant
 There is a breach in the standard of the duty of care owed
 This breach has caused reasonably foreseeable harm
 The harm of which the victim complains was caused by that breach [ 28 , 
p . 9 ] 
All four of the above elements have to be established for a person to win
his or her case and be compensated . The number of negligence cases brought
before the courts has escalated and the time spent and the cost of going to
court can be significant for either party if they lose the case . The cost of
having to pay compensation in a negligence case creates a drain on the NHS
budget and a resulting loss of public trust in the competence of NHS staff to
provide high standards of care . 
In the NHS clinical negligence claims have a potential value of some 4 billion
pounds . In 2006–7 alone some £579 . 3 million was paid out in connection
with clinical negligence claims [ 46 ]  . 
A school nurse has a duty of care not only to school-aged children and
young people in their care but also to anyone else affected by their actions or
omissions , including colleagues , school staff and parents . However , it would
be unreasonable for a school nurse who is part of a team covering a cluster of
primary schools and a comprehensive to be individually accountable to all of
these children at all times . Donoghue v Stevenson [ 1932 ]  [ 47 ] established that
we all have a duty of care to anyone affected by our reasonably foreseeable
actions . For example , if a school nurse gives unsafe advice on the management
The Development of School Nursing 119
of anaphylaxis which results in a child being harmed then the school nurse may
be liable and could be sued by the child or his or her parent . 
It is difficult to measure the standard of care given by school nurses because
the role varies enormously depending on the employer and job description ; 
however , the precedent set by Bolam v Friern [ 1957 ]  [ 48 ] establishes the
reasonable standard expected by someone exercising and performing that
particular art , so a school nurse would be compared with that which is reasonably expected of another school nurse . The Bolam test does not expect the
highest standard of practice just the reasonable standard , although school
nurses should be striving for excellence , and it could be argued that the Bolam
standard is not set high enough as highlighted in Bolitho v City and Hackney
Health Authority [ 1998 ]  [ 49 ]  . 
The precedence in Wilsher v Essex Health Authority [ 1988 ]  [ 50 ] acknowledges that inexperience is no defence , for example a school nurse carrying out
vaccinations is required to be safe whether or not she has additional qualifications or has been qualified for five days or five years . If a person accepts a role
it is his or her responsibility to ensure that he or she can carry it out safely . 
Equally , it is also reasonable to expect that any additional education and training should be reflected in the standard of that school nurse ’ s practice and
subsequently the expectations of employers , schools , school-aged children
and the public would be greater . The accountability of the school nurse to the
child would include all the activities required to protect that child from harm
and to promote that child ’ s health and well-being . Acquiring the appropriate
knowledge , skills and understanding of all these issues are essential to protect
the child and also protects the school nurse from litigation . 
Accountability to the employer
Employment law originates from statutory law and the school nurse is accountable to her employer through the contract of employment whether employed
by the NHS , LEA , Independent school or charitable organisation . 
An employer also has a duty of care to his or her employee ; therefore , an
NHS trust would be vicariously liable for a school nurse ’ s work because the
trust appointed her and is responsible for ensuring that she has the expected
level of knowledge , skills and expertise and that a safe standard of work is
provided . The employer is also responsible for ensuring that all staff has an
opportunity to attend study days or practice sessions where new pieces of
equipment are introduced . 
Consideration also needs to be given to the contract of employment , terms
and conditions of service and any job description as the NHS trust may not
be vicarious liable ( indirect liability ) if a school nurse works outside her job
description . Accountability to the employer is the arena where most nurses
are called to justify their actions for two reasons : firstly , children , parents and
colleagues are more likely to complain to the employer rather than take legal
action ; secondly , the burden of proof in employment law is lower than that
required in the civil and the criminal courts . 
120 Public Health Nursing
Employment law only requires that an employer hold an honest and genuine
belief that an employee is guilty of misconduct based on the outcome of a
reasonable investigation [ 51 ]  . 
Accountability to the profession
The NMC was set up by Parliament to regulate the profession , set standards , 
approve courses and hold practitioners accountable for their actions as a way
of firstly ensuring that the public and patients are not harmed and secondly
providing redress to people who have been harmed ( Nurses , Midwives and
Health Visitors Act 1997 ; Nursing and Midwifery Order 2001 )  . 
In order to practice the school nurse needs to be registered with the NMC , 
and affirm accountability to the profession and agree to abide by the NMC code
of professional conduct which is the recognised ethical code determining the
standard of practice [ 26 ]  . Registrants must affirm that they are keeping up to
date with their practice and meet the NMC PREP requirements [ 52 ] if a school
nurse is found by the NMC Conduct and Competence Committee to be guilty
of breaking the clauses within the code then her name can be removed from
the register . 
A professional law case that subsequently became a civil law case involved
a school nurse administering childhood vaccinations in a school , Hefferon v
Committee of the UKCC [ 1988 ]  [ 53 ]  . During a vaccination session , the school
nurse erroneously injected a child who was not due for vaccination and she
immediately reported the error to the medical officer and her line manager . 
The child was examined by the doctor and was apparently unharmed . The
school nurse ’ s line manager reported the incident to the UKCC and she was
referred to the Professional Conduct Committee . Allegations of professional
misconduct were made and evidence presented by the school nurse ’ s manager
and others were compared with the UKCC Code of professional conduct [ 19 ]  . 
Hefferon was found guilty of professional misconduct on a number of counts
and the decision was made to remove her name from the UKCC register so
that she could no longer practice as a nurse . 
Hefferon subsequently took her case to the civil courts . The High Court
established that the laws of natural justice had not been applied during the
Professional Conduct Committee and Hefferon had not been given the opportunity to state her case , present any evidence to support her actions or
challenge the evidence presented against her [ 53 ]  . The decision of the UKCC
to remove her name from the register was subsequently quashed . 
As a consequence of the Hefferon case and other concerns about the statutory functions of the UKCC an independent review was ordered by the government and undertaken by JM Consulting who in their 1999 report made
recommendations for changing the statutory role , functions and accountability of the regulatory body for nurses , midwives and health visitors [ 54 ]  . 
The government accepted the findings and produced a consultation paper 
[ 55 ]  . This led to new legislation causing in the dissolution of the UKCC being
The Development of School Nursing 121
replaced by the Nursing and Midwifery Council in April 2002 ( Health Act 1999 , 
Section 60 )  . This is discussed more fully in Chapter 2 ; however , the specific
implications of incorporating school nursing as a registerable qualification
within the SCPHN will now be considered [ 56 ]  . 
The development of the role of the SCPHN – school nurse
There remains a significant variation in the provision of health care for the
school-aged population and the role of the school nurse employed by the LEA , 
the NHS , Independent Schools and charitable organisations vary significantly . 
The RCN undertook a census survey of school nurses in 2005 and identified
that the roles of school nurses varied significantly according to their job title
and where they worked [ 14 ]  . School nurses employed by education did not
provide the same type or level of service as those employed by the NHS . 
The role of the school nurse employed by the LEA frequently included nonnursing duties such as collecting dinner money , photocopying , health and
safety officer and first-aid responsibilities whilst those employed by the NHS
were specifically involved in child health surveillance and health promotion
work . 
When the NMC Standards of proficiency for SCPHN were introduced school
nurses were arguably ecstatic that they finally had the opportunity to gain
national recognition for their role and the regulatory body for the profession
was condoning a graduate programme of education leading to a registerable
qualification for school nurses as specialists in public health school nursing 
[ 56 ]  . 
The implementation of the course was not without problem as the standards
set for the different fields of SCPHN practice were the same even though the
defined areas of practice were different [ 57 ]  . For decades the health visiting
courses had required health visitor / community practice teachers ( PTs ) to
support and assess students throughout their clinical placements . These PTs
had specific qualifications to undertake their roles and their NHS employers
supported them in clinical practice in two ways : firstly , by agreeing to give
them a reduced case load and secondly , by rewarding them financially and
setting them at a higher grade than their generic health visiting colleagues so
that they could concentrate their efforts of facilitating learning in the clinical
environment . 
In sharp contrast previous school nursing courses had facilitators to support
them in practice . These experienced school nurses did not have any specific
qualifications to take on the teaching and learning support role and did not
receive any financial reward for their involvement in the learning process . 
Section 7 of the NMC standards established the PT requirements for all fields
and stated that by 2007 all PTs had to meet the standards required in the 2004
document [ 58 ]  . This was problematic for the school nursing pathway of the
SCPHN course as nationally there were very few SCPHN school nurses who met
the criteria required to become PTs . As a result many universities requested a
122 Public Health Nursing
process of deferment in meeting the criteria until sufficient numbers of SCPHN
school nurses could undertake the PT training before supporting students . The
NMC acknowledged that there was inequity and establishes the opportunities
to apply for deferment until 2010 [ 59 ]  . 
The second area of inequity between PTs in health visiting and school nursing occurred within NHS trusts as SCPHN – school nurse PTs were not initially
given a higher grade or reduced workload to enable them to fulfil their PT requirements . This is now being addressed although progress is slow and there
remains a significant discrepancy between the NHS agenda for change grade
that NHS trusts implement for SCPHN – school nurse PTs and SCPHN – health
visitor PTs [ 60 ]  . 
Summary
This chapter has reviewed the historical development of the school health service and explored how the public health role of the school nurse has evolved . 
The relevant drivers for change , legislation and social policy were considered
to explore how the service evolved to meet the new public health agenda . The
accountability of the school nurse to the child , society , the profession and the
employer was discussed and the development of the public health function of
school nurses explored . Consideration of the educational preparation , training and support required to enable school nurses to develop their role was
included and identified the historical inequity in the educational preparation
of school nurses . 
The NMC as regulator for the profession has acknowledged that school nursing is a registerable qualification and while disparity in child health , education
and life chances continues there is a need for the school health services , school
nursing and public health approaches to meet the health needs of the younger
generation . The future for school nursing is robustly optimistic , particularly
now that government has recognised the untapped potential and opportunities for promoting and protecting the health of school-aged children and
young people . The next chapter will consider the current situation relating to
school nursing practice and how the public health agenda is developing . 
References
1 Baly M . The setting . In : Nash W , Thruston M , eds . Health at School : Caring for
the Whole Child . Oxford : Butterworth , 1985 , pp . 2–16 . 
2 Webber I . Professions and school nursing . In : Symonds A , Kelly A , eds . The
Social Construction of Community Care . Basingstoke : Macmillan , 1998 . 
3 Zaiger D . Historical perspectives of school nursing . In : Selekman J , ed . School
Nursing : A Comprehensive Text . Philadelphia : F . A . Davis Company , 2006 , 
pp . 3–24 . 
4 Barker DJP . Obesity and early life . Obesity Reviews 2007 ; 8 ( Suppl 1 )  : 45–9 . 
5 Inter-departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration . Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on Physical Deterioration . London : HMSO , 1904 . 
The Development of School Nursing 123
6 Lightfoot J , Bines W . Working to keep school children healthy : the complementary roles of school staff and school nurses . Journal of Public Health Medicine
2000 ; 22 ( 1 )  : 74–80 . 
7 Leff S , Leff V . The school as location for health promotion . In : DeBell D , ed . 
Public Health Practice and the School-Age Population . London : Hodder Arnold , 
2007 , pp . 93–130 . 
8 DeBell D , ed . Public Health Practice and The School-Age Population . London : 
Hodder Arnold , 2007 . 
9 Porter E . Public health and health visiting . In : Robotham A , Frost M , eds . 
Health Visiting : Specialist Community Public Health Nursing . Edinburgh : 
Elsevier Churchill Livingstone , 2005 . 
10 Robotham A . The profession of health visiting in the 21st century . In : Robotham
A , Frost M , eds . Health Visiting : Specialist Community Public Health Nursing . 
Edinburgh : Elsevier Churchill Livingstone , 2005 , pp . 5–27 . 
11 Ministry of Health . An Inquiry into Health Visiting . London : HMSO , 1956 . 
12 Department of Education and Science . Education Circular 10 / 65 . London : Department of Education and Science , 1965 . 
13 Central Advisory Council for Education . Children and Their Primary Schools : 
The Plowden Report . London : HMSO , 1967 . 
14 Royal College of Nursing . School Nurses : Results from a Census Survey of RCN
School Nurses in 2005 . London : Royal College of Nursing , 2005 . 
15 Secretary of State for Social Services . The Court Report : Fit for the Future . 
London : UK Commission of Enquiry of Child Health Services , 1976 . 
16 British Paediatric Association . Report of a Joint Working Party on Health Needs
of School Aged Children ( Chaired by Professor Leon Polnay )  . London : British
Paediatric Association , 1995 . 
17 Kelly A , Mabbett G , Thom´e R . Professions and community nursing . In : Symonds
A , Kelly A , eds . The Social Construction of Community Care . Basingstoke : 
Macmillan , 1998 . 
18 United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting . 
The Future of Professional Practice – The Council ’ s Standard for Education
and Practice Following Registration . London : United Kingdom Central Council
for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting , 1994 . 
19 United Kingdom Central Council for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting . 
The Code of Professional Conduct . London : United Kingdom Central Council
for Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting , 1992 . 
20 National Leadership and Innovation Agency for Healthcare . Financial help for
healthcare students in Wales ( available at www . wales . nhs . uk / sites3 )  . Accessed
10 October 2008 . 
21 Cumberlege J , ed . Neighbourhood Nursing : A Focus for Care . London : Department of Health and Social Security , HMSO , 1986 . 
22 NHS Scotland . Family Health in Scotland : A Report on the WHO Europe Pilot 
( available at www . scotland . gov . uk / publications / 2003 / 10 / 18428 / 28397 )  . Edinburgh : Scottish Executive , 2003 . Accessed 4 August 2008 . 
23 Brazier M , Cave E . Medicine , Patients and the Law , 4th edn . London : Penguin
Books , 2007 . 
24 Department of Health . Looking for a School Nurse ( available at
www . everychildmatters . gov . uk )  . Nottingham : Department of Health ; Department for Education and Skills , 2006 . Accessed November 2006 . 
25 Department of Health . Looking for a School Nurse ( available at
www . everychildmatters . gov . uk )  . Nottingham : Department of Health ; Department for Education and Skills , 2006 , p . 8 . Accessed November 2006 . 
124 Public Health Nursing
26 Nursing and Midwifery Council . The Code : Standards of Conduct Performance
and Ethics for Nurses and Midwives . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 
2008 . 
27 Griffith R , Tengnah C . Law and Professional Issues in Nursing ( Transforming
Nursing Practice Series )  . Exeter : Learning Matters , 2008 , p . 32 . 
28 Dimond B . Legal Aspects of Nursing , 5th edn . Harlow Essex : Pearson Education
Limited , 2008 . 
29 Tracing Acts of Parliament : House of Commons Information Office . Factsheet L12 ( available at )  . 
Accessed 4 April 2008 . 
30 Clothier Report . The Allitt Inquiry : An Independent Inquiry Relating to the
Deaths and Injuries on the Children ’ s Ward at Grantham and Kesteven General Hospital during the Period of February to April 1991 . London : HMSO , 1994 . 
31 United Nations Children ’ s Fund . Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
General Assembly Resolution 44 / 25 of 20 November 1989 ( available at
www . unicef . org / crc /  )  . Accessed 1 September 2008 . 
32 Beauchamp TL , Childress JF . Principles of Biomedical Ethics . Oxford : Oxford
University Press , 2001 . 
33 Department of Health . Good Practice in Consent : Implementation Guide . 
London : Department of Health , 2001 . 
34 Griffiths R , Tengnah C . Law and Professional Issues in Nursing ( available at
www . learningmatters . co . uk )  . Exeter : Learning Matters Ltd .  , 2008 . 
35 Re W ( a minor : medical treatment )  [ 1992 ] 4 All ER 627 . 
36 Sterrick MJ . Competence in children has a Scottish twist . BMJ 2006 ; 332 : 975 . 
37 Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority [ 1986 ] AC 112 ,  [ 1985 ] 
3 All ER 402 ,  [ 1985 ] 2BMLR 11 HL . 
38 Department of Health . Best Practice Guidance for Doctors and Other Health
Professionals on the Provision of Advice and Treatment to Young People Under 16 on Contraception , Sexual Health and Reproduction . Gateway Reference
3382 , 2004 . 
39 Department of Health . Chief Nursing Officer ’ s Review of the Nursing , Midwifery and Health Visiting Contribution to Vulnerable People and Young People . 
London : Department of Health , 2004 . 
40 Elfer P , Gattis S . Keeping children healthy . In : Charting Child Health Services . 
London : Allen and Unwin National Children ’ s Bureau , 1990 , pp . 1–136 . 
41 Appleton JV . Vulnerable children . In : DeBell D , ed . Public Health Practice and
the School-Age Population . London : Hodder Arnold , 2007 . 
42 DeBell D , Everett G . In a Class Apart : A Study of School Nursing . Norwich : 
Norfolk Health Authority , 1997 . 
43 Baker J , Hallet J , Knox G . Excluded but not Rejected . London : The Evangelical
Alliance , 1999 . 
44 United Nations . Convention on the Rights of the Child . Article 24 General Assembly resolution 44 / 25 of 20 November 1989 . United Nations Children ’ s Fund 
( available at www . unicef . org / crc /  )  ; 1989 . 
45 United Nations . Convention on the Rights of the Child . Article 24 General Assembly resolution 44 / 25 of 20 November 1989 . United Nations Children ’ s Fund 
( available at www . unicef . org / crc /  )  , Article 24 ( 2 ( e )  ; 1989 . 
46 NHS Litigation Authority . Report of Accounts 2007 ( HC 908 )  . London : HMSO , 
The Stationery Office , 2007 . 
47 Donoghue v Stevenson [ 1932 ] AC582 . 
48 Bolam v Friern HMC [ 1957 ] 1WLR 582 . 
49 Bolitho v City and Hackney Health Authority [ 1998 ] AC 232 . 
The Development of School Nursing 125
50 Wilsher v Essex Health Authority [ 1988 ] AC 1074 ( HL )  . 
51 British Home Stores Ltd v Burchell [ 1980 ] ICR 303 ( EAT )  . 
52 Nursing and Midwifery Council . The PREP Handbook . London : Nursing and
Midwifery Council , 2008 . 
53 Hefferon v Committee of the UKCC [ 1988 ] Current Law , May 1988 . 221 . 
54 JM Consulting Ltd . The Regulation of Nurses , Midwives and Health Visitors : 
Report on a Review of the Nurses , Midwives and Health Visitors Act 1997 . 
London : JM Consulting Ltd , 1999 . 
55 NHS Executive . Modernising Regulation : The New Nursing and Midwifery Council : A Consultation Document . London : Department of Health , 2000 . 
56 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist Community Public Health Nursing . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2004 . 
57 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist Community Public Health Nursing . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2004 , 
Standard 4 . 
58 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist Community Public Health Nursing . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2004 , 
Section 7 . 
59 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards to Support Learning and Assessment
in Practice . London : Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2008 . 
60 NHS Employers : Agenda for Change ( available at http :  /  / www . 
nhsemployersorg / pay-conditions / agenda-for-change . cfm ? frmAlias =  / 
agendaforchange /  )  . Accessed 30 August 2008 . 
Chapter 6
School Nursing and School
Health Practice
Sarah Sherwin and Mary Smith
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Appreciate how policy relating to school health practice translates
into reality
 Discuss how the standards for specialist community public health
nursing apply to school nursing
 Appreciate some of the challenges and opportunities that exist in
promoting the health of the school-aged population
Introduction
The changing face of public health care presents many challenges for school
nurses and school health services . The role is moving from being a predominantly task-orientated service delivered just by school nurses to one that is a
more complex , responsive , proactive model of preventative health involving
a range of professionals within a school health team . This new model seeks
to identify and address the health and health-related needs not only of individuals but also groups and communities ( see Chapter 5 for development
and historical overview of school nursing practice )  . School nurses provide an
important link between school-aged children , their families and carers , health
and education professionals , social care services , Primary Care Trusts , Children ’ s Trusts , National Health Service ( NHS ) Trusts and extended services [ 1 ]  . 
Although there may be different models of service delivery , school nurses are
in a unique and ideal position to plan , implement and evaluate skilled nursing
care in order to meet the public health needs of children , young people and
the wider school community . In order for children and young people to fulfil
their full potential good health is vital and good habits need to be established
in childhood to provide a sound basis for lifelong health and well-being [ 2 ]  . 
126
School Nursing and School Health Practice 127
School nursing is cited by Debell and Tomkins [ 3 ] as being the only professional group within the NHS whose remit is to focus entirely on meeting the
health needs of school-aged children and young people and their families , yet
it appears to remain a somewhat invisible service . The discussion that will follow is offered as an initial starting point for those working within the remit of
school health , and practitioners are encouraged to engage with this dialogue
and then explore a wider range of literature . 
School nurses are required to meet the demands and challenges of promoting and protecting children and young people ’ s health responding to the
plethora of public health legislation , policies , reports and guidance documents
that have been produced over the past few years [ 4–8 ]  . One of the most influential is that of Every Child Matters [ 9 ]  , which was given legal status in
the form of the Children Act 2004 [ 10 ] and applies to all those services and
agencies working with children and young people . Subsequent policy has been
produced for young people entitled Youth Matters [ 4 ] in 2005 and a ten-year
strategy ‘ Aiming High ’  [ 11 ] outlines how to transform facilities and support
for young people exploring issues around positive outcomes , empowerment , 
access and quality . There are five identified outcomes aimed at improving
opportunities for all children and young people : 
 Be healthy
 Stay safe
 Enjoy and achieve
 Make a positive contribution
 Achieve economic well-being
Activity 6 . 1
Consider your own individual strengths and limitations relating to the five
outcomes outlined in the Every Child Matters document , then reflect on
your strengths and limitations . Plan how you might develop your own
skills in helping children and young people you work with to achieve the
five outcomes . 
Structure of school health teams
School nurses have historically worked as autonomous practitioners , often
working in isolation purely because they are a much smaller group of community nurses . In 2000 , Debell and Jackson [ 12 ] suggested a framework which
could be adopted to ensure that school health services are able to deliver
services outlined in government policies ( Figure 6 . 1 )  . 
Over recent years , in many areas , services have been restructured to include
team leaders , specialist community public health nurses ( SCPHNs )  , school
128 Public Health Nursing
Professional advisor / lead
Team leader SCPHN qualification
Specialist SCPHN school nurse
School health staff nurses
Youth workers / mental health support workers
School health support assistants
Figure 6 . 1 Proposed structure of school health team . Adapted from DeBell
and Jackson [ 12 ]  . 
staff nurses and school nurse support workers . This move towards a multiskilled school health team , rather than a team of just school nurses has in some
areas , helped to provide new , proactive and innovative initiatives designed to
improve and protect children ’ s long-term health . The National Service Framework for Children and Young People published in 2004 [ 6 ] proposes that
school health teams should also include other practitioners such as mental
health care workers , youth workers etc . However , the implementation of such
a model is fragmented , as there is no national framework for planning and delivering school health services . The number of full-time-qualified school nurses 
( SCPHNs ) have slightly increased [ 13 ]  , but there is still a shortage in meeting
the government ’ s commitment of a qualified registered specialist school nurse
in every secondary school and its cluster of primary schools in England by 2010 
[ 5 ]  . The Welsh Assembly Government in its policy ‘ One Wales ’  [ 8 ] also commits
to providing a minimum of one family nurse per secondary school . 
Nonetheless , the creation of school health teams has started to provide a
number of benefits to school nursing . Their conception has helped to reduce
the isolation previously felt by some school nurses who have traditionally
worked alone managing a caseload [ 12 ]  , as well as introducing a much-needed
career structure within the service . Many trusts have been more proactive and
invested in employing staff on a variety of different contracts including fulltime , all-year-round contracts , which includes school holidays as well contracts
that involve evening and weekend working in order to provide a continuous
service for children , young people and their families . This coupled with a more
flexible working pattern , may help to attract more male , ethnic and other
minorities who are currently excluded by the rigidity of limited contracts into
school nursing . A team approach is vital , in order for the service to be able
School Nursing and School Health Practice 129
to have a robust career structure , which can renew itself , rather than be
a stagnant workforce and is designed to meet the need of the school-aged
population by including those with the relevant skills . 
The development of teams within special schools and the independent sector maybe more problematic due to smaller numbers of children . These particular groups of school nurses tend to deliver more specific and specialised
clinical care , supporting children who have long-term conditions or require a
more ‘ first contact ’ service as in independent schools . Yet , they also have a
vital role to play in promoting positive health within the communities that they
work with . 
Zero- to nineteen-year preventative service
Some services have taken the development of school health teams a stage
further and reconfigured to merge health visiting and school nursing services
together to provide an integrated 0- to 19-year preventative service in line
with integrated children ’ s services and in preparation of delivering the extended Child Health Promotion Programme [ 14 ] and Child Health Strategy due
to be published in 2009 [ 15 ]  . A 0- to 19-year preventative service may include
SCPHNs , health visitors , occupational health nurses , public health practitioners , youth offending team practitioners , primary mental health workers , youth
workers , nursery nurses etc . whoever is required to meet the needs of the population . Such a new way of working has a number of benefits such as providing
a more seamless but flexible delivery of services , pooling and local devolvement of budgets and resources to the team and improving the visibility of
services working with children and young people . But within such an approach
it is important to recognise that specific , specialist skills are still required to
meet and respond to the identified needs of children and young people . The
0- to 19-year preventative service would also enable practitioners to extend
services to those attending Further Education Colleges and Sixth Form Centres where school health services have traditionally not been provided and by
establishing links with occupational health nurses into the workplace where
young people may be employed . 
Image of school nursing
The image of school nursing is often closely linked to the title ‘ school nurse ’ 
as for some it conjures up historical images of the ‘ nit nurse ’  . In an attempt to
shake off this old-dated image , a number of services have changed the name , 
for example , to school health advisors but as this is only at local level this
can create confusion for colleagues , children , young people and their families . 
Some would argue the very title ‘ school nurse ’ portrays a very narrow focus
of the nurse within the school setting – is it time to change and adopt a title
at a national level which reflects the public health role for those aged 0–19
years more closely and that the service should focus on school-aged children
and young people wherever they are , not just in schools ? Or does the title
130 Public Health Nursing
matter if school nurses are able to market their service , raise their profile and
demonstrate the breadth and value of their role ? What about the children and
young people themselves ; what would they prefer the title to be ? If they can
identify and understand the title then maybe they would be more willing to
seek out advice and support . 
Specialist community public health nursing and school nursing
Over recent years , school nursing practice has returned to its original remit
of promoting and protecting public health focusing on school-aged children , 
young people and their families ( see Chapter 5 )  . It has become increasingly
complex and demanding with the need for school nurses to be able to identify , 
plan , deliver and evaluate health care to meet the needs of the individuals , 
groups and populations with whom they work . In order to become a registered
SCPHN , practitioners must undertake an academic training programme at
degree or masters level and meet the standards for SCPHN practice laid down
by the Nursing and Midwifery Council [ 16 ] which has been discussed in the
previous chapter . 
These standards are based on four key domains of public health nursing ( see
Chapter 2 )  . Each of these domains will be explored in more depth in relation
to school nursing practice . 
Search for health needs
The concept of need is a complex area and open to interpretation ; however , 
Bradshaw [ 17 ] identified four types of need : normative , felt , expressed and
comparative ( see Chapters 1 and 2 )  . Any health needs assessment should consider what kind of need is highlighted . Normative need , that is need identified
by the health professional , is often used as the basis for health promotion activities . Obtaining views from service users ( i . e . teachers , parents and pupils ) 
would help identify felt or expressed needs . Choosing Health [ 18 ] highlighted
areas of national need including the need to encourage good health by prevention and educational action and to give children and young people a better
start in life . School nurses with their knowledge and expertise in health surveillance and health education / promotion are ideally placed to contribute towards
programmes to address these needs . 
The Children Act 2004 [ 4 ] strongly advocates the involvement of children
and young people in the planning and delivery of services appropriate to their
needs . Involvement of young people from the outset will instill a sense of
ownership in initiatives designed to promote health and hopefully will help to
ensure that they take on board important messages relating to health and
well-being . 
School Nursing and School Health Practice 131
Evidence-based practice
There is an assumption that there is little research-based evidence available
relating to school nursing practice . However , this view is disputed by DeBell
and Tomkins [ 3 ]  , who conducted a comprehensive scoping review of the available evidence . They found that there was a wealth of evidence , but that much
of the evidence focuses on individual services rather than painting an overall national picture . This has led to services becoming fragmented nationally
and whilst services need to develop to respond to local need , there needs to
be a national steering of the profession to establish what is expected from
school health services and setting outcome measures . DeBell and Tomkins
also identify that there needs to be large-scale research studies into school
nurse practice development and school nurse leadership the results of which
are needed in order to steer the future direction of the service . 
As identified , there is evidence that small-scale studies are taking place and
this can contribute to the overall body of school nursing knowledge and be a
source of interest and inspiration to others and therefore the findings should
also be shared as widely as possible . But the onus is not just on individual practitioners to highlight effective working practices based on research findings . 
Team leaders , school nurse managers , professional advisors and managers
should all play a part in encouraging and actively supporting practitioners to
disseminate and publish their work . In support of this concept , Lord Darzi ’ s
report [ 19 ] on the future direction of the NHS published in 2008 , refers to
the establishment of a new NHS evidence service where staff will have easy
access to clinical and non-clinical best evidence and practice . 
Activity 6 . 2
Reflect on an aspect of your current practice and consider how you know
your practice is based on the best evidence available ? Spend some time
reviewing the current literature to help support , direct and guide your
practice . 
Health needs assessments and school health plans
The assessment of health needs is a central principle of a public health approach . Assessing the needs of school-aged populations and devising school
health plans was advocated back in the early 1990s , but is not a tool that is
used universally by school health teams [ 20 ]  . Health needs assessments aims
to help identify , analyse and prioritise the health needs or potential health
needs of a population in order to be able to target interventions more appropriately . Assessing need will equip school nurses with essential information
relating to the health needs of school-aged children and young people enabling them to prioritise and formulate proactive school health plans . Both
132 Public Health Nursing
schools and school health services are in receipt of a wealth of information
that when combined would provide a very clear evidence-based picture of the
health needs of that particular group of school-aged children and young people . In turn this would help to inform the provision of health education within
the curriculum . School nurses have a considerable working knowledge base
relating to the health needs of the local area such as the incidence of dental
caries , obesity levels , teenage pregnancy rates , admissions to local accident
and emergency departments detailing alcohol and drug misuse , the nature of
accidents relating to those that occur within the home or out in the community
as well as being cognisant about the availability of local services . 
School nurse ’ s knowledge regarding the state of children and young people ’ s
health and their ability to build relationships with them and their parents is , 
according to Debell and Tomkins [ 3 ]  , highly prized . They are often aware of the
children ’ s and young people ’ s emotional needs and risk-taking behaviours via
the drop in clinics run in many schools . Therefore , it is imperative that schools
and health professionals work together seamlessly , combining information
and resources in order to plan and deliver a relevant health curriculum . The
document ‘ Looking for a School Nurse ’  [ 21 ] should assist head teachers and
governors , both in state and independent schools , to help them work with
school nursing services to promote and improve the health of children and
young people , as well as staff , within their school community . 
This information should be disseminated and used to strategically plan
and provide health promotion and public health services in partnership with
schools . It should also contribute to local health targets identified by Primary
Care Trusts and commissioners and assist in delivering local multi-agency
children ’ s and young people ’ s plans . This will involve collaborative working
and the development of healthy alliances within education , social care and
other agencies working with children , which in turn will raise awareness of the
school nurse ’ s role , but most importantly meet the needs of the children and
young people . 
Case Study 6 . 1 Searching for health needs : anger
management
School health advisors within a West Midlands Primary Care Trust identified a health need in relation to a gap in service provision , for those
children and young people who were having difficulty controlling their
anger . 
The school health advisors contacted the child and family psychology
department for assistance in bridging this gap . 
A group consisting of a psychologist , a psychology trainer and two
school health advisors was formed to develop a project in order to meet
this identified need . 
A ten-week course was designed based on the cognitive behaviour
therapy approach to anger management , utilising best evidence-based
practice .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
School Nursing and School Health Practice 133
The programme is delivered within schools by school health advisors
supported by members from the psychology team . An extensive evaluation of the course is currently in progress and initial indications suggest
there has been improvement in the children ’ s behaviour .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Case Study 6 . 2 Searching for health needs youth
advisory clinics
The school nursing team in an area in Wales was aware that only a small
number of young people were attending the existing youth advisory
clinics ( YAS ) for sexual health advice , contraceptive services and healthy
lifestyles advice . 
Using the personal social and health education sessions in schools the
team opened a direct route to the YAS clinic . These clinics are run by
the school nursing team who has established contacts with young people
with a reputation of being trustworthy and approachable . 
Since identification of this gap in service provision the number of
young people attending YAS clinics has increased considerably . 
The venue is young person friendly , confidential and staffed with people trained to work in this area .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
However , searching for health needs and delivering services to meet such
a need is not without its challenges . An equitable system of health care is one
in which everyone has equal opportunities to achieve their potential health
status . Bagnall and Dilloway [ 22 ] argue that the school health service is able
to prevent ill health and promote positive health is an excellent example of
a service that is able to put the health of the whole population on an equal
basis . However , the diversity in the organisation of school health services , 
clinical practice and the wide variations in caseload sizes have contributed to
an inequitable provision of services nationally . 
Facilitating health-enhancing activities
School nurses , along with other agencies , play a major role in facilitating
health-enhancing activities for the school-aged population [ 23 ]  . Involvement
in local health promotion programmes as well as embracing national initiatives
such as the Healthy Schools Programme all help to enhance children and young
people ’ s health . The use of the spiral curriculum to revisit and reinforce health
messages is vital , as is the need to work in partnership with the whole school
community . Selective health interviews as advocated by Hall and Elliman [ 24 ]  , 
and drop in sessions provide an arena for individuals to seek confidential
advice and information on a variety of health matters . Children and young
134 Public Health Nursing
people are very impressionable and the whole ethos of the health-promoting
school can be used to portray positive role models and encourage participation
in a huge range of health-enhancing activities . 
School health teams are involved in promoting and protecting health in
many areas such as running smoking cessation groups , delivering parenting
programmes , advising on behavioural issues , delivering immunisation programmes , providing drug and alcohol education etc . The Darzi Review of the
NHS [ 19 ] reaffirms that there must be comprehensive well-being and prevention services which need to focus on key goals which include tackling childhood
obesity and encouraging physical activity , improving sexual health , promoting
positive mental health and supporting the vulnerable in society . These key
areas will be discussed in more depth . 
Childhood obesity
Childhood obesity in the UK has increased dramatically over recent years and
there is increasing concern about the effects on children ’ s long-term health 
[ 25 ]  . The causes of which are multi-factorial but are largely attributed to the
increase in availability of high energy , low nutritional , cheap foods high in
fat , sugar and salt as well as high sugary fizzy drinks . Combined with the
downward trend in physical exercise , due to the use of small-screen games
consoles , mobile phones , televisions and computers and the fact that children
have more limited opportunities for play , have all played a part in the obesity
revolution [ 26 ]  . Not only does this have implications for the child or young
person in terms of their short- and long-term physical and mental health , 
that can affect their educational and employment attainment but also has a
significant impact on the NHS [ 27 ]  . 
The Foresight report [ 28 ] is a report commissioned by the government to
develop a long-term vision over the next 40 years to reduce obesity levels
within the UK . The report stated that by 2050 , 60% of men and 50% of
women will be obese at a cost of £45 billion pounds if no action is taken . 
There is a strong correlation between children becoming obese if one or both
parents are obese . In boys this is around 25% and in girls around 22% . 
It has taken 30 years for obesity trends to have developed and changes
will not occur overnight . The report advocates that for obesity levels to
be halted it will require partnership working between government , science , 
business and civil society and at multiple levels personal , family , community
and national . It is recognised that the causes of obesity are multi-factorial
and include diet , access to reasonably priced healthy foods , the need for
safe environments and communities so children can play safely , access to
sport and leisure facilities , social marketing , healthy schools and workplaces
etc . But these all are issues that a school nurse who has been trained as a
SCPHN ( supported by other members of the school health team ) can help to
address . 
School Nursing and School Health Practice 135
Activity 6 . 3
Considering the important role parents play in their child ’ s nutrition , 
reflect on what level of support and type of advice you give to parents / carers . 
How can you further support families to make behavioural changes in
relation to their child and family ’ s nutrition ? Consider the strategies
and initiatives you and your team could be involved in to promote good
nutrition practices with children , parents and carers ? 
How can you promote the Change4Life Programme with parents and
children ?  ( www . dh . gov . uk / change4life ) 
Tackling childhood obesity is a national priority for the NHS and local partners , and is part of the government ’ s new public service agreement ( PSA ) on
child health and well-being . Following evidence provided by the Foresight report , a cross-government strategy , Healthy Weight : Healthy Lives , published
by the Department of Health in 2008 [ 27 , p . 7 ] sets out the following target : 
Our ambition is to be the first major nation to reverse the rising tide of
obesity and overweight in the population by ensuring that everyone is able
to achieve and maintain a healthy weight . Our initial focus will be on children , 
by 2020 we aim to reduce the proportion of overweight and obese children
to 2000 levels . 
Box 6 . 1 shows the government ’ s areas for tackling obesity and excess weight
in children . 
Box 6 . 1 Five areas for tackling excess weight 
( Healthy Weight : Healthy Lives : A Cross
Government Strategy )  [ 27 ] 
Children : healthy growth and healthy weight – early prevention of
weight problems to avoid the ‘ conveyor–belt ’ effect into adulthood
Promoting healthier food choices – reducing the consumption of foods
that are high in fat , sugar and salt and increasing the consumption of
fruit and vegetables
Building physical activity into our lives – getting people moving as a
normal part of their day
Creating incentives for better health – increasing the understanding
and value people place on the long-term impact of decisions
Personalised advice and support – complementing preventative care
with treatment for those who already have weight problems
136 Public Health Nursing
Activity 6 . 4
Consider the five main themes outlined in the document ‘ Healthy Weight : 
Healthy Lives ’  ( www . dh . gov . uk / healthyweighthealthylives )  . 
Consider how school nurses and school health teams can deliver and
evaluate these themes within practice . 
Physical activity
Play and physical activity play a crucial role in a child ’ s development . It helps
the child to develop physical control as well as gross and fine motor coordination . It also plays an important role in promoting good health and preventing
and tackling childhood obesity . 
Encouraging regular exercise has been a key element of a number of government policies over the past few years for both adults as well as children and
young people . School health teams are able to promote and support children , 
young people and their families to engage in physical activity by running ‘ fit
clubs ’ outside of school curriculum or being involved in weight management
programmes that have a fitness element . 
Case Study 6 . 3 Facilitating health-enhancing
activities : physical exercise sessions for children
School nurses within an area of the West Midlands have a specialist
team called Phyzkids , which provides physical activity sessions for children aged 5–12 years . The team is made up of approximately ten school
nurses with three of them having undergone specialist training ( Fitkid ) in
order to lead the sessions . Each session lasts for approximately one hour
with 4–5 fun activities , including warm-up , cool-down and circle-time . Activities are designed to be adaptable for varying abilities to ensure all
children can be included . There are six progressive sessions , which have
imaginative themes , for example , in the army , seaside fun , grab five and
bone builders . As well as encouraging physical activity and why it is important for good health the sessions are also designed to incorporate
other health promotion messages , for example healthy eating and sun
safety .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Mental health
School health teams need to provide holistic care to children and young people so they can develop into healthy adults and have the ability to develop
School Nursing and School Health Practice 137
psychologically , emotionally , intellectually and spiritually . Children ’ s and
young people ’ s social and emotional well-being is important as it affects their
physical health and determines what they achieve at school and whether they
can choose to adopt a healthy lifestyle . The National Institute for Health and
Clinical Excellence ( NICE )  [ 29 ] have produced guidance for promoting children ’ s social and emotional well-being in primary education . A stark message
is that a lack of investment in mental health promotion in primary schools is
likely to lead to a significant cost for future generations . 
Prevalence of mental health disorders in school-aged children
Statistics from the Office of National Statistics [ 30 ] suggest that 1 : 10 children
aged between 5 and 16 years have a diagnosable mental health disorder . It is
estimated that between 1 : 12 and 1 : 15 children self-harm and 25 000 children
are serious enough to admit to hospital and for children who are in the ‘ looked
after ’ system this is much higher , school nurses have seen a rise in children
suffering from stress and anxiety ; 1 : 10 children have a mental health problem , 
that is serious enough to seek professional help [ 31 ]  . The impact of transition
periods plays a role in affecting mental health such as changing schools , illness , 
family divorce , bereavement and loss and those separated from their families
for a variety of reasons . For these reasons children need to develop coping
mechanisms to cope with such changes and school nursing services need to
reflect this ; by providing initiatives that will enhance every aspect of their
childhood . 
Role of school health teams in promoting positive mental health
School nurses are able to help deliver emotional health and well-being programmes as part of a school ’ s curriculum , can support individual children and
young people by providing early intervention services , and provide intensive
support to children , young people and their families around transition periods . 
School nurses can work with schools to run bullying support groups for both
the bullied child as well as the perpetrator . Signposting to other services such
as child and adolescent mental health , bereavement services , peer support
groups etc . is also an important aspect of the role . However , many services
find it difficult to provide such services due to workforce numbers and the
need for commissioners to recognise the importance of investing in more
school nurses to meet this important health need . There are some services
which have a school nurse specialising in emotional health and well-being and
mental health or employ specialist mental health workers within the team to
support children and young people . There are a number of examples across
the country where pupils are being supported in relation to emotional health
such as the one detailed below . 
138 Public Health Nursing
Case Study 6 . 4 Facilitation of health-enhancing
activities : stress management programme run by
school nurses
An aromatherapy service has been set up in local high school , within the
West Midlands , by a school nurse , who is also a qualified complementary
therapist , to help reduce stress and anxiety in young people . They may
be experiencing difficulties due to family breakdowns , loss , illnesses and
exam pressures . The treatment is based on hand massage and relaxation
techniques . This initiative has been successful because of support from
the PCT and the school . Funding has been obtained from the Community Partnership Fund and set up at a minimal cost . The young people
can self-refer or are referred by agencies such as Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Services and teachers within the school community . The
evaluations of the service have been very positive and the aim is to
develop and extend the service to other local schools in the near future .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Sexual health
It is acknowledged that the UK has the highest teenage conception rates within
Western Europe [ 32 ] and it appears unlikely that the target to reduce under-18
conception rates by 2010 , as stated in Choosing Health [ 5 ]  , will be met . The
Social Exclusion Unit Report on Teenage Pregnancy in 1999 [ 32 ] identified that
there was no one single reason for the high rates but highlighted three factors
that appear to contribute – low expectations of young people many from
disadvantaged backgrounds , ignorance about the need for contraception and
its availability , sexually transmitted infections and the demands of parenting
and mixed messages that as a society we portray to our young people about
sex . In 66% of teenage pregnancies there is a live full-term birth and it is
recognised that teenage parents are then more likely to experience long-term
unemployment , have less educational opportunities , live in inadequate
housing all of which contribute to health , social and economic inequalities 
[ 32 , 33 ]  . 
School nurses involved in working with young people need to be trained in
order to deliver effective sex and relationship education both with groups and
individuals . It may be pertinent for services to consider employing , as part of
the school health team , school nurses that specialise in adolescent health . It is
important that it is not only knowledge and information that is communicated
but young people need to be able to develop skills and attitudes to make
informed , safe choices that will protect their long-term health .  ( This will be
discussed later in this chapter .  ) Chlamydia screening , pregnancy testing etc . 
can all be offered at drop-in clinics but often this is reliant on the views of the
head teacher , school governors and ethos of the school . 
School Nursing and School Health Practice 139
School nurses need to work closely with schools and other agencies to overcome some of these challenges particularly in areas where teenage conception
rates and sexually transmitted infections are high . 
Supporting children and young people with complex health needs
Children and young people with complex needs also require high levels of support by school health services and partner agencies [ 34 ]  . Over recent years
there has been a significant move to educate children with complex needs
in mainstream school partly in response to the Special Educational Needs
Disability Act 2001 [ 35 ]  . The number of children with special needs or complex health needs attending mainstream schools has gradually increased over
the years with an estimated 2 . 8% of all children having a statement of special educational needs [ 36 ]  . There are , of course , many more children within
mainstream schools who , despite having some form of special needs , do not
require a statement . This widespread integration has resulted in a changing
role within special schools , as only 36 . 9% of children with a statement of
special educational needs actually attended a special school . 
School nurses in special schools are required to care for children with very
complex health needs , but school nurses working in mainstream schools tend
to have less input for the day-to-day care ( as this is often carried out by support
staff who is with the child all day in school )  . The generic school nurse is more
involved in drawing up plans of care that support the child , parents and school , 
bringing together agencies to ensure the needs of the child are met . School
nurses not only have a role to play in the assessment procedure but also with
 ‘ inclusiveness ’ comes the need to acquire knowledge and understanding of
a wide range of conditions . In order to facilitate effective integration , school
nurses should understand the effect these conditions may have on a child ’ s
ability to learn , thus enabling them to offer advice and support to the child , 
family and school staff . The Children ’ s Plan [ 37 ] highlights the importance
of providing ongoing support to young people and their families during the
transition from children ’ s to adult services . 
Case Study 6 . 5 Facilitation of health-enhancing
activities : obesity
Poor nutrition in the South Wales Valleys has been a longstanding problem with obesity identified as a major issue throughout Wales . 
The school nursing team addressed this need by providing nutritionbased activities in the schools in a phased and age-related manner as
part of the school curriculum . 
An innovative interactive Treasure Island Game was implemented to
help raise awareness of food groups and enable primary school children to make healthier food choices and is well received by schools and
children .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
140 Public Health Nursing
Additional activities include healthy pack lunches , hydration awareness
and food advertising . These health promotion activities enable individual schools to work towards achieving the national-recognised healthy
school ’ s award .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Personal , social and health education
Personal , social and health education ( PSHE )  , although not a statutory curriculum subject , is delivered in most schools and is one of the four key themes
outlined in the Healthy Schools Programme . The PSHE Continuing Professional Development programme is a national scheme that has been developed
for teachers , community nurses and other professionals who work both in
schools and out in the community . The need for the development of specialist
teams to be established , particularly within secondary schools , which consists
of specialist trained teachers and other health professionals such as school
nurses and sexual health nurse advisors was recommended as being a way
forward by OFSTED in 2002 [ 38 ]  . 
The programme aims to : 
 Improve the confidence of teachers , community nurses and others delivering PSHE in schools and out of schools settings
 Provide recognition for individual teachers ’ and community nurses ’ experience and skills
 Improve the quality and effectiveness of PSHE provided to children and
young people
 Raise the profile of PSHE
 Contribute to the United Kingdom ’ s teenage pregnancy strategy ’ s goal to
halve the number of under-18 conception rates by 2010 [ 32 ] 
 Address issues relating to health inequalities and social inclusion
This programme is an effective example of a joint approach between different government departments and provides clear leadership between services
that is able to transfer policy into practice [ 3 ]  . 
The programme also enables schools , communities and their health partners
to take a more strategic , coherent approach to PSHE , as the priority that is
given to PSHE within a school can often depend on the interest and motivation
of individual teachers and community nurses that happen to be working in the
area . 
In some schools , where PSHE is not given priority , it maybe the view of the
head teacher and governing body that it should be the parents and carers who
should play the major role in meeting the personal , social and health needs
of their children rather than the school itself . The opposite may also be true
in that some parents rely solely on the school to inform their children about
health particularly in relation to puberty and Sexual relationship education 
( SRE )  . But what remains clear is that children and young people need to be
School Nursing and School Health Practice 141
given every opportunity to develop knowledge , skills and attitudes to enable
them to make informed health choices . 
Case Study 6 . 6 School nurse ’ s experience of PSHE
programme
 ‘ Before undertaking the PSHE programme I just went into school and
delivered information on health . Completing the course has enabled
me to consider the importance of planning sessions in conjunction with
the teacher to ensure the session actually meets the needs of the whole
group as well as evaluating the effectiveness of the session with the
pupils . I now feel much more confident in delivering PSHE ’  .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Promoting health outside of the school curriculum
It is recognised that schools play a vital role and are a key setting in order to promote health [ 5 , 39 ]  , but do not have the monopoly on promoting
children ’ s and young people ’ s health . School-based health promotion is only
one influence on the health behaviour of young people [ 40 ] as schools are
not the only place where children and young people gather . Children and
young people gather in a whole host of other settings , which can contribute
in supporting them to make well-chosen health choices such as youth centres . Learning is ongoing and takes place outside of the school environment
in the home , from television , via the Internet and in the wider community . 
All of these will influence children ’ s and young people ’ s beliefs about health
and illness . Health promotion programmes can and should also be delivered
outside of the normal school curriculum in a variety of other settings where
young people gather such as youth clubs and groups , sports clubs , support
groups , children ’ s centres , activities and groups run with extended schools , 
breakfast clubs , after-school clubs , young peoples ’ sexual health clinics , Sure
Start Plus programmes , Flying Start in Wales , young offenders institutions in
fact anywhere where children and young people come together . 
The issue of access to a health service designed for school-aged children
and young people must also be considered for those who do not regularly attend mainstream school . This may be for a variety of reasons such as chronic
illness , home-educated , behaviour problems , pregnancy , teenage mothers , 
young carers etc . It is recognised that those not attending school maybe potentially more vulnerable from developing long-term health problems [ 32 ]  . They
require equal access , alongside their peers who attend mainstream school , 
to a health care professional who is specifically trained to work with schoolaged children and young people . Research carried out by Lightfoot and Bines
in 1997 [ 41 ] suggests that whilst school nurses are well placed to meet the
health needs of children and young people within the school setting , young
people value a choice in being able to access similar services outside of the
142 Public Health Nursing
school premises . New models of service delivery , such as integrated teams
with specialist nurses , that are both creative and innovative , need to be developed to ascertain how school health services can effectively meet the health
needs of children and young people ( up to the age of 19 years ) wherever they
are . 
School health teams have the skills to be able to meet the health needs of
school-aged children and young people wherever they are , what is required
is additional resources and an increase in workforce capacity . This reinforces
the public health role of the school nurse , recognising that the role stretches
beyond the confines of the school and into the wider community . In order for
this to take place effectively , school nurses need to work closely with other
agencies from both the statutory and voluntary sectors to create opportunities
for the promotion and development of health promoting initiatives , which meet
the health , needs of the children and young people they are working with . 
However , this can only happen if there is long-term sustainable investment in
the school health service . 
Activity 6 . 5
Consider your role or your team ’ s role in supporting children and young
people outside of the school setting . Justify your involvement and consider how you could provide evidence to commissioners of your / your
team ’ s effectiveness . 
Stimulating an awareness of health needs
Health education and health promotion are essential factors in raising awareness amongst the school community . The Healthy Schools Programme which
was re-launched in 2005 , aims to raise awareness of the opportunities that
exist in schools for improving health and develop a whole school approach to
health around four core themes of healthy eating , PSHE , emotional health and
well-being and physical activity [ 42 ]  . A National Healthy Schools Network and
the Wired for Health website support the initiative , which is not only concerned
with promoting pupils ’ health but includes the whole school community . 
Consulting children , young people and parents in relation
to health issues
In order to stimulate effectively an awareness of health needs it is important
to consult and work with users of the service . 
In the early years of the education system and within society children were
viewed as passive recipients of knowledge and information . Mayall [ 43 ] makes
School Nursing and School Health Practice 143
the point that children did not speak for themselves but were spoken for by
adults . They construct their understandings about what children need and
decisions are made which is the basis on which children lead their lives . But
the introduction of the United Nations Convention for the Rights of the Child
Articles 12 , 13 and 17 brought the entitlement of children and young people to
participate to the fore [ 44 ]  . 
There has been a conscious move to move away from the traditional paternalistic style of service delivery to one that should encourage children and
young people to actively participate in their own health care agenda [ 5 ]  . Young
people define health holistically and have a good understanding of what is considered to be healthy and unhealthy . However , it is the environment and their
lifestyle that does not always help them to choose healthy options [ 45 ]  . 
One of the principles of the Children ’ s Plan [ 46 ] is that services need to
be shaped and developed by children , young people and their families not
designed around professional boundaries . The Chief Nursing Review in 2004 
[ 47 ] highlighted that children and young people wanted services that listened
to them , were accessible , confidential , non-judgemental and provided information that was age appropriate in order for them to make choices . Children
with disabilities also wanted to be given information and choices about their
care and treatment . The Department of Health has developed quality criteria
titled ‘ You ’ re Welcome ’  [ 48 ] that provides guidance on how to make health
services young people friendly . 
An initial step is to consult the views of those who use the service , which not
only include the children but the views of the parents and wider school community . On a school community basis the views of young people may be sought
via student councils which exist in many secondary schools and increasingly
so in junior schools . OFSTED in 2002 [ 38 ] found that few schools engaged
pupils in planning or evaluating sex and relationship education programmes
or policies . However , they highlighted that in some areas consultations do
take place and where this occurs pupils value such discussions and the school
gains fresh insights into their curriculum , which assists in future development . The Education Act 2002 [ 49 ] requires that all schools include pupils in
the decision-making processes relating to issues within school life that affect
them . Schools need to consult children and young people and respond to their
needs to ensure that PSHE is relevant , effective and that the potential for
learning is maximised fully [ 50 ]  . 
Accessing existing research studies such as lifestyle surveys and conducting
local research projects are also ways of seeking the views regarding health
of the ‘ whole population ’ within the school . School health assessments and
the establishment of service-level agreements are also ideal opportunities to
seek the views of teaching staff , school governors as well as the children . 
Involving parents in clinical audits and ‘ customer satisfaction ’ surveys as well
as attendance at parents ’ evenings are additional mechanisms . Although the
users of the service maybe consulted and have some control over the delivery
of existing services , they should equally be consulted and actively involved
144 Public Health Nursing
in identifying and planning new services . For example , if a new drop-in clinic
is to be set up then it is important to have representation from the young
people who will be accessing the clinic . In some areas young people are being
included in recruitment processes for school health staff either meeting candidates informally before the interview or as part of the interviewing process
itself . There does , however , need to be a conscious effort to ensure this does
not become an example of notional empowerment . A more committed approach to truly empowering young people in decision-making processes is to
have a representative from this group on working parties and steering groups . 
Emphasis must be placed on consultation , participation and responding to expressed needs rather than just monitoring and recording opinions which are
then largely ignored . Although there needs to be a recognition that there are
often only limited resources available , but school health service managers
need to be creative with the funds that are available and seek further investment on a number of different levels – micro ( Primary Care Trusts , NHS Trusts
in Wales )  , meso ( Children Trusts and Strategic Health Authorities ) and macro 
( Government and European sources )  . 
Acting as an advocate for school-aged children
School nurses are ideally placed to act as advocates for the school-aged children and young people . For example in situations where there are issues
related to safeguarding such as abuse , witnessing domestic abuse , bullying , 
experiencing bereavement or loss or where there is low self esteem . 
Indeed client or patient advocacy is an integral and essential aspect of good
professional practice , and is implicit within the code : standards of conduct , 
performance and ethics for nurses and midwives [ 51 ]  . Therefore , school nurses
have a duty to act as advocates for school-aged children . 
Providing support to parents , in partnership with other agencies , can be
an important role for school nurses . This can be in the form of parenting
support groups for both primary- and secondary-aged children , behaviour
management groups , individual support at family level etc . 
The notion of providing personalised care is revisited in the Darzi report on
the NHS [ 19 ]  . Such an approach will help and support people of all ages including children and young people to stay healthy and protect their long-term
health . One example of this is the NHS Teen LifeCheck initiative , which is an
online self-assessment tool for 11–14 year old . Its aim is to provide information
and advice on healthy lifestyle issues and signpost young people to further
sources of advice at both a local and national level [ 52 ]  . 
Collaborative working
One of the key principles of the modernised primary care-led NHS is collaboration and partnership working [ 18 ]  . Working alongside other agencies has been
a central feature of the school health service , as it owes its very existence to
School Nursing and School Health Practice 145
working with education providers , working with social workers to safeguard
children and young people and with other agencies such as CAMHS , police etc . 
Many school nurses run drop-in clinics in conjunction with youth workers , educational welfare officers , community paediatricians , dieticians etc . and need
to develop clear links with general practice [ 53 ]  . But possibly this could be described as working in parallel rather than true partnership working [ 23 ]  . There
have been challenges over the years as school health services have only been
able to work in schools by invitation . Often social workers , education staff and
school health have all been working with a child and their family with little
communication taking place between them . Every Child Matters [ 7 ] seeks to
address some of these shortcomings . However , the Children Act 2004 [ 54 ] 
has provided a legislative framework to ensure these processes become formalised with a plethora of supporting documentation to aid schools , health
services , social care and other key partners in the establishment of Children ’ s
Trust . 
Children ’ s Trusts will support the development of initiatives such as extended schools . There is no ‘ blueprint ’ of what an extended school must look
like as it should be tailor made to meet the needs of the local community and
reflect its diversity [ 55 ] but it may also strengthen services already currently
provided . Fundamental to the development of extended services is the consultation and involvement of the wider community . The idea of bringing services
together is to make it easier for universal services ( such as schools ) to work
with specialist and targeted services such as school health [ 56 ]  . 
During recent years there has been other commitments to facilitate a
greater understanding of the importance of working together to improve
services for children and young people . At a local level Children and Young
People ’ s Services Delivery Plans have been developed by all those agencies
involved in delivering children ’ s services and this should also foster a commitment in providing joined-up integrated seamless services . 
Interprofessional learning is now a key feature of many specialist community public health nursing courses with community nurses learning alongside
social workers and police officers , for example . Other educational programmes
such as the National PSHE CPD Programme enables teachers and community
nurses to learn and work together . 
Case Study 6 . 7 Interprofessional collaboration
placement project between trainee teachers and
school nurses
Seven trainee teachers and eight student school nurses took part in a
joint placement project within a secondary school in the West Midlands , 
facilitated by lecturers from the University of Wolverhampton . The aim
of the project was to bring together teachers and school nurses to work
together to plan , deliver and evaluate a PSHE day for pupils ranging from 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
146 Public Health Nursing
year 6 to year 13 and to promote a greater understanding of each other ’ s
roles in relation to meeting the five outcomes outlined in Every Child
Matters . 
The teachers were able to share their knowledge and skills around
lesson planning and classroom management and the school nurses were
able to provide information on health issues and resources that could
be utilised . In conjunction with the school a range of appropriate topics
were identified and the group worked in pairs to plan a PSHE lesson . 
The students as well as school staff and pupils evaluated the lessons
and the school reported that ‘ this was the most successful PSHE day
they have held ’  . It is anticipated that this project will be offered to other
schools within the area .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Influencing policy development
The contribution school nurses make to the assessment of health needs and
the promotion and protection of health places them in a prime position to influence and contribute to the development of effective health policies . In broad
terms , there is also a role for acting as an advocate for school communities , 
in relation to policy formulation on health issues . It is , however , recognised
that there needs to be opportunities available for children and young people
to be able to verbalise their opinions , thoughts and ideas [ 41 ]  . School nurses 
( in conjunction with other colleagues from education and youth services ) are
in a position to be able to facilitate these opportunities and communicate
them to those involved in policy formulation and the planning of health care
services . 
Ways of being involved in developing policy
Being involved in policy development can be achieved in several ways ; at
school level , school nurses can contribute to the Healthy Schools Programme 
[ 42 ] by acting as a facilitator working with school staff , governors , parents and
pupils , assisting schools to develop bullying and SRE policies , for example . At
a community level school nurses are able to adopt a strategic stance working
in partnership with other agencies in order to plant the needs of school-aged
children firmly on the health , education and social care agenda . For this to
be maximised school nurses need to have representation at a strategic level
within Primary Care Trusts , NHS Trusts , Children ’ s Trusts , Strategic Health
Authorities and Local Authorities / Extended Services Provision . Influence at
national level can be achieved by becoming actively involved in professional
organisations , contributing to government consultations , presenting at conferences , publishing , getting involved in and undertaking research and lobbying for change . 
School Nursing and School Health Practice 147
Case Study 6 . 8 How school nurses have contributed
to the development of the immunisation policy for a
Midlands Primary Care Trust
 ‘ As part of our Specialist Community Public Health Nurse ( SCPHN ) degree we were given the opportunity to work in partnership with the PCT ’ s
Immunisation Officer . We contributed comprehensively towards the development of the new immunisation policy for use by staff working within
the Primary Care Trust . 
Using information gained from policy development discussions on the
SCPHN course we felt confident in using our analytical skills and knowledge to participate in detailed discussions on contentious issues such
as consent . An initial draft was prepared and following further appraisal
this was amended , as it was agreed aspects of the policy were difficult
to understand . The vaccination and immunisation committee will now
review the final draft of the policy . 
Our involvement in the development of the policy was a new and
exciting challenge and something that we would not have felt confident
in doing before undertaking the SCPHN course ’  .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Activity 6 . 6
Reflect on how you have worked with another agency and consider the
factors that made the experience successful or not . List the things you
would do next time to improve the partnership and collaboration and
ultimately improve the health outcomes for the child , young person and
their family . 
Summary
Chapters 5 and 6 have provided an overview of some of the many , complex
issues related to school health practice . It was not possible , nor intended , to
provide in-depth analysis of the areas rather to stimulate thoughts and motivate school nurses and those working in school health teams to seek further
information . School nursing has changed considerably since its inception over
a hundred years ago , although the principles remain similar . The government
has acknowledged the valuable contribution that school nurses can make to
the public health agenda [ 6–8 ]  . School nurses , school health teams and 0–
19 years ’ preventative services continue to work hard to raise the profile of
their profession and prove their worth as key specialists working to improve
148 Public Health Nursing
the health of children and young people in schools , colleges and in other
settings . 
The demands on school health services are ever growing both nationally
and at a local level . School nurses have hungered for national recognition
to demonstrate that they are able to effectively identify and contribute to
meeting the health needs of Britain ’ s school-aged children . A plethora of government policies has supported this recognition , but the service needs to
continue to respond to the challenge of ensuing that there is a firm structure in place , which will meet these ever-increasing demands , for example the
introduction of the HPV vaccine for protection against cervical cancer [ 57 ]  . 
Whilst this is clearly a public health issue that school health teams are ideally placed to deliver on , the resource implications are huge and the service
has currently not got sufficient capacity to absorb this new initiative , and if
they do it will be at the demise of some other very important aspect of the
role . Therefore , it is important that new programmes and initiatives such as
the proposed extension to the Child Health Promotion Programme [ 37 ] are
adequately centrally funded , and that recognition is given to school health
services that they can with the right resources implement and manage these
public health initiatives . 
School nurses must be prepared to engage in research , share areas of
innovation and good practice by the publication of articles , projects , disseminating at conferences in order to establish a clear-evidence base and expand
the body of school nursing knowledge . Although school nurses are involved
in very valuable work , the service needs to be able to demonstrate that its
outcomes are clinically effective and that there is a commitment to strive
to continuously improve the quality of the service provided . The continued
introduction of commissioning will influence the direction of community nursing service including school nursing . The Darzi report [ 19 ] clearly highlights
that community nurses will have a role to play in the commissioning process . 
School nurses and their managers are in a position to advise on and influence
the development and commissioning of services in relation to children ’ s and
young people ’ s health . 
However , whilst adopting a strategic approach in developing closer links
with primary care is essential equilaterally , school nursing services need to be
able to demonstrate to commissioners , through evidence-based practice that
the service provided actually meets the health needs of school communities 
[ 53 , 3 ]  . There needs to be clear evidence that a wide range of strategies
and clinically audited interventions ( which have a public health focus ) are
in place and are clinically effective . Whilst strategic players such as team
leaders , professional advisors , managers , commissioners and providers have
responsibility for such developments , it is ultimately the responsibility of every
school nurse to seek out the health needs of children and young people . 
Consideration also needs to be given to marketing and recruitment . As a
multi-cultural society deliberation must be given to the needs of all groups
and as such school health services should continue to strive to attract nurses
from different ethnic groups , to increase the number of male nurses within
School Nursing and School Health Practice 149
the profession and provide a structured career pathway to encourage newly
qualified staff . 
The title ‘ school nurse ’ needs to be debated in order to ensure that it accurately reflects the modern role and in the light of new models of service
delivery . Another important area to be addressed is related to contracted
working hours , there must be adequate numbers of school nurses and support staff working full-time in order to provide a continuous , seamless service
for children and young adults throughout the year both in schools and in other
settings . In areas where school nurses work on a term–time basis parents and
young people may feel isolated during school holidays at a time when they
also lose the support of the school environment . 
School health teams need good leadership from within , working at a strategic level in partnership with others locally and nationally , to develop costeffective services , which prove the true value of investing in services for
school-aged children and young people . 
The diverse nature of current school nursing practice will strongly influence
the opportunities that exist for developing relationships within primary care . 
However , in an NHS that is largely primary care led and in the new world of
commissioning services , it is essential for school nurses and school health
to be able to respond to the challenge of creating a new service agenda , by
reducing the invisibility of the service , being responsive and proactive . This
chapter has identified just a few of the many examples across the country
where school nurses are working in new ways , but these need to be adopted
at a more national level , with the flexibility to ensure the specific health needs
of local school-aged populations are still met . It will take a firm commitment
to continue to develop a truly integrated approach in promoting the public
health of school-aged children and young people within local schools , colleges
and the wider community . We owe it to the future health of the next adult
generation , to promote and protect their health , which is one of the most
fundamental principles of school health practice . However , there must be an
inspired shared vision at a local and national strategic level in order for the
profession to continue on the challenging but exciting journey translating
rhetoric into reality . 
References
1 DeBell D , Everett G . The changing role of school nursing with health education
and health promotion . Health Education 1998 ; 98 ( 3 )  : 107–15 . 
2 Department for Children , Schools and Families . The Children ’ s Plan : Building
Brighter Futures ( available at www . dcsf . gov . uk )  . London : TSO , 2007 . Accessed
6 August 2008 . 
3 Debell D , Tomkins A . Discovering the Future of School Nursing : The Evidence
Base . London : CPHVA , 2006 . 
4 Children Act ( available at www . publications . parliament . uk )  ; 2004 . Accessed 30
April 2008 . 
150 Public Health Nursing
5 Department of Health . Choosing Health : Making Healthier Choices Easier . London : The Stationery Office , 2004 . 
6 Department of Health . National Service Framework for Children , Young People
and Maternity Services . London : TSO , 2004 . 
7 Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  / Department of Health ( DH )  . Every Child Matters : Change for Children . London : HMSO , The Stationery Office , 
2004 . 
8 Welsh Assembly Government . One Wales : A Progressive Agenda for the Government of Wales . Cardiff : WAG , 2007 . 
9 Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  / Department of Health ( DH )  . Every
Child Matters . London : TSO , 2003 . 
10 Department of Children , Schools and Families . Youth Matters . London : TSO , 
2005 . 
11 Department of Children , Schools and Families . Aiming High for Young
People : Ten Year Strategy for Positive Outcomes ( available at www . 
hm-treasury . gov . uk )  . London : DCSF / HM Treasury , 2007 . Accessed 9 October
2008 . 
12 DeBell D , Jackson P . School Nursing within the Public Health Agenda : A Strategy for Practice . London : QNI , 2000 . 
13 CPHVA . Community Practitioner , Editorial . 2008 ; 81 ( 5 )  : 4 . 
14 Department of Health . Pregnancy and the First Five Years of Life . London : TSO , 
2007 . 
15 Department for Children , Schools and Families . The Children ’ s Plan : Building
Brighter Futures ( available at www . dcsf . gov . uk )  . London : TSO , 2007 . Accessed
10 October 2008 . 
16 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist Community Public Health Nurses ( available at www . nmc-uk . org )  . London : Nursing
and Midwifery Council , 2004 . 
17 Bradshaw J . The concept of social need . New Society 1972 ; 19 : 640–43 . 
18 Department for Health . Choosing Health : Making Healthier Choices Easier . London : The Stationery Office , 2004 . 
19 Department of Health . High Quality for All . NHS Next Stage Review : The Darzi
Report . London : TSO , 2008 . 
20 Royal College of Nursing . School Profiling . London : RCN , 1992 . 
21 Department of Health . Looking for a School Nurse . London : DH , 2006 . 
22 Bagnall P , Dilloway M . In a Different Light : School Nurses and Their Role in
Meeting the Needs of School Age Children . London : Department of Health , 
1996 . 
23 Sherwin S , Williams A . Promoting health : historical overview and political context . In : Thurtle V , Wright J , eds . Promoting the Health of School Age Children . 
London : Quay Books , 2008 . 
24 Hall D , Elliman D , eds . Health for All Children , Revised 4th edn . Oxford : Oxford
University Press , 2006 . 
25 Foresight report ( available at www . foresight . gov . uk )  ; 2007 . Accessed 5 August
2008 . 
26 Office for National Statistics . National Diet and Nutrition Survey : Young People
Aged Four to Eighteen Years . Vol . 1 : Report of the Diet and Nutrition Survey . 
London : TSO , 2000 . 
27 Department of Health . Healthy Weight : Healthy Lives : A Cross Government
Strategy for England . London : TSO , 2008 . 
28 Foresight report ( available at www . foresight . gov . uk )  ; 2007 . Accessed 12
September 2008 . 
School Nursing and School Health Practice 151
29 NICE . Promoting Children ’ s Social and Emotional Wellbeing in Primary Education . NICE Public Health Guidance 12 ( available at www . nice . org . uk )  . London : 
NICE , 2008 . 
30 Office for National Statistics ( ONS )  . Census 2001 National Report for England
and Wales . London : ONS , 2004 . 
31 Department for Education and Skills / Department for Health . School Nurse : 
Practice Development Resource Pack . London : DfES Publications , 2006 . 
32 Social Exclusion Unit ( SEU )  . Teenage Pregnancy Strategy . London : SEU , 1999 . 
33 Department of Health . Drinking , Smoking and Drug Use in Young People in
2003 . London : HMSO , 2004 . 
34 Children Act . London : HMSO , 1989 . 
35 Special Educational Needs Disability Act ( available at www . opsi . gov . uk )  ; 2001 . 
Accessed 1 August 2008 . 
36 Department for Children , Schools and Families . Special Educational Needs in
England ( available at SFR 15 / 2008 www . dcsf . gov . uk )  ; 2008 . Accessed 1 August
2008 . 
37 Department for Children , Schools and Families . The Children ’ s Plan ( available
at www . dcsf . gov . uk )  ; 2007 . Accessed 9 October 2008 )  . 
38 Office for Standards in Education ( OFSTED )  . Sex and Relationship Education . 
London : HMSO , 2002 . 
39 DeBell D , Buttigieg M , Sherwin S , Lowe K . The school as a location for health
promotion . In : DeBell D , ed . Public Health Practice and the School Age Population . London : Hodder Arnold , 2007 . 
40 Naidoo J , Wills J . Health Promotion : Foundations for Practice , 2nd edn . London : 
Baillere Tindall , 2000 . 
41 Lightfoot J , Bines W . Keeping Children Healthy : The Role of School Nursing . 
University of York : Social Policy Research Unit , 1997 . 
42 Department for Education and Skills ( DfES )  . National Healthy Schools Status : 
A Guide for Schools . London : HMSO , 2005 . 
43 Mayall B . Negotiating Health : Primary School Children at Home and School . 
London : Cassell , 1994 . 
44 United Nations General Assembly resolution 44 / 25 . Convention on the Rights
of the Child ( available at www . uncrc . info )  . Geneva : UN , 1989 . Accessed 20 June
2008 . 
45 National Children ’ s Bureau . Children and Young People ’ s Views on Health and
Health Services : A Review of the Evidence . London : NCB Publications , 2005 . 
46 Department for Children , Schools and Families . The Children ’ s Plan ( available
at www . dcsf . gov . uk )  ; 2007 . Accessed 6 August 2008 )  . 
47 Department of Health . Chief Nursing Officer ’ s Review of the Nursing , Midwifery
and Health Visiting Contribution to Vulnerable Children and Young People . 
London : DH , 2004 . 
48 Department of Health . You ’ re Welcome Quality Criteria : Making Health Services
Young People Friendly . London : TSO , 2007 . 
49 Education Act . London : HMSO , 2002 . 
50 National Children ’ s Bureau . Developing a Whole School Approach to PSHE and
Citizenship . London : NCB Publications , 2003 . 
51 Nursing and Midwifery Council . The Code : Standards of Conduct , Performance
and Ethics for Nurses and Midwives ( available at www . nmc-uk . org )  . London : 
Nursing and Midwifery Council , 2008 . 
52 Social Science Research Unit . NHS Teen LifeCheck Evaluation ( available at
www . ioe . ac . uk / ssru )  . London : University of London , 2008 . Accessed 30 July
2008 . 
152 Public Health Nursing
53 Baptise L , Drennan V . Communication between school nurses and primary care
teams . British Journal of Community Nursing 1999 ; 4 ( 1 )  : 13–18 . 
54 Children Act ( available at www . publications . parliament . uk )  ; 2004 . Accessed 30
April 2007 . 
55 National Governors ’ Association . Extended Schools – A Guide for Governors 1 . 
Birmingham : National Remodelling Team , 2006 . 
56 Department for Education and Skills . Extended Schools : Access to Opportunities and Services for All . A Prospectus . Nottingham : DfES Publications , 2005 . 
57 Department of Health . Extension of HPV Vaccination . London : DH , 2008 . 
Chapter 7
What Is Occupational Health ? 
Greta Thornbory
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Appreciate the role of occupational health ( OH ) in public health and
how OH practice has evolved
 Appreciate the multidisciplinary approach of OH practice
 Identify the legal , financial and moral aspects and benefits of caring
for worker ’ s health
 Discuss the role of OH in workplace health promotion and the promotion of good health as good business
Introduction
This chapter will discuss OH and how it is related to public health . It will cover
the objectives of an OH programme in the prevention of work-related ill health
and the positive promotion of health , particularly in the United Kingdom ( UK )  . 
It will explore the UK legal , as well as the financial and moral aspects of OH and
the business world in which the OH professionals have to work as part of the
multidisciplinary team , many of whom may not be health care professionals . 
It will highlight the importance of caring for the population of the workforce
during its working life as a captive audience for health promotion . 
OH is probably the least well known of the public health disciplines in health
care . The name itself is often confused with occupational therapy , yet there is
no comparison whatsoever with this branch of health care . OH is exactly what
it says , the health of people in their occupations or work ; another term which
may serve to clarify its role is ‘ workplace health management ’ and there have
been some moves to use this term [ 1 ] instead of OH in order to avoid confusion
over the two disciplines . 
Today , people in the UK may work from the age of 16 until they are well
into old age . With changes taking place over retirement age through the Age
Discrimination legislation [ 2 ] and , as the longevity of the population increases , 
153
154 Public Health Nursing
people will be working for most of their lives and this may mean for more than
50 years . Even those who choose higher education and so defer ‘ starting work ’ 
undertake holiday , evening and weekend employment . People also spend onethird of their day working ; so in a given 24-hour day we spend around 8
hours working and 8 hours sleeping ; which leaves just 8 hours in which to
do everything else including personal care , household chores , socialising and
recreational activities . This means that work and the working environment
are an important aspect of everybody ’ s life and consequently ‘ work should do
the worker no harm ’ a maxim enshrined by health and safety law in the UK . 
Research by Waddell and Burton [ 3 ] concludes that there is strong evidence
that work is generally good for physical and mental health and well-being . OH
is all about supporting this and helping employers and employees in ‘ workplace
health management ’  . OH services are there to offer that help and support to
the organisation and later in this chapter we will talk about the different ways
in which OH services can offer that support . 
The history of OH services
Because traditionally OH services were not a part of the UK NHS provision , 
it is often thought that it is a new branch of health care . However , there has
been a long historical interest in the health and welfare of the workforce ; 
there is mention of how work affects health in the Bible [ 4 ] and around that
time , circa 3000 BC , there is evidence that in ancient Egypt when building the
pyramids the slaves covered their mouths in order to prevent them inhaling
the dust rising from the various building processes . In the eighteenth century , 
Dr Ramazinni , an Italian Professor of Medicine wrote his treatise on the diseases of workers , De Morbis Artificum Diatriba or Diseases of Tradesmen and
Craftsmen [ 5 ]  , and is therefore regarded as the father of industrial medicine . 
In his work , he outlined the hazards to health of many substances , dusts , 
vapours and chemicals as well as other agents from some 52 occupations . 
Later , Charley in her interesting historical book explores the birth of industrial
nursing and in particular the work of the nineteenth-century philanthropists
who cared for their workers , not only from a health perspective but often
also from a home and social aspect . It was here that OH nursing is thought
to originate , from the work of Philippa Flowerday who worked in Norwich for
Colman ’ s Mustard and is attributed to be the first OH nurse , working in the
mornings in the factory and in the afternoons with workers families – a sort of
link between OH and health visiting ! OH services were originally called ‘ industrial ’ medicine and nursing because of the advent of the industrial revolution
in the eighteenth century when factory work was so very dangerous affecting
the health and welfare of many people . This was not just adults either but
also children ; they were often given the most dangerous jobs that only smallsized people could do . In those days , and until the later part of the twentieth
century , OH was not merely a preventative service but also acted as a casualty department which treated minor injuries and illnesses . More recently , 
What Is Occupational Health ? 155
treatment services have been discontinued in most UK OH services , particularly in light of the First Aid Regulations [ 6 ] and easier access to primary
care and GPs through local health centres , although they continue on major
building projects such as the recently completed Terminal 5 at Heathrow and
the 2012 Olympic site . 
In 1948 , when the NHS started , it was recorded that 1944 people died per
annum from accidents at work [ 7 ] – and that was only from those employers
for whom statistics were kept – so that actual number was probably much
higher . In 2006 / 2007 , the figure had reduced to 241 people killed at work . 
Still too high , of course , but the improved health and safety legislation and
better health of the population meant that the advice and care needed to prevent death had reduced significantly . However , there is a maxim that every
business or employer requires ‘ maximum output for minimum outlay ’ from
his workforce . Taking care of the health , safety and welfare of the workforce was , and still is , thought to be costly . However , today there is research 
[ 8–11 ] that shows that ‘ good health is good business ’ and , as will be seen
later in the chapter , promoting a healthy workforce and taking an interest in
health and well-being of employees can actually help to cut sickness absence
rates , reduce accidents and prevent fatalities , therefore saving the employer
money in the long run . Where the employer contributes towards a private
health insurance plan they may also save money by improving the health of
their workforce , and help to avoid costly early retirement on the grounds
of ill health . Savings to the pension fund are a benefit to all of those who
contribute . 
Hence , industrial health was born out of an industrial age . In the latter half of
the twentieth century there has been a decrease in manufacturing , a growth
in the service industries and the globalisation of enterprises in the business
arena ; this together with the advent of computers and other technologies , the
name was changed from ‘ industrial ’ to ‘ occupational ’ health and in 1950 the
Joint ILO ( International Labour Organization )  / WHO ( World Health Organization ) issued the first definition of OH which was updated in 1995 to these three
objectives :  
( 1 ) The maintenance and promotion of workers ’ health and working capacity 
( 2 ) The improvement of working environment and work to become conducive
to health and safety 
( 3 ) The development of work organisation and working cultures in a direction which supports health and safety at work and in doing so promotes
a positive social climate and smooth operation and may enhance the productivity of the undertaking
Twelfth Session of the Joint ILO / WHO Committee on Occupational Health
1995
In 2002 , the WHO Regional Office for Europe [ 12 ] produced guidance for OH
professionals and outlined the 11 key functions of an OH service : 
156 Public Health Nursing
Functions of OH services :  
( 1 ) Identification and assessment of the health risk in the workplace 
( 2 ) Surveillance of work environment factors and work practices that affect
workers ’ health , including sanitary installations , canteens and housing , 
when such facilities are provided by the employer 
( 3 ) Participation in the development of programmes for the improvement of
working practices , as well as testing and evaluating health aspects of new
equipment 
( 4 ) Advice on planning and organisation of work , design of workplaces , choice
and maintenance of machinery , equipment and substances used at work 
( 5 ) Advice on OH , safety and hygiene , and on ergonomics and individual and
collective protective equipment 
( 6 ) Surveillance of workers ’ health in relation to work 
( 7 ) Promoting the adaptation of work to the worker 
( 8 ) Collaboration in providing information , training and education in the fields
of OH , hygiene and ergonomics 
( 9 ) Contribution to measures of vocational rehabilitation 
( 10 ) Organisation of first-aid and emergency treatment 
( 11 ) Participation in the analysis of occupational accidents and occupational
diseases
It should be remembered that these key functions related to OH throughout
the European Union ( EU ) and that many countries in the EU have vastly different health care services and are at different stages of development following
the political changes over the last 20 years . There is also a diverse team of OH
professionals who undertake this work and it is not just doctors and nurses
involved in delivering these 11 functions . 
Activity 7 . 1
Make a list of all the different disciplines you consider are involved with
the health and well-being of people in the workplace . Consider how many
of them are health care professionals ? Then decide what you believe is
a health care professional . See if you can find a definition . There is one
on the Health Protection Agency website . 
Delivering OH services
In most large organisations , i . e . those employing more than 250 employees , 
there is a department that is responsible for the human resources or personnel that the company employs ; however , in many small- or medium-sized
enterprises ( SMEs ) the employer accepts responsibility and undertakes this
work himself . The EU has started to standardise the concept of SMEs to avoid
What Is Occupational Health ? 157
confusion . Its current definition categorises companies with fewer than 50
employees as ‘ small ’  , and those with fewer than 250 as ‘ medium ’  [ 13 ]  . 
In 2006 , there were 4 . 5m businesses in the UK of which only 0 . 1% employed
more than 250 people [ 14 ]  . This means that there are few ‘ in-house ’ OH services and a great need for SMEs to have access to some form of OH advice
and support to care for the health of people at work . So , whilst the employer
is always responsible for the OH and safety of his staff , in many organisations
OH really begins with the person responsible for the ‘ human ’ resources or
 ‘ personnel ’ within the organisation . Where there is a human resources department ( HR ) then they are usually responsible for employing the OH service and
personnel and in turn the OH service personnel are answerable to HR . This is
often controversial as there are schools of thought amongst OH professionals
that OH services should be totally independent and answerable directly to the
employer or the Board of Directors , depending on the status and structure of
the organisation . However , the recent report on the review of the health of
Britain ’ s working population by Dame Carol Black [ 15 ] says that ‘ developing an
integrated approach to working-age health requires occupational health to be
brought into mainstream health care provision ’ and a number of pilot studies
along these lines are to be set up in the UK during the next few years and it
is worth keeping an eye out in the professional journals for updates on this
initiative . At the time of writing there are discussions taking place on developing a Council of Occupational Health bringing together the various disciplines
involved in OH . 
So , who exactly is part of the OH team and who is an OH professional ? Box
7 . 1 shows most of the OH team but it is not exclusive . 
Box 7 . 1 The occupational health team
Occupational health physician
Occupational health nurse
Occupational health technician
Occupational hygienist
Occupational psychologist
Counsellors
Ergonomists
Health and safety adviser or manager
Case managers
Fire safety specialist
Manual handling adviser
Physiotherapist
Administrative or clerical support
All these people contribute to the health , safety and well-being of people
at work and may be employed by the company on a permanent , sessional or
158 Public Health Nursing
advisory capacity . There is no law that says any of them should be employed
but it is interesting to note that at a recent employment tribunal , when Dundee
City Council were found in breach of the Management of Health and Safety
Regulations , the personnel manager admitted that he did not understand the
meaning of OH and the tribunal itself struggled to define it during the course
of the hearing [ 16 ]  . It would probably have been better if they had asked for an
OH expert from one of the OH bodies ( see appendix ) to give an explanation and
to demonstrate the business case . This serves to demonstrate that not having
access to OH advice can result in legal action being taken . Whilst the various
regulations in the area of health and safety do not require organisations to
employ specifically OH professionals , they do require that certain services , 
such as risk assessment and health surveillance , are provided by competent
persons , and it is the employers ’ duty to ensure that the people that they
employ are competent . 
The OH team is made up of both OH health care professionals and others
who are not regarded as health care professionals . A health care professional
is distinguished by the fact that their profession is regulated by statute and is
either a member of the Health Professions Council ( HPC ; www . hpc-uk . org )  , the
Nursing and Midwifery Council ( NMC ) or the General Medical Council ( GMC )  . 
All these health care professions have a code of profession practice and must
respect patient / client confidentiality . This is the main difference between the
OH health care professional and the other OH professionals and members of
the OH team . Which members of the OH team are employed , and whether on
a permanent or advisory basis , will depend on the specific company , its type , 
size and the work that it does . There is no set model for an OH team . There
is a great deal of overlap between the different members of the team and
there are times when this may cause problems . Smedley et al .  [ 17 ] say that
provided role definitions are clear and overlaps and gaps are managed sensitively any combination can be successful . It is useful to describe the different
roles . 
OH physicians
OH physicians are qualified doctors and occupational medicine ( OM ) is a recognised branch of clinical medicine . The principal role of OM is the provision of
health advice to organisations and individuals . There are several levels of specialist training in OM a qualified doctor can undertake , depending on what
aspect of OH he / she wishes to be involved . A general practitioner may wish to
offer specialist services to local companies as part of his GP work ; to do this , 
he should achieve the basic level of qualification which is the Diploma in Occupational Medicine . This will enable him to understand the main issues affecting
health and work and to appreciate the difference between caring for a healthy
population of a workforce and the clinical role of the GP for individual patients . 
To become an associate member of the Faculty of Occupational Medicine the
doctor will need to study an agreed training programme and this is aimed
at doctors interested in pursuing a full-time career in OM and they must
What Is Occupational Health ? 159
demonstrate a core knowledge in OM theory and practice . To obtain
consultant status in OM or Membership of the Faculty of Occupational
Medicine they must achieve the Higher Specialist Training by undertaking
accredited courses and complete a dissertation which must be accepted 
( www . som . org . uk )  . 
OH nurses
OH nurses are nurses who have studied a specific course and who work at a
specialist level in public health nursing . They must meet the standards for entry
to be part of the specialist community public health nurse ( SCPHN ) register . 
A nurse must be on the nursing part of the NMC Register to be eligible for
entry to the SCPHN part ( see Chapter 2 )  . The NMC ( www . nmc-uk . org ) say that
all nurses have a role to play in promoting the public ’ s health , but that only
a proportion of them will work at a level where they can promote change
by working in partnership with a wide range of agencies , making decisions
that influence whole populations . Employers are under no legal obligation to
employ qualified OH nurses , but if nurses take on work they are not qualified to
do they would be in breach of their professional code ; the NMC code [ 18 ] says
that you must have the knowledge and skills for safe and effective practice
when working without direct supervision and that you must recognise and
work within the limits of your competence . Failure to do so could result in
suspension of your registration and therefore licence to practice . Further , 
more in-depth , explanations of OH nursing will be given in Chapter 8 . 
OH technicians
OH technicians are much like health care assistants . They are trained to carry
out specific basic OH tasks – often repetitive or straightforward things such
as audiometry or lung function testing – and may not even have a health
background . They are expected to work within closely defined protocols and
procedures , but are not expected to make clinical judgements and they are
usually answerable to a qualified OH nurse or physician . There are specific
courses for OH technicians – see appendix . 
Occupational hygienist
Occupational hygiene is about recognising , evaluating and controlling health
hazards arising from work . Occupational hygienists have an in-depth knowledge of how chemical , physical and biological agents may affect the health
of the workforce , and in turn the health of the business . They advise on controlling health risks by assessing and resolving practical problems in all types
of workplaces . A qualified occupational hygienist has undertaken a suitable
higher education course recognised for entry to the British Occupational Hygiene Society ( BOHS )  . Only very large organisations or those with specific
160 Public Health Nursing
hazards and risk would employ an occupational hygienist full time , so many
consultancies exist for employers to call on their expertise as and when needed 
( see appendix for more details )  . 
Ergonomists
Ergonomics is the application of scientific information concerning humans
to the design of objects , systems and environment for human use [ 19 ]  . Ergonomists ensure that equipment , facilities and systems are designed and
organised to the highest standards of comfort , efficiency , health and safety
for the people using them . By scientifically studying the relationship between
people , environments and equipment , ergonomists can use their findings to
improve human interaction with processes / systems . Areas of work include
product / equipment design , production systems , information and advanced
technology , and transport design . They may work in consultancy , research , 
development or teaching and may also be called human factors specialists . Ergonomics comes into everything which involves people . Work systems , sports
and leisure , health and safety should all embody ergonomics principles if well
designed . There are different levels of qualification from student , graduate
through to fellow and honorary fellow . Again , only large organisations with
specific hazards and risk would usually employ an occupational hygienist full
time , so consultancies exist for employers to call on their expertise when
needed ( see appendix for more details )  . 
Occupational psychologists
Occupational psychologists are specialist psychologists who apply psychological knowledge , theory and practice to the world of work . They determine
how work conditions and tasks can affect people by developing or constraining them and influencing their well-being , and on how individuals and their
characteristics determine what work is done , and how . They may work in a
consultancy role , or maybe employed within a large organisation working with
management , training officers etc . and work both with teams and individual
staff . 
Counsellors
Counselling is one of the talking therapies and at the moment is not a health
care profession although there are moves to regulate the discipline when it will
become one of the professions regulated by the HPC . The British Association
for Counselling and Psychotherapy ( BACP ) offers an accreditation scheme 
( MBACP ) for counsellors . It requires prospective counsellors to accrue at least
450 hours in both theoretical and practical training . Counsellors actually help
people to explore feelings about their lives so that they can reflect about what
is happening to them and consider alternative ways of doing things . It is a
confidential service as counsellors listen attentively to their clients and offer
What Is Occupational Health ? 161
them the time , empathy and respect they need to express their own feelings
in a safe environment . Counselling is an important aspect of OH as one of
the biggest causes of sickness absence from work is stress-related illness , 
particularly mental ill health . Businesses are encouraged by the Health and
Safety Executive to employ the services of ‘ employee assistance programmes ’  
( EAPs ) which offers confidential services to employees . 
Health and safety
Employers must designate someone in their organisation to be responsible
for the health and safety arrangements [ 20 ]  . The type of organisation , the
hazards and the risks to health and safety will usually determine the quality
of the post holder . The person may be called an adviser , officer , manager etc . 
and there is no control over the qualifications or experience this person will
need to have ; and when they do have them , health and safety qualifications
do not make the person a health care professional . 
Regulation 7 of the Management of health and safety at work Regulation 
[ 20 ] states ‘ Every employer shall ,  .  .  . appoint one or more competent persons
to assist him in undertaking the measures he needs to take to comply .  .  . with
the relevant statutory provisions ’ and ‘ a person shall be regarded as competent .  .  . where he has sufficient training and experience or knowledge and
other qualities to properly assist in the undertaking ’  . The guidance goes on
to say that competence in this case does not necessarily mean possession of
qualifications but more complicated organisations will require the ‘ competent ’ 
person to have a higher level of knowledge and experience or they may have
particular technical knowledge and experience of a specific process or substance . The lack of control over this role has sometimes meant that qualified
OH nurses are answerable to less qualified health and safety personnel , or
they are answerable to qualified health and safety people who lack understanding of OH and the role of the OH nurse ; this has on occasions led to
conflict . 
Today , a number of organisations offer training courses at various levels , 
from certificate through to masters degree , but the recognised leading body
on health and safety is the Institute of Occupational Safety and Health ( IOSH ) 
where those people who have undertaken suitable training and have obtained
the necessary qualifications can register to become members etc . and continuing professional development must be demonstrated in order to maintain
membership – see appendix . 
Case managers
According to the Case Management Society ( www . cmsuk . org )  , the role of a
case manager is to collaborate with clients by assessing , facilitating , planning
and advocating for health and social needs on an individual basis . They go on
to define case management as : 
162 Public Health Nursing
A collaborative process which assesses , plans , implements , co-ordinates , 
monitors and evaluates the options and services required to meet an
individuals health , care , educational and employment needs , using communication and available resources to promote quality cost effective outcomes . 
Of course , much of the work of an OH nurse could be said to be that of
case management , but case managers may also be non-health care professionals , although they do need appropriate qualifications and experience and
the society lays down standards and has an approved code of ethics [ 21 ]  . The
Case Management Society say that case management originated in the United
States . In the past , providers of services have been mainly community nurses
and social workers who coordinated their services through the public health
sector . More recently , insurance companies have employed nurses and social
workers to assist with the coordination of care for people who have suffered
complex injuries requiring multidisciplinary intervention . EEF [ 22 ] suggest that
a case management approach to sickness absence is the way forward and that
line managers are best placed to fill such a role . 
Fire safety specialist
This role is often combined with that of Safety Officer except where there is a
specific type of fire risk . 
Manual handling adviser
This role is found most frequently in the NHS where patient handling is a major
area of concern both for the health and safety of employees and patients alike . 
Physiotherapist
Chartered physiotherapists are often employed by large companies on a sessional basis in order to get employees with work and non-work , often sports , 
injuries back to work quickly . Musculoskeletal disorders ( MSDs ) are the most
common cause of sickness absence and the Chief Executive of the Chartered
Institute of Physiotherapists says that ‘ Physiotherapists are ideally placed to
tackle workplace ill health and help keep people in work . By intervening early , 
and playing a key role in the treatment and prevention of health conditions
that affect ability to work , physiotherapists can improve patient health and
well-being and reduce benefit dependency ’  . 
Administrative or clerical support
A vital role is that of the OH department ’ s clerical support staff . However , 
as they are not health care professionals they should sign a confidentiality
declaration . 
From this explanation of the ‘ OH Team ’  , it is clear that OH help and advice
can be delivered by a wide and diverse range of people . 
What Is Occupational Health ? 163
Good health is good business : the legal aspects
Or so it is said and has been shown by various pieces of research quoted earlier
in the chapter . However , employers want maximum output for minimum outlay
and in the UK they expect the NHS to take care of their employee ’ s health . 
There is a great deal of case law that shows that employers have not always
taken care of employees ’ health and in fact one of the gold standard cases in
1968 [ 23 ] confirms that the courts felt that the company ought to have known
and dealt with the risk to the health of the employees [ 24 ]  . There have been
numerous subsequent cases illustrating that employers still do not always
take care of their employee ’ s health , safety and welfare . Back in 1968 , there
was a great deal of piecemeal legislation dating back over a hundred years
and in 1974 , following the Robens Report , the most significant piece of health
and safety legislation became law – The Health and Safety at Work etc . Act
1974 . 
The Health and Safety at Work etc . Act
The Health and Safety at Work etc . Act ( HASAWA ) is an enabling act ; in other
words , it acts as an umbrella so that other secondary legislations or regulations
can be made under this ‘ Act of Parliament ’  . The most significant aspect of the
Act is that it covers all employees ( except domestic servants ) for the first
time ever and in Section 2 , it places responsibility for the health , safety and
welfare of employees , as far as is reasonably practicable , squarely on the
shoulders of the employer . It also requires employers to provide safe systems
of working , as well as adequate training and supervision [ 25 ]  . The phrase
 ‘ as far as reasonably practicable ’ has been defined in law [ 26 ]  . Anyone in
breach of the Act is subject to punishment through criminal prosecution and
many prosecutions have taken place over the intervening years ; examples
of these can be seen by visiting the Health and Safety Executive website 
( www . hse . gov . uk / enforce / index . htm ; last accessed 29 July 2008 )  . Employers
often believe that they have insurance that will cover such prosecutions , which
is not the case , and we will deal with this in more depth later in the chapter
under financial aspects . They may also require help and advice with regard
to ensuring the health , safety and welfare at work of his employees and this
is where the OH team come in . Note that the OH team offer help and advice , 
they do not take over responsibility ; that remains firmly with the employer
who may choose not to take the OH help and advice offered . 
Risk assessment
Since 1974 , there have been many regulations made under the Act but probably one of the most significant is the Management of Health and Safety at
Work Regulations 1999 ( MHSW ) originally made in 1992 as part of what was
known as the ‘ six pack ’ or 6 pieces of health and safety legislations passed to
164 Public Health Nursing
bring UK legislation into line with a European health and safety directive . This
has , at times , mistakenly been called European legislation . The MHSW requires
all employers to undertake a ‘ risk assessment ’ of the undertaking as the risks
to health and safety vary according to the type and place of work ; for ease of
identification , this is often known as the four Ps : 
 Premises
 Plant ( or equipment ) 
 Processes
 People
The risk assessment requires employers to determine the hazards and
therefore the risks to the safety and health of the employees ; the Health
and Safety Executive give five stages to the risk assessment :  
( 1 ) Identify the hazard ( s ) to health and safety 
( 2 ) Quantify the risk – who might be hurt and how 
( 3 ) Put in place measures to eliminate , reduce or control the risks to health
and safety 
( 4 ) Record findings and details of control measures 
( 5 ) Review periodically , such as when new equipment is installed or when
working practices change – but at least once a year
Various members of the OH team may be needed to offer help and advice
with regard to the risk assessment and putting in place suitable control measures . A simple example of a risk assessment in an office environment is given
here , as almost every workplace will have some type of office ( see Figure 7 . 1 )  . 
Activity 7 . 2
Undertake a risk assessment : See if you can spot the hazards and estimate the risks to health and safety in Figure 7 . 1 . Then compare your
findings with the text below .  
( 1 ) Identify the hazards : Offices are regarded as fairly safe places to work and
therefore low risk . However , there are a few areas where problems may
occur . Considering the four Ps we need to look at the office itself then
at the plant or equipment in the room and the work that is undertaken
using that equipment . The increased use of computers over the past 30
years has brought about concerns with eyes and eyesight , and concentrated time spent in front of a computer screen ( known as ‘ display screen
equipment ’ or DSE ) has proved to cause various MSDs . In this picture , the
office worker is using a laptop computer and , despite the relaxed looking
position , the man is at risk of developing upper limb MSDs . Also in the
What Is Occupational Health ? 165
Figure 7 . 1
picture there are filing cabinets , these can be loaded unevenly and may
topple open when draws are open , or people may trip over drawers left
open . Finally , the bookcase on the right has some high shelves , reaching
for high storage can be hazardous and also cause MSDs .  
( 2 ) Quantify the risk , who might be hurt and why : Obviously , the man himself
is at risk of MSDs and anyone who visits his office could be hurt by tripping
over open drawers of the filing cabinet .  
( 3 ) Put in place measures to eliminate , reduce or control the risks to health
and safety : The DSE regulations and the HSE guidance on the regulations 
[ 27 ] require that the man in the picture needs to be made aware of the risks
to his health . He needs to be shown or receive training on how to adjust
his workstation to his individual needs in order to prevent MSDs . Where
this is not possible the employer must provide suitable adjustments to
provide an ergonomically sound work station . His work processes should
be such that he is able to spend time on other work away from the DSE or
at least have a very short break every 50 minutes . 
According to the Regulations , he should be able to request an eye test by
a competent person and for the employer to pay for suitable corrective
lenses if ordinary corrective lenses are not sufficient . 
Under health and safety legislation , an employer must also provide suitable training and supervision for all health and safety hazards and that
would include advice on using filing cabinets and storage .  
( 4 ) Record these findings and the details of control measures .  
( 5 ) Review periodically – such as when new equipment is installed or when
working practices change – but at least once a year . 
166 Public Health Nursing
Activity 7 . 3
Now undertake a risk assessment at your place of work , probably your
own office , workstation or clinic area would be a good place to start . 
Then compare this with the company risk assessments
Employment law
Under the Employment Rights Act 1996 , employees have the right not to be
dismissed unfairly from their jobs . In order for employers to act fairly and
reasonably with their employees they will need the help and advice of an OH
health care professional to give advice particularly when there is a question
of ill health or capability [ 24 ]  . 
Employers believe that they should employ people that are ‘ fit ’ to do the
work but what exactly does ‘ fit ’ mean ? Like health it is a concept and much has
been written about exactly who or what defines health [ 28 ]  , but employers
expect someone to say ‘ this person is fit to work ’ or not . However , much will
depend on the type of job , where and how the work is done and what it involves . 
Only when the ‘ risk assessment ’ for that job has been undertaken , can it be
decided what health and fitness criteria are needed to assess an individual ’ s
fitness or otherwise for such work . So when an employee is returning from
long-term sick leave or has taken frequent short spells of sickness absence
the work that that person is doing will need to be assessed along with their
mental and physical ability or otherwise to do the work . Care must be taken
by the employer because of the Disability Discrimination Act ( DDA )  . 
DDA 1995
This Act makes it an offence to discriminate against somebody because they
are disabled . The word ‘ disabled ’ often conjures up images of a person in a
wheelchair but the meaning of disability under the Act is much broader than
that ( see Box 7 . 2 )  . 
Employers must make reasonable adjustments for employees , either existing or prospective , if it is thought that it is likely they will come under the DDA . 
There are several significant points here :  
( 1 ) OH professionals can only make recommendations to employers as to
whether they consider someone would be likely to come under the DDA ; 
they are not in a position to state categorically as that is the prerogative
of the courts .  
( 2 ) The law requires employers to make ‘ reasonable ’ adjustments and , as
Lewis [ 24 ] says , the word is subject to constant legal argument . Reasonable may be considered in the terms of the cost to the employer and the
impact it may have on the workplace and other employees , as well as the
impact on the process of work that is undertaken . 
What Is Occupational Health ? 167
Box 7 . 2 Disability Discrimination Act definitions
The statutory definition of disability discrimination is when : 
A person directly discriminates against a disabled person , if , on the
grounds of the disabled person ’ s disability , he treats the disabled person
less favourably than he treats or would treat a person not having that
particular disability whose relevant circumstances , including his abilities
are the same as , or not materially different from , those of the disabled
person . 
A person has a disability according to the DDA if : 
He has a physical or mental impairment which has a substantial and
long-term adverse effect on his ability to carry out normal day-to-day
activities .  
( 3 ) Most significantly adjustments can be quite simple , such as adjusting work
hours or seeking help and advice from specific bodies , such as Access
to Work or Royal National Institute of Blind People – see appendix for
further information . They do not have to involve ‘ unreasonable ’ amounts
of outlay .  
( 4 ) According to the DDA ( see Box 7 . 2 ) a person will be considered to have a
disability if it interferes with his or her ability to carry out normal day-today activities . Activities of daily living are the things we normally do day to
day and they include such things as eating , washing , dressing , grooming , 
working , homemaking and leisure . OH nurses may like to consider the
Roper , Tierney and Logan model of ‘ Activities for Daily Living ’  [ 29 ] to help
put this into some sort of perspective . Here Roper et al . outline the factors
that influence the activities of daily living as : 
 Physical
 Psychological
 Sociocultural
 Environmental
 Politicoeconomic
And this fits well with the biopsychosocial model considered today which
will be discussed in the next chapter . 
The Data Protection Act 1998
In seeking to employ someone or to find out if an employee , or prospective
employee , is fit to do the work it is necessary to gather information about
that person , in other words , to gather ‘ personal data ’ which will need to be
processed , used and stored . The Data Protection Act ( DPA ) says that there
are two different types of personal data – the straightforward personal data
of name and address etc . and then sensitive personal data which include
168 Public Health Nursing
such things as ethnic origin , gender , religious beliefs and information about a
person ’ s mental or physical health . Sensitive data can only be held with the
consent of the person to whom the data relates . It is this ‘ sensitive ’ data to
which OH records and medical information relates . 
The DPA is comprehensive and has eight main principles ( www . ico . gov . uk ) 
to make sure that personal data are : 
 Fairly and lawfully processed
 Processed for limited purposes
 Adequate , relevant and not excessive
 Accurate and up to date
 Not kept for longer than is necessary
 Processed in line with your rights
 Secure
 Not transferred to other countries without adequate protection
This is very significant in OH practice especially as any personal data that
is gathered must be ‘ adequate , relevant and not excessive ’  . That means that
health questions should only be asked that have a significant bearing on the
employment of that individual . This will be discussed in more depth in the next
chapter when considering pre-employment health assessment , but questions
about family history , for example , generally have no place in OH practice . 
Personal data should be ‘ not kept for longer than necessary ’ and there are
guidelines for keeping certain health and medical records in other legislation , 
such as the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 2002
which requires health surveillance records to be kept for 40 years . 
The Information Commissioner has produced a valuable ‘ Employment Practices Code ’  [ 30 ] in four parts :  
( 1 ) Recruitment and selection 
( 2 ) Employment records 
( 3 ) Monitoring at work 
( 4 ) Workers ’ health
This code can be downloaded free from the Information Commissioners
website and gives guidance on the handling of sensitive data . 
Other legislation which is relevant to the work of the OH nurse will be
discussed later in the chapter on OH nursing . 
Good health is good business : the financial aspects
A business ’ s most valuable asset is .  .  . the dedicated staff that devotes themselves to delivering the work of the organisation . Healthy and fit staff are
essential to ensuring a company remains efficient and profitable .  
( Professor Dame Carol Black [ 31 ]  ) 
What Is Occupational Health ? 169
So it is well recognised that the health and welfare of the individual employees plays a great part in the success or otherwise of the company and
therefore there are financial reasons for ensuring that fitness . Employers are
required by law to pay the Employers Liability Compulsory Insurance ( ELCI ) 
and , as mentioned before , employers often quote that they have this insurance and paid their premium so are covered for should anything happen
to them which will cost . The premium is to cover injuries and ill heath experienced by employees whilst at work . However , it does not cover all the
costs . For every £1 of insured costs of an accident or ill health there will
be another £10 of uninsured costs ( www . hse . gov . uk / costs )  . The ELCI will not
cover : 
 Sick pay to employees
 Damage or loss of product or raw materials
 Repairs to machinery or equipment
 Overtime , temporary or agency workers needed to cover the work of sick
or injured employees
 Delays in production
 Time taken for investigation by health and safety , HR , line managers
 Fines , court costs and any excess on claims
 Loss of further business and reputation
The HSE say that ELCI only pays out the tip of the iceberg . So costs of ill
health and accidents may be considerable . Pickvance [ 8 ] says that the evidence that employers can reduce or control insurance costs by improving
health and safety is debatable . The exception is where there are specific problems when fear of litigation costs and therefore increased insurance premiums , has encouraged employers to improve preventative measures . Research 
[ 32 ] found that workers ’ compensation arrangements in other countries positively motivated health and safety arrangements and rehabilitation . The research concluded that there is evidence that a reform of the UK insurance
process would provide significant motivation for employers to improve health , 
safety and rehabilitation . Wright [ 9 ] said that since 2002 employers have been
experiencing the true cost of liability insurance and that this is the result of
poor investment in the market with the knock-on effect that insurers raise
their premiums . Add this to the higher compensation costs and health care
costs the result is that employers have to pay even higher premiums . Insurers
have now moved to ‘ risk-based ’ pricing of insurance and employers now have
to take the issue of OH and health and safety in hand to keep premiums as low
as possible . 
Another study [ 10 ] examined a number of case studies that provide evidence
of the business benefits of OH and safety interventions ( Table 7 . 1 )  . Every one
of those reasons listed in Table 7 . 1 has a financial implication . It must be
remembered that the average recruitment cost of filling an employee vacancy
is over £4000 and in some instances this increases to nearly £8000 [ 33 ]  . 
170 Public Health Nursing
Table 7 . 1 Examples of business benefits arising from health and safety
interventions . 
Direct benefits Indirect benefits
Reduced insurance premiums Reduced absenteeism
Reduced litigation costs Reduced staff turnover
Reduced sick pay costs Improved corporate image
Improved production / productivity Improved chance of winning
rates contracts
Lower accident costs / production delays Improved job satisfaction / morale
Reduced product and material damage
There is an extremely high cost from unplanned sickness absence and one
of the biggest roles of an OH service is its involvement with advising and
supporting the employer in managing absence . Indeed OH services have been
quoted by both the Confederation of British Industry ( CBI ) and the Chartered
Institute of Personnel and Development ( CIPD ) as the most effective way of
dealing with sickness absence through early referral . The most recent report
from CIPD [ 34 ] quotes the use of OH services as most highly rated for both
short-term and long-term absence . 
Health promotion
If good health is good business and work is good for health then the employee is
a captive audience for health promotion . Professor Dame Carol Black recently
published her review of the health of Britain ’ s working-age population [ 15 ] in
which she said that improving the health of the working-age population was
critically important to secure higher economic growth and increased social
justice . Among her objectives were the prevention of illness and the promotion
of health and well-being together with early intervention for those who develop
a health condition . She goes on to highlight that legislation has played a part
in improving health and safety at work and that a new approach to health
and well-being is needed ; she makes suggestions about the way forward and
that OH should be brought under the main stream health care provision . She
also proposes a new ‘ fit for work ’ service , with several different models tested
and evaluated over the next few years . This is all in the pipeline , but what is
happening out there now ? 
Health promotion is about promoting health living and if we revisit the
day-to-day activities of living of eating , washing , dressing , grooming , working , 
homemaking and leisure and , bearing in mind we spend one-third of our life at
work , then many of these aspects of our daily life occur at , or through , work . 
Kreis and B¨odeker [ 35 ] say that workplace health promotion programmes
actually prove to be more effective than community programmes . They also
What Is Occupational Health ? 171
suggest that such programmes lead to a reduction in absenteeism and provide
a return of investment . The WHO in their Declaration on Workers Health [ 36 ] 
in 2006 state that there is growing recognition about the linkages between
working conditions , health and productivity and that primary prevention of
disease is cost-effective ; they go on to say that to achieve this requires a
holistic approach combining OH with disease prevention , health promotion
and tackling the social determinants of health . 
Activity 7 . 4
Consider what you can do to help promote a healthy workforce bearing
in mind your time and financial constraints then compare your answers
with the suggestions below . 
In light of all the above it is worth considering what has been achieved
already and the contribution that can be made by organisations for their
employees , particularly on the key topics identified in Chapter 2 . 
Smoking
Already with recent legislation smoking has been banned in all enclosed public
places since July 2007 . To assist with this a number of initiatives to support
employers and employees alike have been available and the report [ 37 ] from
the government on the first 12 months is encouraging and positive . The initiative seems to be working . 
Healthy eating
The government statistics ( www . foresight . gov . uk ) on obesity show that there
is wide spread obesity and this needs to be tackled . The government project
 ‘ Foresight ’ aims to ‘ to produce a long-term vision of how they can deliver a
sustainable response to obesity in the UK over the next 40 years ’  . This is at a
national level , but at a local employment level much can be done at work to
improve the diets of working people by : 
 Making sure employees take regular breaks especially away from their work
stations
 Providing pleasant areas in which to take breaks to eat and drink
 Ensuring there is an adequate supply of fresh drinking water ( this is a legal
requirement under the workplace ) Health , Safety and Welfare Regulations
1992
 Offering healthy choices of food . Tea trolleys and canteens should be offering fresh fruit and vegetables and cutting down on salt and fried or fatty
food
172 Public Health Nursing
 Automatic vending machines should be regularly stocked with healthier
alternatives to chocolate bars and fizzy drinks
 Departments should allocate the tea and coffee money to fresh fruit rather
than packets of biscuits
Physical activity
More and more work these days is of a sedentary nature and even in manufacturing much is done by robots . For people in those sedentary jobs there is
a need to get some exercise to improve and maintain a healthy cardiovascular system , prevent obesity and MSDs . MSDs are one of the two top reasons
for long-term sickness absence , the other being stress-related illness . It is
said that exercise is also good for relieving stress , the other main reason for
sickness absence . 
OH services can do a lot to advice employers on suitable ways of supporting
employees in increasing people ’ s activity . Playtex ( or DB Apparel ) is a case
study example of a company taking onboard advise to improve employee
morale . They started the annual power walking event ‘ Playtex Moon Walk ’ to
raise funds for a breast cancer charity . In doing so they generated energy and
motivation among their staff and have subsequently built on that . Originally , 
49% of staff were not exercising at all and now 68% are engaged in exercise 
[ 38 ]  . 
Employers can help employees with their physical fitness in many ways . 
Here are a few suggestions : 
 Arranging for cheap rate membership to local sports clubs and gyms , or
even provide in-house facilities if possible
 Make available information on local sports activities , clubs etc . and the
benefits of physical activity
 Encourage inter-workplace or departmental teams for sports activities both
inside and outside working hours
 Encourage employees to walk or cycle to work . To promote healthier journeys to work and reduce environmental pollution , the 1999 Finance Act
introduced an annual tax exemption , which allows employers to loan cycles and cyclists ’ safety equipment to employees as a tax-free benefit 
( www . dft . gov . uk )  . The exemption was one of a series of measures introduced under the government ’ s ‘ Green Transport Plan ’  . So there are several
companies that offer to work with employers in supplying bicycles under
this scheme , such as www . cyclescheme . co . uk
 Employees are allowed by law to take regular breaks away from their workstation . The Working Time Regulations require that employers give rest
breaks of not less than 20 minutes if working longer than 6 hours ; this
length is increased to 30 minutes after 41 
/ 2 hours for young people
 Make sure people take their annual leave entitlement
What Is Occupational Health ? 173
Alcohol and drug misuse
It seems strange to put drugs and alcohol together as one is a legal substance
and other is illegal . Today , there are government-recommended limits for
alcohol consumption and it has to be remembered that what a person does in
their own time is not the province of the employer . It becomes his province
when abuse of these substances impact on the working environment and
put people at risk to their health and safety , the Information Commissioner
gives more details on this topic especially from the ethics and data protection
viewpoint of testing for drugs and alcohol in the workplace ( www . ico . gov . uk )  . 
From a health promotion perspective it is advisable for employers to have
policies and procedures in place to deal with drug and alcohol misuse . The role
of the OH nurse in drugs and alcohol misuse will be covered in more detail in
the next chapter . 
Mental well-being
According to national surveys , the main causes of absence from work are back
pain , MSDs and stress [ 34 , 39 ]  . Work-related stress accounts for over one-third
of all new incidences of ill health and that each case of stress-related ill health
leads to an average of 30 . 9 working days lost ( www . hse . gov . uk / stress )  . This
means that over 12 . 8 million working days are lost per annum due to stress , 
depression and anxiety . There are also other mental health conditions with
which employees may suffer including schizophrenia , bi-polar disorders ( manic
depression ) psychosis , obsessive compulsive disorders and eating disorders . 
It goes to show that maintaining mental well-being is an important aspect of
employment and it is worth employers investing in suitable health promotion
activities . Mindful Employer ( www . mindfulemployer . net )  , an organisation led
by employers , for employers and set up by the NHS says that if given the right
support people with mental health conditions are able to stay at work . 
The HSE define stress as ‘ The adverse reaction people have to excessive
pressure or other types of demand placed on them ’  . According to ACAS , stress
is often a symptom of poor employment relations and can seriously affect
productivity . To help prevent work-related stress the HSE have published a
set of evidence-based standards recommended for employers to follow . These
standards are about helping employers to prevent mental ill health and require
commitment of at all levels or the organisation . The research showed that
there are six key areas of work design which , if not properly managed , may
lead to ill health , reduced productivity and increased sickness absence . In each
area a risk assessment should be carried out to cover these points : 
 Demands : What are the demands of the job ? Can the employees cope ? 
 Control : To what degree do employees have control over their work ? Does
management consult with employees so that they can have a say in how
they should go about their work ? 
174 Public Health Nursing
 Support : What level of management and colleague support is provided ? Are
employees provided with information and support ? Are policies and procedures easily accessible ? Are they given regular and constructive feedback ? 
 Relationships : What is the quality of work relationships ? Has the organisation addressed and eliminated workplace intimidation and bullying ? 
 Role : Is the employee aware of his / her role within the organisation and how
it is managed ? 
 Change : How is change managed ? Is there sufficient communication with
employees ? Do they have any involvement with change ? 
What can an employer do ? 
 The HSE website recommends a risk assessment and offers downloadable
guidance for doing this . 
 Put in place suitable policies and procedures relevant to stress and mental
health . 
 Make sure managers are trained to manage people , not just the process . 
Then make sure they have adequate information and training about stress
and other mental health issues and how to deal with them . 
 OH professionals can help with raising awareness and understanding of
mental health issues in the workplace amongst the workforce . 
 Employers need to make sure employees have access to an Employee Assistance Programme ( EAP )  . EAP ’ s services are usually free to the employee . 
These are often via contracts with an independent EAP company . This is
also a confidential service so employers do not know who is using their employee assistance programmes , unless there are extenuating circumstances
and the proper release forms have been signed . 
Summary
This chapter has attempted to explain what OH is and what it is not . Health and
safety at work is the employers ’ responsibility and also everybody ’ s business ; 
therefore , good health means good business . The chapter has also discussed
the various disciplines that go to make up the team of people who contribute
to workplace health and who advise employers on all aspects of OH matters . 
Much of workplace health is governed by , or impinged on by statutory requirements and mandatory guidance , so the legislation and legal aspects have
been explored in the most significant legislation . For more in-depth details
on relevant law and in particular , case law , it is best to look at a textbook on
that subject [ 24 ]  . There are substantial financial benefits to employers who
show consideration for the health of their employees . These are evident from
the research that has shown how employment and the place of work can contribute to health promotion in the workforce and therefore the health of the
nation . 
What Is Occupational Health ? 175
References
1 Whitaker S , Baranski B . The Role of the Occupational Health Nurse in Workplace Health Management . Geneva : WHO , 2001 . 
2 The Employment Equality ( Age ) Regulations 2006 , SI No 1031 . 
3 Waddell G , Burton AK . Is Work Good for Your Health and Wellbeing ? London : 
TSO , 2006 . 
4 Ecclesiasticus 38 v25–35 . 
5 Charley I . The Birth of Industrial Nursing : Its History and Development in Great
Britain . London : Balliere , Tindall and Cox , 1954 . 
6 Health and Safety ( First Aid ) Regulations 1981 SI No . 917 . 
7 Gifford P . From phenol poisoning to stress : 60 years of health and safety . 
Health Care Risk Report 2008 ; 14 ( 8 )  : 18–19 . 
8 Pickvance S . Arguing the business case for occupational health . Occupational
Health Review 2003 ; May / June ( 103 )  : 31–5 . 
9 Wright M . The Business Case in Well-Being at Work . London : IOD , 2006 . 
10 Shearn P . Case Examples : Business Benefits Arising from Health and Safety
Interventions ( HSL / 2003 / 13 )  , 2003 . 
11 Hu Tec Associates Ltd . The Cost and Benefits of Active Case Management and Rehabilitation for Musculoskeletal Disorders ( available at
www . hse . gov . uk / research . rrhtm / rr493 . htm )  ; 2006 . 
12 Lie A , Baranski B , Husman K , Westerholm P . Good Practice in Occupational
Health Services : A Contribution to Workplace Health . Copenhagen : WHO Regional Office , 2002 . 
13 European Commission ( 2003-05-06 )  , Recommendation 2003 / 361 / EC : SME
Definition ( available at 
policy / sme definition / index en . htm )  . Accessed on 15 July 2008 . 
14 Department for Business , Enterprise and Regulatory Reform . National Statistics ( available at )  . 
15 Black C . Working for a Healthier Tomorrow : A Review of the Health of Britain ’ s
Working Age Population ( available at www . workingforhealth . gov . uk )  ; 2008 . 
16 Tribunal dismisses appeal against ‘ disproportionate ’ HSE action . Occupational
Health Review 2006 ; Nov / Dec ( 124 )  . 
17 Smedley J , Dick F , Sadhra S . Oxford Handbook of Occupational Health . Oxford : 
Oxford University Press , 2007 . 
18 Nursing and Midwifery Council . The Code : Standards of Conduct , Performance
and Ethics for Nurses and Midwives . London : NMC , 2008 . 
19 Ergonomics Society ( available at www . ergonomics . org . uk )  . Accessed 24 July
2008 . 
20 HSE . Management of Health and Safety at Work . Approved Code of Practice
and Guidance L21 ; 1999 . 
21 The Case Management Society . Code of ethics for case managers ( available
at www . cmsuk . org )  ; 2007 . 
22 EEF . Managing Sickness Absence : A Tool Kit for Changing Work Culture and
Improving Business Performance ( available at www . eef . org . uk )  . London : EEF , 
2007 . 
23 Stokes v . GKN ( Nuts and Bolts ) Ltd [ 1968 ] 1 WLR 1776 . 
24 Lewis J , Thornbory G . Employment Law and Occupational Health : A Practical
Handbook . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing , 2006 . 
25 Health and Safety at Work etc . Act 1974 , Section 2 ( 2 )  ( a–e )  . 
176 Public Health Nursing
26 Greeen A , Youngs A . Occupational health – an over view of the legislation . 
In : Thornbory G , ed . Occupational Health 2008 : Making the Business Case –
Special Report . Cambridge : Workplace Law , 2007 . 
27 HSE . Work with Display Screen Equipment : Guidance on the Regulations , 2002 . 
28 Seedhouse D . Health : The Foundations of Achievement , 2nd edn . Chichester : 
John Wiley and Sons , 2001 . 
29 Roper N , Logan WW , Tierney AJ . The Roper–Logan–Tierney Model of Nursing : 
Based on Activities of Living . Edinburgh : Elsevier Health Sciences , 2000 . 
30 Information Commissioner . Employment Practices Code ( available at
www . ico . gov . uk )  ; 2005 . 
31 Institute of Directors . Wellbeing at Work : How to Manage Workplace Wellness
to Boost Your Staff and Business Performance : A Directors Guide . London : 
IOD , 2006 . 
32 Wright M , Marsden S . Changing Business Behaviour , CRR436 / 2002 ( available
at www . hse . gov . uk / research / crr htm / 2002 / crr02436 . htm )  ; 2002 . 
33 CIPD . Recruitment , Retention and Turnover , Annual Survey Report ( available
at www . cipd . co . uk )  ; 2007 . 
34 Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development . Absence Management Annual Survey Report ( available at www . cipd . co . uk )  ; 2008 . 
35 Kreis J , B¨odeker W . Health Related and Economic Benefits of Workplace Health Promotion and Prevention : Summary of Scientific Evidence 
( available at www . enwhp . org / fileadmin / downloads / IGA-report 3 English . pdf )  . 
Essen : Buckbundesverband , 2004 . 
36 World Health Organization . Declaration of Workers Health ( available at www . 
who . int / occupational health / publications / declaration2006 / en / index . html )  ; 
2006 . 
37 Donaldson L . Smoke Free England – One Year On ( available at www . 
smokefreeengland . co . uk )  . London : DH , 2008 . 
38 Holford P , Nagle W , Kyne J , Rix D . Food for thought in occupational . Health
2008 ; 60 ( 6 )  : 42–3 . 
39 Confederation of British Industry . Absence and Labour Turnover Survey . 
London : CBI / AXA , 2007 . 
Chapter 8
Occupational Health Nursing
Practice
Greta Thornbory
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Appreciate the role of the occupational health nurse ( OHN ) in the
public health arena as defined by the NMC domains : search for health
needs , awareness of health needs , influence on policies affecting
health and facilitation of health-enhancing activities
 Appreciate the role of the OHN in advising and supporting the employer to employ a healthy and productive workforce
 Appreciate the role of the OHN in supporting and advising the worker
from a health perspective , from commencement of employment to
termination
 Discuss the professional , educational and managerial roles of the
OHN from a public health perspective
Introduction
There is a long history of industrial or occupational health ( OH ) nursing dating
back nearly 200 years , all of which is outlined in Irene Charley ’ s book [ 1 ]  . During those past times the link between health visiting and community nursing
was acknowledged . It was realised as far back as the 1920s that there were
substantial differences in the actual practice and therefore it was identified
that the training and educational needs of the , then , industrial nurses needed
separate consideration . Back in October 1932 , a group of nurses held a meeting
at the ( Royal ) College of Nursing to discuss the position of nurses in industry
and discuss suitable training for them as they had identified that the proficiencies required in industry were beyond those covered by training in health
visiting or district nursing , even though there were common areas among
the three professions . The first course of training was offered in 1934 at the
177
178 Public Health Nursing 
( Royal ) College of Nursing in conjunction with Bedford College for Women and
was one academic year long . Since that time there have been great changes
in industry , commence and technology and OH nurses ( OHNs ) have had to
change their practice in line with the demands of the late twentieth- and early
twenty-first-century business . This chapter aims to explore OH nursing practice in the twenty-first century to demonstrate how OH nursing fits into with
the definitions of nursing given by both the International Council of Nurses 
( ICNs ) and Royal College of Nursing ( RCN ) and the definitions of public health
and public health nursing . It will also explore the role of OHNs against the
NMC standards of proficiency for specialist community public health nurses 
( SCPHNs ) and the RCN core competencies for OHNs . 
Chapter 2 discussed the background to public health nursing and the various
definitions of nursing . Here it is necessary to see how OH nursing fits into those
definitions and how it fits into the principles of public health nursing outlined
in Chapter 2 are utilised , these include : 
 Promoting and protecting health
 Reducing risky behaviours and health equalities
 Preventing disease
 Assessing and monitoring the health of communities and populations to
identify those at risk and those with health problems
 Assess priorities for action
 Collaborative working for health and well-being
These principles almost outline the role of the OHN as OH is all about protecting the health of the worker and promoting good health for the workforce ; 
this has been explained in depth in Chapter 7 . The main requirement of health
and safety legislation is the assessment of risks to health and safety and
putting in place suitable controls for the benefit of the workforce community
and the wider community outside the workplace who may be affected . OHNs
play an active part in advising management and employees about the risks to
health and safety and ensuring that appropriate controls are in place , such as
health surveillance , and preventing disease whether work related or not . All
of this will be explained in more details later in the chapter . 
Back in 2003 , the Department of Health in conjunction with the RCN Society of OH Nursing produced a guide [ 2 ] for OHNs where it says that the
workplace has enormous potential as a setting for improving the health of
the adult population . This , of course , was nothing new to the OH nurse , although for some years the perception of public health meant that OH was
not seen as part of the same agenda . Here it is identified that OHNs have
access to a large number of people who are potentially at risk from adverse
health effects caused by both work- and non-work-related health risks and
who have established channels of communication in the workplace through
which to deliver strategies for health promotion , protection and prevention . 
The document also said that with a public health perspective OHNs could
identify the key issues for their workforce population by working as part of
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 179
a multidisciplinary team irrespective of whether it is a large multinational , an
SME or a specific type of industry . It goes on to say that for OHNs a public health
approach is : 
 Planning and delivering interventions and activities that are based on a
systematic assessment of the health needs of the workforce that you are
responsible for
 Working with others , including the workforce themselves , to agree what
the priorities are and how they need to be addressed at individual and
population levels
 Delivering health promotion and health protection programmes that are
based on the best available evidence and evaluating their impact
 Working across professional and organisational boundaries , developing networks with others such as health visitors , practice nurses , GPs , infection
control nurses , public health specialists , midwives and others in the NHS , 
local government , voluntary and business sectors
An example is shown in Case study 8 . 1 . 
Case Study 8 . 1 Hampshire county council ( CC ) 
OH service
In a modern-day occupational health service ( OHS ) practitioners need to
be competent to deliver OH drivers based on : 
 Organisational business need
 Government health strategy
This approach takes the focus away from absence management and
illness , towards a more encompassing ethos and culture working towards
attendance management , education and personal responsibility for good
health . 
Development of marketing materials such as booklets and advice
leaflets need to be designed and published stating purpose , values and
philosophy – the approach being to help staff to help themselves . Appropriate marketing will help sell services and demonstrate core messages
such as the need to care for one ’ s own health . An example of this is
Hampshire CC OH ‘ schools pack ’ that gives a step-by-step guide to their
biggest customer showing how best to utilise service provision , whilst
the ‘ director pack ’ explains what we do and how we deliver to the other
businesses . 
Managing sickness absence can be a mine field and OH practitioners
must be sure of their ground when giving advice . Up-to-date knowledge
of health and safety and employment legislation is important as is an
awareness of relevant case law , whilst clinical information gathered from 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
180 Public Health Nursing
clients needs to be accurate . Managing absence is a priority due to cost
and it is essential to have sound strategies to help address the problem . 
At the same time the OH service needs to demonstrate added value by
reducing the average clearance time on absence cases . Hampshire CC
has managed to reduce this from around 20 days to 7 days . This means
that the process for case management needs to be clearly defined . Client
interviews need to be structured taking account of the time element and
the quality of questions to be asked in order to bring specific answers . 
It is best to put written information back to customers in a standard
framework indicating : 
 The main problem with health and work
 Any treatment that may affect work or delay progress
 Risk issues regarding the DDA
 Advice on a safe and timely return to work
Developing an intranet web page was essential to HCC marketing its
services as it enabled a diverse range of products to be publicised . 
Some examples are : 
 The OH input into the policy health strategy
 Access to information and necessary OH documentation which can be
downloaded
 Access to a plethora of up-to-date information on health topics and
frequently asked questions
 Information on topical health issues
 Information on positive thinking and daily wellness habits emphasising
the health and wellness element of OH
Working collaboratively on the ‘ service-level agreements ’ the OH service
helps the customer understand a range of services that can realistically
be delivered if we offer to bolt on , for example , three health seminars
a year across the businesses . In practice this means that we are able
to deliver what we say we can without putting the OHN under pressure . 
This also means that OH nurses have more variety in their job roles . 
It became clear to HCC OH that on site health checks are a must in
order to meet customer expectation , but when we offered these in 2007 , 
we were overwhelmed by demand . Fortunately , these had been marketed
as a trial so we were able to re-think the strategy . The next step is to
tender for an online web-based health service that all 36 , 000 employees
can access . 
In terms of the day-to-day running of the department , we encourage a
collaborative approach to case management , increasing our case reviews
only for complex cases . As part of the case management process , we
make an initial phone contact with the person who has referred the 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 181
client before speaking to the client themselves ; this enables OH to gauge
the organisational viewpoint such as performance , attitude and ability . 
A menu of educational workshops is offered to keep health issues
on the agenda and OH is working with the safety teams and others to
coordinate stress awareness , thus helping to identify any organisational
issues and target health promotion . 
Early on in the process areas of business with excessive absence were
identified . Two OH advisers have been allocated to these businesses
as the named person who will be able to offer an effective customer
interface on a regular basis and to produce regular statistics as these
are an all-important part of this process . This will be regularly reviewed
and evaluated .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
In the previous chapter the people that go to make up the OH team was
explained in detail , here we can see that OHNs will have to work with the
even wider health team outside of their particular place of work . Indeed this
concept of collaboration is one in line with the NMC principles in the standards
of proficiency [ 3 ]  . 
Of course , not all UK employees are working on home shores . Many people
are employed and work for international companies or are sent by their employers to undertake work in foreign , often hostile climes ; examples of these
are the news journalists and camera crews , non-governmental organisations
such as the Red Cross and Save the Children , the armed forces and research
scientists . Yet , as UK citizens they and their employers are governed by UK
laws and so consideration must be given to their health and well-being whilst
at work ; their public health remains a concern and OHNs must be able to help
and advise those people . In Case study 8 . 1 , one OHN gives an example of the
work her company must consider . 
Case Study 8 . 2 The UK Employee abroad
Providing global OHS for the oil and gas industry and any other commercial or industrial services provides many challenges , with public health
being a major consideration . The three elements to public health are
infrastructure , disease profile and workplace environment . 
Infrastructure
Working in remote locations and in developing countries , where the infrastructure is not always conducive to the maintenance of public health , 
the OHN has to assess and advise on both the workplace and the local
health risks . The main issues are : 
 Local health care provision – how to access quality care and access
resources ; the limited monitoring of ill health from a distance with
subsequent education and preventative service .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
182 Public Health Nursing
 Water quality , often contaminated due to old pipe work or the use of
well water , access to potable water for remote or offshore situations
and managing water supplies in company residences . One of the main
issues is the mineralisation of water resulting in kidney dysfunction , 
urolithiasis and other calculi and the risk from legionella or other
bacteria . 
 Food quality is primarily affected by spoilage which is common in
hot countries , pests and food safety . Although there are international
standards for personal hygiene and food hygiene they are not always
in place and working effectively . 
 Waste management in remote locations and developing countries is
usually via septic tanks . Food wastes are sometimes stored ready for
collection and attract vermin . Biohazard waste is not always segregated or managed to European standards with appropriate sharps
boxes and incineration . 
Disease profile
Using the WHO research and data provides a baseline to assess the
burden of disease for the specific countries . The main issues are : 
 Water and vector-borne disease from malaria to haemorrhagic fever
and rabies
 Other infectious disease including scabies ( associated with cramped
living conditions )  , influenza and gastrointestinal disease associated
with poor personal and food hygiene practices
 Travel-related conditions such as isolation and sexual and reproductive health also count towards the disease profile
 Mortality and morbidity due to lifestyle , age and genetic factor , as well
as health beliefs
Environment
 Extremes of temperature not only have a physical and psychological
impact they also affect the ability to exercise and socialise outdoors
 Air quality can be affected by pollution and industrial by-products , 
which may be controlled if within your own company but not so easily
if it is from a neighbouring company
 Industrial pollution also includes noise , odours and chemical
Therefore , organisations commission a health impact assessment to
identify the significant public health issues whilst the companies work
both internally and with external partners and government organisations
to control the associated risk to health , which is where the OHN plays
a vital role . The OHN has to ensure that his or her advice , support and
service delivery are in line with the public health constraints and support
the improvements required . 
Christina Butterworth , Health Risk Manager , BG Group 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 183
The role of the OHN
The role of the OHN is complex and covers many different aspects and disciplines of nursing . Whitaker and Baranski [ 4 ] give the following list : 
 Clinician
 Specialist
 Manager
 Coordinator
 Adviser
 Health educator
 Counsellor
 Researcher
This is a long list of different roles for one person and many nurses working
in OH may well not be equipped with all those skills . 
Activity 8 . 1
Consider your work in OH and write a brief paragraph on how you fulfil
each of the roles outlined above . 
A public health approach means working with both populations and individuals [ 2 ]  , certainly from the perspective of competence in those areas then
basic nurse training will not have equipped the OHN . The RCN has produced
a list of ‘ competencies ’ for OH nursing [ 5 ] and graded the nurse into three
distinct categories of competent , experienced and expert OHN – see Box 8 . 1 –
this was produced to be in line with the Department of Health Agenda for
change knowledge and skills framework [ 6 ]  . 
Box 8 . 1 OH nursing-level descriptors
Competent OHN
 First-level registered nurse
 Two years post-basic experience
 Post-basic education and training equivalent to university diploma
 Works under guidance of established protocols and procedures at
operational level
 Maintains safe and competent practice
Experienced OHN
 Two years experience in OH setting
 Post-basic education and training equivalent to university degree
 Holds or working towards a recordable / registered OHN qualification
with the NMC
184 Public Health Nursing
 Develops and establishes protocols and procedures at operational
level
 Develops and leads on safe and competent practice
Expert OHN
 Five years experience in OH setting
 Post-basic education and training equivalent to university higher degree
 Holds a recordable / registered OHN qualification with the NMC
 Develops , leads and establishes protocols and procedures at operational and strategic levels
 Innovates , develops and leads on safe and competent practice
 Leads and develops consultant occupational nursing and consultancy
Adapted from RCN Competencies 2005 . 
Even though OHNs work outside the NHS many private employers base
their pay scales on those of the NHS , although it has to be said that they
are under no obligation to offer the same pay and conditions as the NHS and
many do not . It was hoped that these competencies would enable employers
to see the scope and value of OHNs as well as to help with determining their
pay scale ; however , personal communication has indicated that they have not
been found to be of any real use to private employers . 
The RCN Competencies have also been mapped against the NMC standards
for SCPHN to show how the work of the OHN fits into the NMC requirements . 
The RCN competency framework lists 12 sections where the OHN needs to be
competent to practice at one or other of the 3 levels :  
( 1 ) Self-assessment 
( 2 ) Core transferable skills 
( 3 ) Core leadership and management skills 
( 4 ) Core quality assurance and research skills 
( 5 ) Legal and ethical issues 
( 6 ) Risk assessment 
( 7 ) Heath promotion , protection and surveillance 
( 8 ) Sickness , absence and rehabilitation 
( 9 ) Psychological and psychosocial interventions 
( 10 ) Ergonomics 
( 11 ) Occupational hygiene 
( 12 ) Maintaining safety and accident control
So , between the different roles outlined by Whitaker and Baranski , the RCN
level descriptors and competencies and the NMC principles it is not surprising
that many people get lost when trying to find out exactly what an OHN does ! 
Indeed the wide variation in the OH nurse ’ s role that can be observed in
different industries reflects different demands and priorities from within those
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 185
different settings , but also different stages in the development of the OHS . In
some settings the role is defined more narrowly within a commercial contract
for services that makes explicit that the employer will pay for only those
services that they want to purchase . In this case the role of the OH nurse may
be seen only within the context of enabling the employer to comply with his
legal duties . In other settings the role is much wider and can encompass many
different types of activities with different , often complementary , benefits . It is
perhaps easier to consider the role of the OHN with each stage of employment . 
The employer must consider the health of the worker from the time they are
employed until the time they leave employment and beyond . So let us now
consider the role of the OHN at each stage of the employment process . 
Pre-employment and recruitment
Employing people is a risky and costly process ; on average in 2008 , recruitment costs £4667 per employee [ 7 ]  . It could be said that employers only want
to employ healthy or fit people because they will give better service , but then
we know that defining health and fitness is not easy [ 8 ]  . Involving the OH service , and in particular the OHN , from an early stage in recruitment is advisable . 
To start with the OH service can advise companies on the health aspects of
their recruitment policies and procedures , particularly where risk assessments
indicate that there is a particular hazard in the working environment which
could affect the health of employees . The OHN cannot do this unless they have
knowledge and understanding of the workplace , the type of work and the job
demands and the skills to assess risks and make recommendations . 
It is not in nursing and medical training to know the ins and outs of factories , 
work processes and the many different types of employment , some of which
are extremely hazardous . Where practical the OHN should visit the working
environment where he or she is employed , to gain knowledge and information
of the different jobs and work processes that the organisation undertakes and
to get to know the various managers , as well as employees and staff and / or
trade union representatives . Only then can the OHN give an informed opinion
on the fitness needs for different jobs . Where there are specific hazards and
demands advice may be needed from other members of the OH team , such as
the OH Physician , ergonomist , safety officer or occupational hygienist . Some
types of work may have either statutory or mandatory health requirements , 
e . g . working with tools that may cause hand arm vibration ( HAVs )  , working
with specific substances such as asbestos or lead , and these will need to be
considered . 
Once management have completed the risk assessment and the health requirements for the job based on that assessment have been discussed and
agreed with the OH service , then together they will be able to lay down some
health criteria . There has been little research into pre-employment health
assessment ; however , research that has been undertaken shows that there
is little value , either in financial terms or health terms , in extensive preemployment health assessment unless there is a specific health needs for the
186 Public Health Nursing
job [ 9 ]  . This research undertaken in the early 1990s demonstrated that 98%
of applicants were found ‘ fit for work ’ using a self-administered questionnaire
followed by an interview by a nurse . The conclusion was that pre-employment
health assessment had its limitations in terms of its ability to detect clinical
conditions and to predict the health status of employees once in employment ; 
no subsequent research has challenged this statement . 
Another OH audit [ 10 ] undertaken for two years , April 2003 to April 2005 , 
where 4482 pre-employment forms were scrutinised no one was refused
employment for health reasons . According to the audit the estimated costs
of scrutinising pre-employment health declaration forms amounted to 15
minutes per form and almost the cost of one full-time OH adviser at a salary
of circa £30 000 pa . This sum was reached by adding up the time it takes to : 
 Scrutinise each form
 To clarify statements and get correct information
 Complete the necessary records and documentation
 Return the documentation and answer any queries
Further research into pre-employment questionnaires was undertaken in
2006 by Ballard [ 11 ]  . He also highlighted the time-consuming aspects of this
function concurring with Hargreaves ’ findings above . He concluded that not
everyone agrees that the effectiveness of pre-employment health assessment
justifies the time and resources invested in it . 
According to the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development ( CIPD )  
[ 7 ] survey , 25% of organisations had refused employment to people who had
lied on their applications . In her article on honesty and knowledge at preemployment , Kloss [ 12 ] says that there is no duty on a prospective employee
to declare a health condition ; however , if he or she makes a deliberate lie
then they may be acting unlawfully ; as yet there is no legal precedent . So
all this does not augur well for pre-employment health assessment being of
any particular value in the long term of either saving money or predicting the
health outcomes of prospective employees . 
The Data Protection Act Employment Code of Practice [ 13 ] says that only
necessary information should be obtained and kept on individuals , so employers and OH services can only ask for information from employees that is
necessary and that includes health information . 
Activity 8 . 2
Review your pre-employment procedures and find out when the last
audit of your records system was undertaken . Consider if any changes
need to be made in your area of practice and what contribution you can
make to bring about those changes
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 187
Disability and work
The implications of the Disability Discrimination Act ( DDA ) mean that one cannot turn down applicants who have a health condition unless due consideration
has been to making ‘ reasonable adjustments ’ to the job and the workplace . 
One point to note here is that there is help and support from the government
department , the Department of Work and Pensions ( DWP ) through their Access to Work scheme and the specialist advisers and the Disability Employment
Advisers ( DEAs )  . The DEA will help to provide specialist support to people who
are recently disabled , or those whose disability or health condition has deteriorated and who need employment advice . They provide support to disabled
people who are having difficulty in getting a job because of their disability , and
also to employed people who are concerned about losing their job because
of a disability whilst the Access to Work advisers provide support to disabled
people and their employers to help overcome work-related obstacles resulting
from a disability . 
Pre-employment health assessment today
Hargreaves [ 10 ] trialled a new approach to pre-employment health and it is
proving attractive in several organisations . Recommendations from the trial
are that pre-employment health assessments should continue where the risk
assessment has identified that there are health and safety issues or safety
critical standards to be met such as for health care workers , construction
workers or drivers who need to meet the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency
standards etc . The suggestion is that pre-employment health assessment is
eliminated for the majority of workers and the following three questions be
incorporated into the recruitment form and assessed by Human Resources 
( HR ) personnel : 
 Do you need any special aids / adaptations to assist you at work , whether or
not you have a disability ? 
 Are you having , or waiting for , treatment or investigations of any kind at
present ? 
 Have you ever had any health problems which may have been caused or
made worse by work ? 
 Answer YES to any one of the questions and the candidate must be
referred to OH for assessment
 Answer NO to all questions and accept as fit for employment
This would mean that HR / Personnel are aware at the recruitment stage
that the DDA may apply , or that there is a health problem to be considered
as only prospective employees who have answered yes to any one or more of
the questions would be seen for a thorough confidential assessment by the
OH professionals , usually an OH nurse in the first instance who may refer the
person to the OH physician depending on their case history . However , more
188 Public Health Nursing
research is needed to develop an evidence base for pre-employment health
assessment . 
Of course where there are specific hazards in the job , or there are statutory
or mandatory health surveillance requirements on-employment health assessments or even a medical examination by an OH physician maybe necessary , 
e . g .  , for divers , airline pilots etc . but as Smedley et al .  [ 14 ] say the rationale
for the fitness assessment should be clear to all parties . 
Records
Once a person is employed then his or her OH record , or medical record , is
created and this should contain only health details that relate directly to what
is needed for that specific post / job . This record remains a confidential record
to the OH team [ 15 ]  . 
A survey undertaken by Ballard [ 11 ] revealed that some OH services enquired
about 160 different conditions , symptoms or syndromes . This is excessive
and , according to the DPA , no personal information should be obtained or
kept unless it is relevant to the job ; there seems to be no evidence base for
obtaining and keeping such details . Asking about such things as ‘ family history ’ 
is not really relevant with regards to being fit for work and has no place on OH . 
Regular auditing of the OH service is recommended [ 16 , 17 ] and the Information Commissioner recommends a regular audit or ‘ impact assessment ’ of
the collection and storage used for the OH records system to ensure that the
collection of health information does actually address the risks it is directed
at . The DPA Employment CoP gives clear guidelines for this . 
It must be remembered that employee OH records are confidential and
where health surveillance is required by law then two different types of records
will be generated :  
( 1 ) The OH record : This is the confidential document held securely by the OH
service / department and is the clinical record of the employee relevant to
his or her job and visits to the OH service . It is not available to anyone
outside of the OH service other than the employee to whom it relates
without the informed written consent of that employee . It should be kept
whilst the employee continues in that employment and it is suggested that
they are kept for a period of time after employment ceases . There is no
statutory requirement to keep them , but sickness records and medical
reports should be kept for 3 years and accident and injury records should
be kept up to 12 years after the end of employment . These latter records
may be held by HR / Personnel as they are not the clinical OH record .  
( 2 ) The health record : This is a record of health surveillance results , i . e . that
the employee is fit to continue his or her work following whatever health
surveillance procedures have been undertaken . More details on health
records will be given in the section on health surveillance . 
OHNs should follow the guidance given by the NMC on record keeping [ 19 ]  . 
There is a section on the ownership of records which relates specifically to OH
nursing and OH records . 
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 189
Report writing
The OHNs will be expected to write reports for employers in several circumstances , e . g . assessment on employment , sickness absence referral or a workplace assessment . It is easier if the OH department has a procedure agreed
with management and prepared a template or pro forma to be used both for
the referral and the report . This avoids all confusion on both sides . It also
enables the employee to give his or her written consent to disclosure which is
required as doctors and nurses have a duty of care to maintain patient / client
information as confidential . 
Confidentiality
This is enshrined in the relevant professional codes of practice [ 20 ] and reinforced with the DPA and Section 4 of the DPA Employment Code . However , 
when it comes to giving reports to management OHNs often come into conflict . As Butterworth [ 21 ] says ‘ We need to say less often “ I cannot tell you , 
it is confidential ” and to say more often “ I can see why you would want that
information , but I have a duty of care to my patient / client . However , I would
like to work with you on what sort of reasonable adjustments we can put into
place ”  ’  . In other words , be positive and not negative and where possible get
the patient / clients written consent to disclose – if not everything then at least
some aspects of his or her case . Again , it helps if the OH service has a template
or pro forma for the employee to sign for such disclosures . 
When writing medical reports individuals have a right of access to that
report under the Access to Medical Reports Act 1988 ( AMRA )  . Although the
Act says specifically that medical reports relate to reports prepared by a
medical practitioner who is or has been responsible for the clinical care of the
individual , it is generally accepted that OH health professionals would probably
fall into this category although there has been no case law under this Act to
test this . Suffice it to say the DPA allows individuals the right to access to their
records . 
Activity 8 . 3
Before reading the next section write notes on what you understand
health surveillance is all about and then compare your notes with the
text below . 
Health surveillance
The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations not only require
employers to make a suitable and sufficient assessment of the risks to health
and safety at work , but also under Regulation 6 , they require every employer
to provide health surveillance appropriate to those risks identified by the
190 Public Health Nursing
assessment . Risk assessment is the first step to deciding whether or not health
surveillance is needed within an organisation or changed . It is important to
remember that health surveillance should not be used for any other reason
without specific permission of the individual . Employers who seek to check
to see if someone is under the influence of alcohol or drugs or has a disease
caused by a blood-borne virus transmitted by sexual means could be construed
as in breach of the Human Rights Act , unless there is a specific need identified
by the risk assessment in that particular employment . 
The Health and Safety Executive ( HSE )  [ 22 ] defines health surveillance as : 
Putting in place systematic , regular and appropriate procedures to detect
early signs of work-related ill health among employees exposed to certain
health risks ; and acting on the results . 
HSE go on to outline the benefits of health surveillance as : 
 Providing information to detect harmful health effects at an early stage , 
thereby protecting employees and confirming whether they are still fit to
do their jobs
 Checking control measures and giving feedback on risk assessments
 Providing data , by means of health records , to detect and evaluate risks
 Providing an opportunity to train and instruct employees further in safe and
healthy working practices
 Giving employees an opportunity to raise concerns about the effect of work
on health
Types of health surveillance
There are many different types of health surveillance depending on the hazard
and how it affects the human body . So it is important to make sure that
whatever procedures or ‘ screening ’ is carried out fulfils the criteria laid down
by recognised bodies ; otherwise OH professionals may be in breach of their
ethical codes of practice . Screening in medicine is a strategy used to identify
disease and its intention is to identify disease in a given community early , 
thus enabling earlier intervention and management in the hope to reduce
mortality and suffering from a disease . However , not all screening tests have
been shown to benefit the person being screened ; overdiagnosis , misdiagnosis
and creating a false sense of security are some of the potential adverse effects
of screening . The basic principles of screening were laid down in 1968 by Wilson
and Junger and adopted by the World Health Organization [ 23 ] as follows : 
 The condition should be an important health problem
 There should be a treatment for the condition
 Facilities for diagnosis and treatment should be available
 There should be a latent stage of the disease
 There should be a test or examination for the condition
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 191
 The test should be acceptable to the population
 The natural history of the disease should be adequately understood
 There should be an agreed policy on who to treat
 The total cost of finding a case should be economically balanced in relation
to medical expenditure as a whole
 Case finding should be a continuous process , not just a ‘ once and for all ’ 
project
Subsequently , these criteria have been updated and expanded by the UK National Screening Committee ( www . nsc . nhs . uk / pdfs / criteria . pdf )  . So no health
surveillance or ‘ screening ’ procedures should be undertaken just for the sake
of it . There is no point in carrying out an invasive procedure , such as obtaining
a blood test , then telling the person there is a problem but have no means
of treating it . It is not always necessary for health surveillance to involve
the services of OH professionals and certain surveillance can be undertaken
by either responsible persons or even other qualified persons as outlined in
Chapter 7 . 
Certain critical professions produce guidelines on their health surveillance
requirements , e . g . for drivers ( www . dvla . gov . uk / medical / about dri med . aspx ) 
or the UK Civil Aviation Authority ( CAA )  ( www . caa . co . uk )  . Because of the
recent age discrimination legislation [ 24 ] many of these are now all under
review as , at present , different health surveillance procedures are required
according to age . This could be seen as discriminatory and consideration must
be given to the evidence base for separate health surveillance for different
groups . In the HSE guidance on health surveillance they state that these
legal duties of assessing fitness to work should not be confused with health
surveillance . On the other hand , they are all part of the ‘ watching over ’ brief
to protect the worker and others ; so whether or not they are part of ‘ health
surveillance ’ really falls to semantics ! 
Screening ‘ procedures ’ 
This section aims to explain the different types of screening procedures that
can be undertaken as part of health surveillance . It is not intended to cover
absolutely all screening procedures used in health surveillance but will cover
those most commonly used . 
Questionnaires
Using a questionnaire is a screening procedure under health surveillance and
may be used with a number of different hazards . The design is important as
are the procedures for administering the questionnaire . Confidentiality must
be maintained and no questions asked which are not specifically related to the
particular hazard and its effects . It should be checked by a suitably qualified
person , such as an OH nurse , who will be able to take the appropriate action if
necessary . 
192 Public Health Nursing
Skin surveillance
Occupational skin disease is a common OH problem . It is due to either irritation or sensitisation and causes dermatitis . A number of occupations where
substances are handled can cause problems [ 25 ]  . Skin surveillance is one of
the simplest forms of health surveillance where an employee may undertake
the checks for himself , he or she will need to be properly informed and trained
about the signs and symptoms of any skin conditions that may arise from his
or her work and where to go for further advice . Self-assessment on its own
is not sufficient without complementary checks undertaken by a specifically
trained person and the whole programme supervised by OH professionals . 
Respiratory surveillance
There are a number of substances that are known to affect the respiratory
system and may cause occupational asthma . Guidelines for the health surveillance of people exposed to respiratory sensitisers and respiratory irritants
has been produced by the British Occupational Health Research Foundation 
( BOHRF )  [ 26 ] and supported by the HSE . There is also ongoing research in
this field , where a risk of occupational asthma is identified , the surveillance
commences with a respiratory questionnaire on employment and is then completed annually , although during the first two years of employment this would
be more frequent . Such a questionnaire would be designed and scrutinised by
OH professionals and would include : 
 Type and duration , frequency and intensity of exposure to the sensitiser
over a given period
 Any changes in signs and symptoms , such sore eyes or a runny nose not
linked to a cold or flu
 Any respiratory signs or symptoms , such as a wheeze , shortness of breath
or any difficulty in breathing , coughs or tickly throat that have developed
since the last questionnaire completed
The results are then logged onto the employee ’ s health record . When a
problem is identified there may be a need for further investigations such as
skin-prick testing and blood sampling or lung function tests . These screening
tests must be undertaken by appropriately qualified people , not necessarily
a doctor or nurse , but someone who has received training in the necessary
technical skills , such as an OH technician . However , the results must be viewed
and interpreted by an OH or respiratory health professional . 
Blood testing
It is a legal requirement for certain types of workers , such as lead workers , 
health care workers and critical safety workers to have blood tested . Lead
workers require a blood test to ascertain that the environmental controls in
the workplace are effective and also that certain workplace personal hygiene
procedures are being adhered to . This is the opposite to the health surveillance
by blood test of people working in safety critical areas who may require blood
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 193
screening to ascertain that they have not used drugs or alcohol , although there
are other , less invasive , tests that can be done , such as hair sampling and urine
testing which would better fulfil the screening criteria . Health care workers
require blood testing to check immunity following immunisation against certain work-related conditions such as hepatitis B . Other blood tests may also be
required to confirm if sensitivity to a skin or respiratory irritant is suspected . 
However , venepuncture is an invasive procedure and should be avoided unless absolutely necessary and that there is no alternative effective method of
surveillance . 
Eyesight testing
It will depend on the reason for the eyesight testing as to which method of
testing is used . A professionally qualified optician or optometrist is necessary
to carry out a full eye test and it may be advisable for a baseline test to be
carried out when employing people in jobs with specific visual requirements . 
However , there are machines that can be purchased which will test for specific
work requirements , such as for display screen equipment use with computers
and depth perception for forklift truck drivers . It is best to discuss this with an
OH adviser to ensure that the correct vision testing is undertaken . The simple
vision test is the Snellen Chart which provides a standardised test of visual
acuity . As well as visual acuity details on the other tests that may be necessary , 
such as colour testing for certain jobs , then the HSE guide for employers on
colour vision examination gives comprehensive details [ 27 ]  . 
Audiometry
Audiometry is undertaken at the workplace where it is required to check the
effectiveness of the noise control measures . It became mandatory at intervals
of three years ( sometimes more often ) for all UK employees exposed to levels
of 85 dB ( A ) on a daily basis and those exposed to peak sound pressure levels
above 137 dB [ 28 ]  . However , audiometry is only part of a hearing conservation
programme and the HSE say that as a minimum , a programme of health
surveillance should include : 
 Audiometric testing ( baseline assessment on first entering a job involving
noise exposure , annual testing for two years , then three yearly testing ) 
 Arrangements to receive medical advice on management of affected employees
 Arrangements to receive anonymised information to demonstrate effectiveness of controls
Training to use audiometry equipment is usually available from the manufactures of the equipment and may be undertaken by suitably qualified people
such as OH technicians . 
194 Public Health Nursing
Health records
Any form of health surveillance requires a record to be kept . They are different from a clinical or medical record and the two should not be confused . 
Health surveillance records are kept as an historical record of exposure to
the hazardous process or procedure ; as a record of the outcome of health
surveillance procedures in terms of fitness to work , restrictions etc . and they
provide information for the statutory bodies to show health surveillance has
been undertaken . 
Health surveillance and health records must contain : 
 Full name
 Date of birth
 Sex
 Permanent address
 National insurance number
 Date of commencement of present job
 An historical record of exposure to the hazard for which health surveillance
is required
 The conclusions of any health surveillance procedures , i . e . fit to work ; fit
to work subject to certain conditions etc . The date and by whom they were
carried out
Retention of health records
Health records should be kept as long as the person is under health surveillance . However , there are certain statutory requirements to keep health
records for much longer , some for up to 50 years , so it is important to check
the relevant legislation and guidance notes or codes of practice published by
the HSE . 
Case Study 8 . 3
Lotus cars has its own in-house OH department of a full-time OHN and
part-time OH technician . The team is led by the OH and safety manager
who is a qualified SCPHN in OH and who contracts in the services of an
OH physician , physiotherapists and a counsellor . 
The company specialises in the design and build of elite sports cars
and the provision of engineering consultancy services both in the UK
and overseas . It employs a workforce of approximately 1000 staff and
approximately 50% will be working within areas that require some degree of health surveillance . 
A large proportion of the working week is dedicated to the health
surveillance process with clinical assessments , follow-ups , workplace visits and report writing and documentation . By providing an in-house service , we are able to review any identified OH problems both quickly and
efficiently and are able to act promptly . We work proactively with both
health and safety and managerial staff by looking at the source of the 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 195
matter and aim to prevent work-related ill health rather than reactively
attempting to cure and control the problem . 
The OH team is familiar with the workforce and the working environment and is able to address the matter of sickness absence efficiently
by close working relationships with HR , line management and employees
alike . This close relationship has resulted in sickness absence levels of
approximately 2% , far below the considered national average and one
that we are proud to have achieved .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Other considerations for monitoring health at work
Business travel health
Employees who travel overseas as part of their role , or who may work for long
periods overseas for UK companies are still covered by UK health and safety
legislation . Therefore the employer has a duty of care and should make sure
that a risk assessment is carried out and that the risks to health are addressed
before travel . OH services are involved in offering such advice and in many
cases providing suitable immunisation programmes , information and training
sessions . 
Night workers
Night workers are entitled to a free health assessment before they start working nights and on a regular basis while they are working nights according to
the Working Time Regulations 1998 . In many cases it will be appropriate to do
this once a year , though employers can offer a health assessment more than
once a year if they feel it is necessary . Workers do not have to take the opportunity to have a health assessment ( but it must be offered by the employer )  . A
health assessment can be made up of two parts : a questionnaire and a medical
examination . The latter is only necessary if the employer has doubts about
the worker ’ s fitness for night work . 
New and expectant mothers
New and expectant mothers are required under the Management of Health and
Safety at Work Regulations to have a separate risk assessment undertaken
for them in order to ensure that their work does not affect them or the unborn
child . 
Managing absence , disability and rehabilitation
Managing absence is a management responsibility but OH services can do
a lot to help and support employers in effectively managing absence . When
196 Public Health Nursing
Table 8 . 1 Reasons for absence from work . 
Planned Unplanned
Annual leave Military service
Study leave Jury service
Maternity / paternity Bereavement / compassionate leave
Time off in lieu Unplanned health problems
Sabbatical / break in service
Planned health care
talking about absence most people think solely of sickness absence but there
are many other reasons for people being absent from work and these fall into
two main categories – planned and unplanned ( see Table 8 . 1 )  . 
These are mostly planned absences and so management accommodates
them ; even some sickness absence can be planned , such as routine surgery . 
Problems occur when employees take unplanned sick leave and the biggest
cost to employers occurs with short-term minor illness , generally regarded as
less than four weeks , but the majority of which is less than seven days . 
Two organisations undertake annual business absence surveys , the Confederation of British Industries ( CBI ) in conjunction with AXA [ 29 ] and the
CIPD [ 30 ]  . Other , work-related absence statistics are published regularly by
the HSE ( www . hse . gov . uk / statistics / index . htm )  . The interesting factors from
these surveys indicate that despite initiatives sickness absence , particularly in
the public sector , is not reducing and that 12% of sickness absence is thought
not to be genuine and is used to extend weekends , for special events such as
birthdays and for important football matches , with many people taking time
off sick to deal with home and family responsibilities . Whitaker [ 31 ] says that
there are a number of different perspectives from which sickness absence can
be viewed and Table 8 . 2 shows the factors that have been linked to increase
rates of sickness absence . 
Both surveys highlight those aspects of sickness absence management
which work well . What remains a constant are the reasons for long-term absence , i . e . over four weeks ; these are musculoskeletal disorders and mental
ill health related to stress , anxiety and depression . It is especially in these
areas that OH can play a part in supporting management with rehabilitation
advice . 
Principles of sickness absence management
Develop policies and procedures
The initial key to sound absence management is the policies and procedures
developed by management . They should be clearly defined , commonly understood and widely accepted [ 32 ]  . All stakeholders , including the OH service , 
need to be involved in the development of such policies and procedures and
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 197
Table 8 . 2 Factors that can affect sickness absence .  
@ 
Macro level Organisational level Individual level
Climate Nature of the industry Age
Epidemics Working conditions Gender
Provision of health Job demands Occupational status
care services Size of the enterprise Job satisfaction
Social insurance Characteristics of the Length of service
systems workforce Personality
Sickness Workforce availability Life crises
certification Industrial relations Family
practices Supervisory quality responsibility
Taxation Personnel policies Social support
Pensionable age Labour turnover Leisure activities
Social attitudes The provision of OH The health status of
Economic climate services the individual
Available
alternative
employment
Alcohol intake
or
unemployment
From Whitaker [ 31 ] with permission . 
rehabilitation should be included as part of the overall absence management
policy and procedures . 
Return to work procedures
Return to work interviews ( RTWI ) by line managers , trigger mechanisms and
the use of disciplinary procedures were rated as the most effective approaches
to deal with short-term absence in both surveys . For some years now , according to the surveys , RTWI appear to be more effective than disciplinary measures and the recommendations are that it should be carried out by the ( appropriately trained ) line manager after every period of unscheduled absence . 
After RTWI , trigger mechanisms , e . g . ten or more days off sick , indicate that
the involvement of OH services is needed along with introducing rehabilitation programmes . According to the CIPD survey , involvement of OH is key to
managing long-term absence . ACAS [ 33 ] say it is also important to keep in
touch with employees through regular contact when they are on long-term
sick leave . The last few years has seen a substantial increase in the number
of employers developing employee well-being programmes as an effective
means of reducing the cost of absence [ 34 ]  . 
The aim of the RTWI is that the employee will find it easier to return to work . 
However , RTW is still a big step which causes anxiety and exacerbates all sorts
of health implications , so a phased return to work is often suggested as well
as the assessment of whether any reasonable adjustments are needed . 
198 Public Health Nursing
The stigma attached to any sort of mental illness , which stress-related
conditions are , needs careful handling . Employers , HR and managers should
be aware of the resources available , e . g . the Mindful Employer ( www . 
mindfulemployer . net ) initiative which is aimed at increasing awareness of
mental health at work and providing support for businesses in recruiting and
retaining staff . 
Referral to OH for help and advice on long-term absence cases must be
a formal procedure and not seen as a threat or disciplinary measure . Such
behaviour undermines the professional and confidential nature of an OH service . OH professionals are also frustrated by the person who turns up to the
department saying they have been sent by management without any formal
referral . This is why the referral process must be included in the policy and
procedures and it is better to use a pro forma . Any form of referral should be
written and then signed by the referring manager and the employee with a
statement that the reason for referral has been explained and that he or she
consents to an OH report being prepared as per the Data Protection Act and
the employee ’ s rights under this Act . 
Once the OH service has received the referral form , they can then make the
necessary arrangements to see the employee and , where necessary , obtain
further details and make recommendations by writing a report to whoever
made the request . Further details may be required from the employee ’ s doctor , 
particularly a specialist . Caution should be taken when requesting reports from
GPs as it is believed that these do not generally make a difference to the OH
decision [ 35 ]  . Obtaining further details is not cheap ; doctors , both GPs and
specialists , require professional fees for preparing and sending a report to an
employer , even if it is through the OH service . It is best to find out the cost , by
telephone if necessary before requesting . There is a saving to the company
money in the long run if the correct approach is taken and the employee
returned to work . 
Principles of rehabilitation and case management
 ‘ Rehabilitation is not about forcing people back to work . Work , in fact , is often
a crucial step in helping people return to health . And businesses have much
to gain in terms of reduced sickness absence , and improved staff engagement
and retention ’  , so Lord McKenzie from Department of Work and Pension said in
July 2007 at the launch of a new ‘ vocational rehabilitation ’ taskforce . Waddell
and Burton [ 36 ] say that many people do and can work with health problems . 
Well-designed clinical and occupational management should minimise the impact on work performance and productivity ; timing for rehabilitation is critical
and there are many harmful effects of staying away from work for too long . 
Vocational rehabilitation is defined as : 
a process which enables people with functional , psychological , developmental , cognitive and emotional impairments or health conditions to overcome
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 199
barriers to accessing , maintaining or returning to employment or other useful occupation [ 37 ]  . 
Traditionally , the UK health services have concentrated on the three tiers of
health care : primary , secondary and tertiary which is rehabilitation . Waddell
and Burton have demonstrated [ 38 ] that work is good for your health and
can be an effective part of health care , especially if used in the first to sixth
month of absence . They show that unemployment is strongly associated with
poor mental and physical health , higher mortality , higher medical and hospital
needs and low self-esteem . 
The new standards published by the Vocational Rehabilitation Association 
( VRA )  [ 36 ] say that the rehabilitation process is interdisciplinary by nature , 
and may require functional , biopsychosocial , behavioural and / or vocational
interventions . They go on to list the techniques required , but not limited to as : 
 Assessment and appraisal
 Goal setting and intervention planning
 Provision of health advice and promotion , in support of returning to work
 Support for self-management of health conditions
 Career ( vocational ) counselling
 Individual and group counselling focused on facilitating adjustments to the
medical and psychosocial impact of disability
 Case management , referral and service coordination
 Programme evaluation and research
 Interventions to remove environmental , employment and attitudinal obstacles
 Consultation services among multiple parties and regulatory systems
 Job analysis , job development and placement services , including assistance
with employment
 Job accommodations
 The provision of consultation about and access to rehabilitation technology
These required appropriately trained and skilled people to deal with them
and the VRA standards go on to lay down standards for practice in this area . OH
professionals should be able to fulfil these criteria with the help and support
of other VR professionals . 
The use of case managers is regarded as useful for rehabilitation ; the Case
Management Society UK ( www . cmsuk . org ) says that the role of a case manager
is to work with clients on an individual basis . They define case management
as : 
A collaborative process which assesses , plans , implements , co-ordinates , 
monitors and evaluates the options and services required to meet an individuals health , care , educational and employment needs , using communication
and available resources to promote quality cost effective outcomes . 
200 Public Health Nursing
This sounds very much like the ‘ nursing process ’ and here rehabilitation
requires the OHN to work within a multidisciplinary team using a biopsychosocial model [ 35 ]  . This model considers the biological or physical / mental health
condition together with the psychological / personal factors which influence
the functioning of the individual and the social contexts and pressures on behaviour and functioning as explained in Chapter 2 . Therefore , role of OH in the
rehabilitation of employees is to : 
 Assess the individual by identifying the health problem and obtaining further
medical information if necessary
 Assess their workplace and possibly undertake or obtain a job analysis or
risk assessment
 Assess the employee ’ s ability to get to and from , in and out of work , particularly in emergencies
 Arranging ongoing treatment such as psychological or physical therapies
where necessary
 Advising management , by means of a written report , on reasonable adjustments or restrictive duties where necessary
Tolley [ 39 ] makes recommendations for graduated or structured return to
work : 
 Reduction of hours per day but not less than four hours per day
 Working from home or carrying out partial duties
 Gradually increase hours / days over a period of 6–8 weeks maximum
 Therapeutic interventions should take place outside of these shorter working hours
 OH service to review the progress on a regular basis
In the first instance it may be worth recommending that the long-term
absent employee returning for coffee , tea or lunch with his or her colleagues
to break the ice . 
There are a number of initiatives being planned by government departments
aimed at helping to improve the peoples return to work following sickness
absence , particularly with regard to the GPs ‘ sick note ’  . It has been suggested
that GPs should consider more what people are able to do rather than what
they cannot do [ 40 ]  . Pilot studies will be undertaken in the UK before these
will be introduced and at this stage there is no news on this topic . 
Case Study 8 . 4
Neylon Occupational Health Limited ( NOHL ) is a nurse-led service . It
covers the full spectrum of OH from office-based firms to the manufacturing and construction industries . NOHL provides a service in line with
evolving standards and practice within the field of OH which incorporates 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 201
health surveillance , sickness / absence with the focus on rehabilitation , 
health assessments , drugs and alcohol testing , health promotion , travel
health , management referrals , physiotherapy , first-aid training , manual
handling . 
I also provide seminars to GPs , OH physicians and other professionals
to move the focus from absence to work and rehabilitation . NOHL is a
small provider but has the added advantage of being able to provide a
bespoke provision to its clients ensuring continuity and a personalised
service . The main disadvantage to me , as a nurse-led provider , is the
degree of responsibility and the lack of professional support as a lone
practitioner . The best way to counteract this is to continue to update
my skills , attend conferences and seminars and attend OH professional
membership groups . 
Sandra Neylon 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Summary
It can be seen that the role of the OH service and in particular the role of
the OHN in the protection and promotion of worker ’ s health is key to a public
health nursing role . This is clearly illustrated in the case studies and Case
study 8 . 4 demonstrates that this can be achieved through small as well as
large businesses . The community of workers has long been on the fringes of
health care provision in the UK ; now that it is clearly seen as part of public
health and is vital for the health of the population and the UK economy there
are initiatives being discussed at national levels [ 41 ] to raise the profile of OH
even higher . It is , therefore , essential for OHNs to keep up to date with their
CPD and what is happening in this important health care speciality . 
References
1 Charley I . The Birth of Industrial Nursing . London : Balli ` ere , Tindall and Cox , 
1954 . 
2 DH . Taking a Public Health Approach in the Workplace . London : DH , 2003 . 
3 Nursing and Midwifery Council . Standards of Proficiency for Specialist Community Public Health Nurses . London : NMC , 2004 . 
4 Whitaker S , Baranski B . The Role of the Occupational Health Nurse in Workplace
Health Management . Bilthoven : WHO , 2001 . 
5 RCN . Competencies : An Integrated Career and Competency Framework for
Occupational Health Nursing . London : RCN , 2005 . 
6 Department of Health . NHS Knowledge and Skills Framework ( NHS KSF ) and
the Development and Review Process . London : DH , 2004 . 
7 Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development . Recruitment , Retention and
Turnover : Annual Survey Report 2008 . London : CIPD , 2008 . 
202 Public Health Nursing
8 Seedhouse D . Health : The Foundations of Achievement , 2nd edn . Chichester : 
John Wiley and Sons , 2001 . 
9 Whitaker S , Aw TC . Audit of pre-employment assessment by occupational
health departments in the National Health Service . Occupational Medicine 1995 ; 
45 ( 2 )  : 75–80 . 
10 Hargreaves C . Screen test . Occupational Health 2006 ; 58 ( 7 )  : 27–9 . 
11 Ballard J . Pre-employment health screening . Part 1 : pre-employment questionnaires . Occupational Health [ at Work ] 2006 ; 3 ( 3 )  : 18–25 . 
12 Kloss D . Pre-employment screening . Part 2 : honesty , disability and knowledge . 
Occupational Health [ at Work ] 2006 ; 3 ( 3 )  : 35–6 . 
13 Information Commissioner . Employment Practices Code ( available at www . 
ico . gov . uk )  ; 2005 . 
14 Smedley J , Dick F , Sadhra S . Oxford Handbook of Occupational Health . Oxford : 
Oxford University Press , 2007 . 
15 Faculty of Occupational Medicine . Guidance on Ethics for Occupational Physicians . London : FOM , 2006 . 
16 RCN . Occupational Health Audit : A Practical Guide for Occupational Health
Nurses . London : RCN , 1999 . 
17 Agius RM . Audit in Occupational Health : 2 . The Application of Audit to Occupational Health and Medicine ( available at www . agius . com / hew / audit /  . hmt )  ; 
1995–2001 . 
18 Lewis J , Thornbory G . Employment Law and Occupational Health : A Practical
Handbook . Oxford : Blackwell Publishing , 2006 , p . 6 . 
19 NMC . Record Keeping ( available at www . nmc-uk . org )  ; 2007 . 
20 NMC . The Code : Standards of Conduct , Performance and Ethics for Nurses and
Midwives ( available at www . nmc-uk . org )  ; 2007 . 
21 Butterworth C . Be a VIP – visible , informed and positive . Occupational Health
2008 ; 60 ( 8 )  : 32–3 . 
22 HSE . Health Surveillance at Work HSG61 . Bootle : HSE , 1999 . 
23 Wilson JMG , Junger G . Principles and practice of screening for disease . WHO
Chronicles 1968 ; 22 ( 11 )  : 4–73 . 
24 The Employment Equality ( Age ) Regulations 2006 . 
25 HSE . Health Surveillance for Occupational Dermatitis G403 ( available at
www . hse . gov . uk / pubns / guidance / g403 . pdf )  ; 2006 . 
26 British Occupational Health Research Foundation . Occupational Asthma : 
A Guide for Employers , Workers and Their Representatives ( available at
www . bohrf . org . uk / content / asthma . htm )  ; 2004 . 
27 HSE . Colour Vision Examination ( available at www . hse . gov . uk / pubns / 
guidance / web03 . pdf )  ; 2005 . 
28 Control of Noise at Work Regulations 2005 . 
29 CBI / AXA . At Work and Working Well ? Absence and Labour Turnover Survey . 
London : CBI / AXA , 2008 . 
30 Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development . Annual Survey Report : 
Absence Management ( available at www . cipd . co . uk )  . London : CIPD , 2008 . 
31 Whitaker SC . The management of sickness absence . Occupational and Environmental Medicines 2001 ; 58 ( 6 )  : 420–24 . 
32 Walters M . One Stop Guide to Absence Management . Surrey : Reed Business
Information , 2005 . 
33 Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service . Managing Attendance and Employee Turnover ( available at www . acas . org . uk )  ; 2006 . 
34 Holford P , Nagle W , Rix D . Food for thought . Occupational Health 2008 ; 60 ( 6 )  : 
42–3 . 
Occupational Health Nursing Practice 203
35 Preeece R . OH needs to communicate effectively with GPs . Occupational Health
2008 ; 60 ( 8 )  : 10 . 
36 Waddell G , Burton AK . Concepts of Rehabilitation for the Management of Common Health Problems . London : TSO , 2004 . 
37 Vocational Rehabilitation Association . Standards of Practice . London : VRA , 
2007 . 
38 Waddell G , Burton AK . Is Work Good for your Health and Wellbeing ? London : 
TSO , 2006 . 
39 Hughes V , ed . Tolley ’ s Guide to Employee Rehabilitation . London : Lexis Nexis , 
2004 . 
40 Black C . Working for a Healthier Tomorrow : A Review of the Health of Britain ’ s
Working Age Population ( available at www . workingforhealth . gov . uk )  ; 2008 . 
41 Working for Health ( available at www . workingforhealth . gov . uk )  ; 2008 . 
Chapter 9
Education and Continuing
Professional Development of
Public Health Nurses
Rebecca Elliott
Learning objectives
After reading this chapter you will be able to : 
 Identify how education and continuing professional development
contributes to improving quality of practice
 Appreciate regulatory need to maintain professional registration
 Be able to record learning events in order to maintain registration
 Recognise how learning styles influence learning and development
 Recognise the differences in academic levels of study in which they
may participate in
 Utilise reflection throughout learning and professional development
Introduction
The Kaleidoscope offers a metaphor – the symmetry , brilliance and evermoving views of the professions . Each turn of the disk brings a new image , 
renewed vision and refreshment [ 1 ]  . 
This description of Chaska of the developing nursing profession in the 1990s
captured the need for education and continuing professional development 
( CPD ) for the nurses to deal with the changing practice arena . This has still
not changed in the twenty-first century as with every different view within that
kaleidoscope of our roles , nurses need the knowledge and skills to make sense
of what they see in practice and provide the expected outcomes of holistic
health improvement . This is especially pertinent for the specialist community public health nurse as we strive to assist populations in managing these
204
Education and Continuing Professional Development 205
changing images within their community environments and influence the patterns of health that become visible . Public health nurses need to have the
knowledge and skills to influence the way the light refracts upon the crystals
within the kaleidoscope of our changing environment . Education and CPD to
the learner should be as exciting as a child looking through a kaleidoscope . The
practitioner can demonstrate learning and enhancing practice in a variety of
ways and the portfolio of practice is becoming the accepted method for practitioners to demonstrate and record their competence through professional development [ 2 ]  . This chapter will enable you as a practitioner to be able to recognise when learning takes place and that all learning is not a formal activity . 
Professional development for nurses has changed throughout the centuries
influenced by different cultures , society , politics , economical factors and great
nursing leaders [ 3 ]  . There continues to be much debate around the professionalisation of the nurse and although there is no time to discuss this area within
this chapter , this aspect is worthy of further reading in understanding where
you are today in your career [ 4 ]  . CPD is the maintenance , improvement and
broadening knowledge with the development of personal qualities in order to
effectively carry out one ’ s duties . 
In 2000 , the government set out their plans for improving the education , 
training and professional development of health and social care staff [ 5 ]  . The
document Working Together , Learning Together : A Framework for Lifelong
Learning [ 6 ] set out the core vision for implementing the government ’ s plans . 
This document discusses reasons as to why as a professional , we need to be
continuously developing in relation to practice and at the heart of the vision
lies the belief that professional development should be valued by everyone
working in health and social care . Although not all learning is done formally , 
learning programmes should be based on individual needs and rooted in practice . Access to education , training and development should be flexible and
show diversity with no discrimination in terms of age , sex , gender , ethnicity with accessibility for part-time workers and for all geographical areas . 
Accreditation should be awarded wherever possible , recorded , valued and
recognised . Whenever practical , learning should be in shared groups and with
different professions . CPD refers to any lifelong learning activities undertaken
once qualified or in a chosen career . 
The motivation to undertake professional development through formal education may be varied but there will always be key principles involved albeit
in varying degrees : 
 To maintain professional registration
 Personal development
 The quest to improve standards in practice
 Protection against litigation
Self-awareness is an important aspect of CPD . Self-awareness through reflection is fundamental to being able to assess the need for new knowledge , 
identify the learning which has taken place ; problem solving in areas of practice to achieve the required outcomes and for the recall of evaluating the
206 Public Health Nursing
effectiveness of any health intervention undertaken . The clinical governance
framework introduced in the White paper The New NHS : Modern , Dependable 
[ 7 ] joined a range of initiatives aimed at improving practice which included
reflective practice together with evidence-based practice to ensure clinical
effectiveness . This is also clearly defined in the nurse ’ s professional code of
practice [ 8 ]  , where it says that nurses should provide the best standard of care
at all times using best available practice and keep one ’ s knowledge and skills
up to date . Reflection will be addressed in more detail later in this chapter . 
Education and CPD in relation to professional registration
The Nursing and Midwifery Council ( NMC ) in the United Kingdom has the core
function of setting standards for education , training , conduct and performance
of nurses and midwives . By ensuring these standards are maintained , the
NMC protects the safety of the public [ 9 ]  ( see Chapter 2 )  . It is pertinent
to recognise the role of the NMC in influencing the educational needs for
the developing role of the nurse especially the public health nurse role . The
emergence of the nurse prescriber to independent prescriber exemplifies this
as just one of many examples of the political influences on health provision
utilising limited resources for effective delivery of health care with the user in
mind that has required regulatory changes to keep up with the developments . 
The school nurse may identify a priority need to prescribe in order to meet
the needs of their populations [ 10 ]  . Nurse prescribing offers school nurses the
opportunity to make a difference to the health of teenagers who often present
with multiple health-damaging behaviours [ 11 ]  . The changes in regulation to
enable practitioners to meet the needs of their client groups emphasises the
need for education and CPD . As the NHS celebrates 60 years in existence the
Darzi review for NHS reforms [ 12 ] continues to influence the need for CPD to
fulfil the workforce expectations of this review . 
Currently , the pathway-specific specialist public health nurse is registered
on the third part of the nursing register [ 13 ]  ; however , as the Darzi [ 9 ] review
states there is to be great emphasis on the prevention of ill health and maintenance of health within the NHS reforms and this equates to a high profile
for the public health role of all nurses . Darzi [ 9 ] identified the following areas
which require immediate steps in relation to public health : 
 Primary Care Trusts will commission well-being services and prevention
services in partnership with local authorities
 Services personalised to meet needs of local communities
 Working with voluntary and independent sector
 Coalition for better health
 Health of the workforce
 Primary and community care
 NICE
 Access for all practitioners to evidence-based information
Education and Continuing Professional Development 207
Children , 
families and
public health
First contact 
access and 
urgent care
Long-term
care
Acute and
critical care 
Mental health
and
psychosocial
care
Advanced practice – delivering total care packages or complete episodes
Leading care delivery , care coordination and case management
Supporting health self-care and care delivery
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 9 . 1 The model for nurse training : five proposed pathways ( adapted
from the DH [ 14 ]  .  ) 
This will bring with it the need for changing workforce roles as the specialist
public health practitioners alone on the third part of the register will not
be able to fulfil the expected outcomes of this review . This has been partially
addressed following the recent consultative review for post-registration nurse
training [ 14 ]  . The suggested model for training described five pathways in
nursing which included a children , family and public health pathway ( Figure
9 . 1 )  . Note that within the proposed model of nursing pathways the agenda
for change pay structure bandings have been utilised to demonstrate role
competency descriptors . 
Within the NHS , the agenda for change pay structure [ 15 ] works on the basis
of knowledge , responsibility skills and effort needed for the job rather than a
job title . It was a radical change to recognise the changing roles within the NHS
from support workers ( associate ) to the advanced role . The agenda for change
also had a real purpose to identify staff development needs during the personal
development reviews and links closely to the knowledge and skills framework 
[ 16 ]  . Recognising that although the NHS remains the main provider of health
care within the UK this is changing and many PH nurses work outside the NHS . 
This is particularly true for OH specialists and in this case it will be market
forces which determine pay bandings in relation to remuneration for services . 
School nurses also practice in private schools or social enterprises and so
may health visitors . Although market forces may provide lucrative salaries , the
practitioner would be well advised to enquire on offer of employment how CPD
needs will be addressed within their new employment . As discussed later in the
chapter this does not just relate to monies allocated for formal education , but
also relates to time allocated to clinical supervision , evidence-based practice , 
and audit to enable reflection of experiences which enhances learning . 
The response report [ 11 ] identified that further consultation through informed debate is needed in relation to how to present educational models for
208 Public Health Nursing
the PH nurse of the future . It is vital for education needs to be met for the
health care workforce to perform effectively in public health , particularly with
regards to health promotion in a multidisciplinary setting ( see Figure 9 . 1 )  [ 11 ]  . 
The White Paper Trust , Assurance and Safety : The Regulation of Health Care
Professionals in the 21st Century [ 17 ] may very well have tremendous repercussions for the regulation and registration of PH nurses as the government
states that they believe all professionals practicing in the same area should
be subjected to the same standard of training , education and practice and
this will involve the harmonisation of standards for the regulators . This paper
also addresses the need for regulating health care support workers already
referred to in a previous chapter , e . g . OH technicians . Current PH nurses and
aspiring PH nurses need to be aware of these imminent changes and how they
contribute to the overall goals of public health . 
The role of the nurse may change in light of these political expectations . 
The current method of maintaining registration on the Nursing and Midwifery
Register includes the requirement of CPD . Post-registration education and
practice ( PREP )  [ 18 ] was first introduced in 1995 by the former UKCC ( see
Chapter 2 )  . The NMC ’ s latest version of PREP [ 15 ] includes the new rules
relating to the re-registration of the specialist community public health nurse 
[ 10 ]  . At re-registration every three years , nurses on whichever part of the
register have to declare that they have complied with the PREP ( CPD ) standard 
[ 14 ]  . The standard relates to the minimum amount of practice hours that needs
to have been completed in a particular field of nursing and to the amount of
CPD hours that needs to have been undertaken in the three years prior to
re-registering ( see Box 9 . 1 )  . 
Remember that any work you are involved with related to your role can be
classed as practice hours . For example , this may include looking after children , 
Box 9 . 1 The amount of practice hours required as
adapted from The PREP Handbook [ 18 ] 
Renewing your registration for Practice hours required
Nursing 450
Midwifery 450
Nursing and Midwifery 900
Nursing and Specialist Community Health
Nursing
450
Midwifery and Specialist Community Health
Nursing
900
Nursing , Midwifery and Specialist Community
Public Health Nursing
900
Education and Continuing Professional Development 209
a disabled or elderly relative or friend . Helping at St Johns Ambulance or
the Red Cross , accompanying a trip to Lourdes or anything which utilises your
nursing skills paid or unpaid can contribute to the required practice hours . The
remit of the standards for proficiency for the public health nurse is so broad
that any work either paid or unpaid that influences the health and well-being of
a community could be classed as practice . For example , working with the local
cubs group on a safety project , lobbying the council for some improvement
in services , or being a member of the parent–teacher association assisting in
assessing the needs of the school children . 
Activity 9 . 1
Take a few moments to refresh your knowledge of the NMC standards of
proficiency for the SCPHN outlined in Chapter 2 and then make a list of
further activities you can think of which would have a public health role
and may count towards unpaid practice experience . 
The PREP CPD standard also requires all registrants to undertake a minimum of 35 hours of learning activity in the three years prior to their reregistration and to maintain a professional portfolio . The NMC may ask to see
a portfolio as part of their audit process . It is important to recognise that the
form of learning activity undertaken can be varied , including both formal and
informal activities , e . g . it may be a formal course with cost implications or informal where learning takes place through an experience which contributes to
professional development for your role in public health . Indeed , you may not
even be in paid employment whilst undertaking some learning-related activity
which could count towards your CPD . This often causes confusion for some
practitioners . CPD can be evidenced from any experience which contributes
to their learning in relation to their practice . 
Activity 9 . 2
Look back at the experiences you identified as being ‘ practice experience ’ in Activity 9 . 1 . Take one and identify what you learnt from that
experience . Did you identify any sharing and discussing information with
your associates ? Did you spend time web looking for information or
journal / magazine articles ? 
The previous two exercises you have undertaken are exactly the type of
information which needs to be recorded in the professional portfolio . There
is no set format for a personal professional portfolio ; however , any learning
activity must inform your work role or plans for work in the future and it must
help contribute to the best possible standard of practice possible ( see Box 9 . 2 )  . 
210 Public Health Nursing
Box 9 . 2 What should be included in a personal
professional portfolio
 Record your normal place of work or experience
 Name the organisation you have been working for or identify if not
working
 Brief description of your work role if not working , ensure you describe
the learning activity or what you are claiming represents practice
 Record the date and briefly describe the nature of the learning activity , 
what did you do ? 
 Record the learning outcome you achieved and how this experience
influenced your work . This section will include your personal views 
( reflections ) on how the experience will influence the way you practice . 
Case Study 9 . 1
It is breast cancer awareness month (  . 
org . uk / content . php )  . So , I attended an informal networking learning
lunch where a colleague was sharing her research undertaken a few
years ago , relating to how scientists talk to lay people relating to possible
causes of breast cancer . As a PH nurse with a health promotion role , I was
interested in relating any new perspectives on how we can promote the
health of women . The research involved interviewing and focus group
discussions with the scientists involved in researching breast cancer . 
This included clinicians , toxicologists , policy makers and interested parties . The methodology included face-to-face interviews with prominent
specialists in their fields and data from the focus groups using ‘ graffiti
walls ’  . 
Outcome – how did it relate to your work ? 
The results of the research identified a definite discourse in the opinions
of the researchers ; this in turn influences how public health policy and
messages of health promotion are promoted to women . It made me think
that this would be an excellent example to use with students in relation
to how we use the evidence base for practice . 
The methodology used for the research was interesting as I had never
come across the use of graffiti walls where the members of the focus
groups are asked to put comments under specific questions for their
thoughts and feelings . I thought this was a very quick way to gain quality
data on which to analyse a research question , one which I felt I could
use in my work . I was also alerted to the feminine label attached to the 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Education and Continuing Professional Development 211
 ‘ pinkness ’ of breast cancer . Would this alienate some sufferers ? Not all
women may want to be associated with the ‘ Barbie doll ’ image and indeed
breast cancer does not just affect the female gender . 
The discussions made me think that , although death rates have been
slashed by new drugs and early diagnosis , the incidence of breast cancer
continues to rise . Research continues to be focused around cures not
causes . Public health policy differs in the UK from the United States . I
learned that some states have banned the use of certain substances in
relation to breast cancer . Although the evidence may not be substantial
some states work on the ethos of the precautionary principle where the
evidence of harm rather than the definitive proof of harm prevail . Why
is it that in the UK environmental causes are not taken seriously enough
to warrant extensive research funding ? 
I will use knowledge from this new example of how ‘ business ’ and
management of risk influences public health policy . Like the initiatives
around smoking it had taken a long time to take action against the business empire , maybe in the future banning the use of some deodorants
or use of hormones to feed livestock for consumption which even if not
consumed can still enter the environment may be achieved . My future
health promotion lectures will certainly include details of the ‘ precautionary principle ’ when discussing public policy .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Personal development
You may have difficulty in deciding what to do in relation to education and
professional development at whatever stage your career is at . Everybody
pursuing a learning activity , including any formal course for professional development , needs to be aware what is motivating them . The personal driving forces to achieve will certainly influence the outcome , successful or otherwise . Motivation can come from a variety of sources . Maslow [ 19 ]  , when
discussing motivation and our drive to succeed , believed that there is a hierarchy of human needs from physical needs to spiritual self-actualisation 
( see Chapter 3 )  . Innate personal traits to succeed will also be influenced by
the society in which we live in ; for example , we may need to drink but do
we want water or wine ? Likewise , the organisations in which we work can
also influence our motivation to undertake CPD . The learning organisation
will encourage , praise and reward those individuals willing to go beyond the
boundaries to develop safe and effective practice [ 20 ]  . It is important for you
to identify all the different factors so you can also be aware of the barriers
and challenges you may face and prepare for them . This would increase your
chances of success in any goal you aim for . Case study 9 . 2 is a typical example
of how nurses , who have embraced some form of education , develop their
practice . 
212 Public Health Nursing
Case Study 9 . 2
When I started my nursing career as an SEN in 1979 , I could never have
envisaged either wanting or needing to undertake study to degree level . 
By 1998 , the world of nursing was a very different place and I found
myself having to embark on a degree course in OH in order to continue
to practice this speciality . I did not want to do it and at the time I could
not see the point of doing it , how wrong you can be ? Obtaining my
degree has been akin to a lottery win as far as its effect on my career . I
have gained knowledge and confidence and as a result of this I have had
the courage to develop my practice in very innovative ways . Studying for
my degree inspired a passion within me that I did not know existed . I have
gone on to study at masters level , I have had my work published and I have
developed systems of working within OH that have been acknowledged
by the HSE and the Employers Organisation . I am where I am today
because of education and I would encourage all nurses to embrace the
opportunity to open up their working lives through education .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Pedagogy and andragogy
Pedagogy is defined as the art , science and profession of teaching with andragogy being the term used for the teaching and training of adults [ 21 ]  . 
Education and CPD for the PH nurse will be an andragogical experience and
motivation influences the assumptions made about adult learners . It can be
argued that to be successful in education one needs to be aware of these
differences in education stances . Students describe a feeling of apprehension with some teaching styles ( e . g . seminar work or presenting to groups )  . 
Self-awareness in personal motivation will give you the skill to identify which
learning activity is best suited not just for your practice needs ( knowledge and
skills ) but also for enjoyment of the learning experience . Read Case study 9 . 2
again ; the reflections expressed note how the student ’ s views changed during
their educational experience from ‘ needing to know ’ in order to practice to
having a life-centred orientation to learning , involving problem-solving and
task-centred approaches in relation to developing practice . 
Personal learning styles
CPD is also important for the health promotion role of the PH nurse . Personal
learning styles influence the way we learn , they are the preferential modes in
which a student likes to master learning , thinks or simply reacts in a learning
situation . Honey and Mumford [ 22 ] defined four distinct learning styles or
preferences : activist , pragmatist , theorist and reflector . They recommended
Education and Continuing Professional Development 213
Real occurrence or experience
Collection of information and analysis
Influence on next occurrence Observation and thought
Figure 9 . 2 The learning cycle .  ( Adapted by Elliot .  ) 
that in order to maximise your personal learning each learner ought to understand their learning style and seek out opportunities to learn using that style . 
This is important in our current society where demands are placed on us both
professionally and socially as adult learners , forcing us to prioritise how we
divide our time between home and work . Based upon the work of Kolb ’ s [ 23 ] 
learning cycle ( Figure 9 . 2 )  ( discussed in Welsh and Swann [ 24 ]  ) Honey and
Mumford [ 23 ] argue that identification of your preferred learning style will : 
 Develop your learning skills and processes
 Broaden the type of experiences from which you can gain benefit
 Become smarter at getting a better fit between learning opportunities and
the way you learn the best making learning easier and more enjoyable
E-learning
With e-learning expanding through the first decade of the twenty-first century
it is important to recognise the process of learning that is taking place . In relation to professional practice for the PH nurse the outcome is for safe practice
and quality practice development . E-learning is a quick , efficient and viable
method to undertake continual professional development . Most structured
courses will utilise e-learning and can be an integral part of any course . Known
as ‘ learning objects ’  , when used on the web , the expectation from students is
to absorb information quickly via pictures , text or videos . However , learning is
much more than receiving knowledge , it is about having the ability to reflect
upon an experience , analyse the information and , from the learning , influence
behaviour . Today , the web has moved from being a medium in which information was transmitted and consumed into being a platform from which content is
214 Public Health Nursing
generated , shared , remixed and passed along . Individuals now interact and reflect on the web by having conversations and creating information ( blogging )  . 
People no longer do need to be on formal courses to access various learning
objects as e-learning can be an effective way to contribute towards CPD . 
Online professional discussion groups are an ideal way to share information and to be guided by fellow professionals . One example of many offering
this opportunity within the UK is JISCmail . JISCmail has the mission to facilitate knowledge sharing within the academic community using e-mail and
the web , through provision , support and development of specialist mailing
list-based services , enabling the delivery of high-quality and relevant content . 
JISCmail , or The National Academic Mailing list Service , is funded by JISC 
( www . jisc . ac . uk ) to benefit learning , teaching and research . As with all aspects
of practice the skill of the evidence-based practitioner is particularly pertinent
with this technological revolution in the ability to understand and critique any
evidence in the public domain . 
Academic levels of study
The NMC has stated that a new framework for pre-registration training is to be
developed and will be at the minimum level of a first degree . The curriculum
content and delivery of the training is still at the consultative stage . Currently , 
the minimum level of entry to the third part of the nursing register as a specialist community public health nurse is to have completed a validated academic
course at degree level . Many validated courses for entry onto the third part
of the register offer courses at Post Graduate Diploma level . This gives the
opportunity for the students to progress their academic development if they
already have a first degree in a health-related subject [ 25 ]  . It is important to
note that not all forms of study used for CPD will carry academic credit and
you need to check carefully , dependent on your personal requirements , as
to which academic level any programme of study is awarded . This is also an
important point to check in researching CPD requirement in relation to any
recognised professional qualification required . 
Academic level awards are assessed through attainment of learning objectives . These learning objectives are different dependent on the level of
study undertaken . All Higher Education Institutions are quality assured to ensure their levels of study are equal in order for Credit Accumulation Transfer 
( CATS )  [ 26 ]  . The descriptors in Table 9 . 1 clearly show the different application
of knowledge required for practice at various levels . These are also linked to
agenda for change and knowledge for skills frameworks [ 12 , 13 ]  . 
European quality framework
The commission of the European Communities is working towards the European quality framework ( EQF ) for lifelong learning . In 1999 , along with
Education and Continuing Professional Development 215
Table 9 . 1 The different application of knowledge required at different levels .  
@ 
Award Level CATS Descriptor
Diploma of Higher
Education Foundation
degrees [ 27 ] 
1 and 2 Extends and re-enforces
theoretical / practical aspects
of knowledge
Degree ( may be Hons ) 
1 , 2 and 3 Demonstrates critical analysis
and demonstrates ability in
the manipulation and transfer
of subject material to
demonstrate a solid
understanding of the issues in
both theory and practice
Post Graduate Diploma 
( Masters ) 
M Demostrates independent
thought , synthesis of ideas
and the generation of
alternative views and
information
Doctoral Degree PhD Original contribution to field
of knowledge
28 European countries , the UK Government signed the Bologna Declaration , 
demonstrating a willingness to develop and cooperate in the European Higher 
( HE ) Education Arena [ 28 ]  . The education ministers agreed that there would
be a common structure of HE across Europe by 2010 . In 1999 , it was agreed
that all university qualifications would be transparent to employers and comparable . This was to increase student mobility across the European Union and
work opportunities . The Bologna Declaration also affected vocational courses
and the Tuning project is looking at the harmonisation of nursing courses
including post-registration [ 29 ]  . 
Cognitive skills
Cognitive skills ( thinking skills ) are assessed alongside practical skills for validated courses by the NMC , examples of cognitive skills are : 
 Knowledge
 Comprehension
 Application
 Analysis
 Synthesis
 Evaluation
It is clear that for these cognitive skills to be addressed they must be parallel
to practical skills . The NMC validated courses for entry to the SCPHN register
216 Public Health Nursing
require 50% theory and 50% practice . Quality and standards of the courses
are reviewed regularly and aim to ensure students completing these courses
are fit to practice . One of the incentives for using a portfolio within professional
practice is to link the theory to practice and to be able to assess academic
level [ 30 ]  . 
SCPH nurses are expected to be able to consider broader issues that influence the health and well-being of their populations . This involves being able
to identify health indicators such as poverty , social inequity based on gender , 
ethnicity , race , sexual orientation , physical and mental ability and other indicators leading to inequality of health particularly that of a political nature [ 31 ]  
( see Chapter 2 )  . This is why the education of PH nurses needs to be at degree
level ensuring competency in cognitive skills of problem solving resulting in
political competence , action and activism to influence practice rather than just
in clinical skills . 
The need for evidence-based practice
Within the complex and rapidly changing environment for SCPHN , it is essential
that practice is informed by the best available evidence . This commitment is
reflected in the standards of proficiency . It includes searching the evidence
base , analysing , critiquing , using research and other forms of evidence in
practice , and disseminating research findings and adapting practice where
necessary . The ability to synthesise new knowledge into practice , applying it
to all areas of work where it is relevant and likely to be effective , must be
reflected in all we do . 
PH nurses need the knowledge and skills to be able to identify the reliability
and validity of any information to develop , implement , evaluate and improve
practice on the basis of any research . These cognitive skills which are then
demonstrated in competent practice include being able to : 
 Evaluate existing evidence and effectively apply to practice
 Appraise a range of research methods and other forms of generating evidence
 Demonstrate ability to utilise IT skills in databases , bibliographic packages
and appreciate methods of data analysis
 Examine clinical issues from the students ’ practice , or that of others , using
a systematic problem-solving approach
 Demonstrate knowledge of the sources and key concepts of evidence and
how to assist clients in interpreting evidence
The standards of proficiency must , therefore , reflect a breadth of practice
and of learning , at a level commensurate with the specialist nature of community public health nursing practice . This requires an ability to assess risk
in complex situations ; to develop effective relationships based on trust and
openness ; to work flexibly with other services in a range of settings ; to deal
Education and Continuing Professional Development 217
with conflicting priorities and ambiguous situations ; and knowing when to use
different and sometimes contradictory theories and perspectives . In order to
achieve this PH nurse needs to demonstrate critical thinking . 
Critical thinking and reflective practice
It is not sufficient simply to have an experience in order to learn . Without
reflecting upon this experience it may quickly be forgotten , or its learning potential lost . It is from the feelings and thoughts emerging from this
reflection that generalisations or concepts can be generated . And it is generalisations that allow new situations to be tackled effectively [ 32 ]  . 
All the previous discussions point to the need for proficient specialist nurse
practitioners to demonstrate competency in critical thinking in order to practice competently and develop . So what does it mean to be critical ? What does
it mean to be a critical thinker in order to practice effectively and contribute to
practice development as the standards state ? A critical thinker never accepts
what they have read or what they have experienced without further investigation . They are motivated and excited to probe and enquire ‘ why is that ?  ’ 
A critical thinker will want to know how that information came to be . In the
case of any research , the methodologies will be critically reviewed . Was that
the best research method to obtain the answer to the question under investigation ? In the case of practice issues the question to be answered is ‘ why
do we do that ?  ’ In the case of any experience we should be asking ‘ what can
I learn from this ?  ’ Eventually , the critical thinker will be generating their own
ideas as they investigate different phenomena to which they are exposed to
and ultimately influence practice . In relation to learning through experience , 
a critical thinker will be analysing every angle of their exposure to a learning
experience to explain why it happened as it did and how can we get it better
next time ? The learning experience may be as a result of a good experience
or an experience leaving uncomfortable feelings . 
Reflection and reflective learning are similar ; reflective writing is capturing
reflection and reflective practice is a term used in academic practice in many
different ways . Reflection is a form of mental processing – like a form of thinking – that we use to fulfil a purpose or to achieve some anticipated outcome 
( learning to develop practice )  . It can be applied to relatively complicated or unstructured ideas for which there is not an obvious solution and is largely based
on the further processing of knowledge and understanding and emotions that
we already possess [ 33 ]  . Reflective narrative is capturing these unstructured
ideas , almost like in a movie to enable us to return to the event . Very often
this is the narrative found in reflective journals used by many practitioners . 
It is the reflections within your portfolios that capture the learning and is the
evidence of CPD as required for PREP [ 18 ]  . 
Reflection is widely accepted as one of the main tools within any education to promote learning and critical analysis [ 32 ]  . We tend to use reflection
218 Public Health Nursing
when we are trying to make sense of how diverse ideas fit together , when
we are trying to relate new ideas to what we already know or when new
ideas challenge what we already know ( i . e . taking a deep approach to learning )  . Reflection is the process we use when working with material that is
presented in an unstructured manner often trying to create order from
chaos . 
It is often useful to utilise a model of reflection to provide guidance of the
process . Most of us will say we reflect all the time but may never have ‘ captured
the evidence ’ of doing so . Some practitioners may favour a particular model
to use within their profiles to document their learning and CPD . Models can be
useful to guide us through the process particularly if a beginner . 
Johns ’  [ 34 ] reflective cycle can be used to guide us through six stages of
reflection : 
 Description : What happened ? What , where and when ? Who did / said what , 
what did you do / read / see hear ? In what order did things happen ? What
were the circumstances ? What were you responsible for ? 
 Feelings : What were you thinking about ? What was your initial gut reaction , 
and what does this tell you ? Did your feelings change ? What were you
thinking ? 
 Evaluation : What was good or bad about the experience ? What pleased , 
interested or was important to you ? What made you unhappy ? What difficulties were there ? Who / what was unhelpful ? Why ? What needs improvement ? 
 Analysis : What sense can you make of the situation ? Compare theory and
practice . What similarities or differences are there between this experience
and other experiences ? Think about what actually happened . What choices
did you make and what effect did they have ? 
 Conclusion : What else could you have done ? What have you learnt for the
future ? What else could you have done ? 
 Action plan : If it arose again what would you do ? What would you do next
time ? 
Johns ’ model of reflection [ 34 ] was originally developed for nursing practitioners . Johns suggests that the ‘ Model for Structured Reflection ’ is a technique that is especially useful in the early stages of learning how to reflect . 
It is a model which offers guidance to look at the influencing factors within
an experience to enable the practitioner to become reflexive , demonstrate
critical analysis and create new knowledge : 
Looking in : 
 Find a space to focus on self
 Pay attention to your thoughts and emotions
 Write down these thoughts and emotions
Education and Continuing Professional Development 219
Looking out : 
 Write a description of the situation
 What issues seem significant ? 
 Aesthetics
 What was I trying to achieve ? 
◦ Why did I respond as I did ? 
◦ What were the consequences for me and others ? 
◦ How were others feeling ? 
◦ How did I know this ? 
 Personal
◦ Why did I feel the way I did within this situation ? 
 Ethics
◦ Did I act for the best ? 
 What factors were influencing me ? 
 What knowledge did or could have informed me ? 
 Reflexivity
◦ How does this situation relate to previous experiences ? 
◦ How could I have handled this better ? 
◦ What would have been the consequences of alternative actions ? 
◦ How do I feel now about the experience ? 
◦ How can I support myself and others better in the future ? 
Clinical supervision and clinical governance
Johns [ 34 ] argues strongly of the benefits of reflecting within a group with
the use of a facilitator . This philosophy can be seen in the clinical supervision
models as a remit of clinical governance [ 35 ]  . There are many definitions of
clinical supervision ; however , it is generally seen as the participation in regular
reflection to provide professional support and enhance development . Clinical
supervision is non-hierarchical and should be distinguished from management
supervisions , performance appraisals and case load supervision such as child
protection . It is not to be confused with any form of counselling or incident
debriefing . The Department of Health states that in order to enhance the delivery of care nurses must participate in clinical supervision . Clinical supervision
contributes to lifelong learning and is a clear demonstration of an individual
exercising their responsibility under clinical governance [ 37 ]  . Braine [ 38 ] discusses CPD as a process of lifelong learning that supports clinical governance
by ensuring that skills and knowledge are developed and that areas of practice which require development can be identified through reflection . Not all
PH nurses will be working within the NHS but the principles of clinical governance to health care professionals wherever they work . They are supported
by the NMC and are good practice . The various models available need to be
adapted to suit the work areas in which you practice . Three models of clinical
supervision can be seen below . 
220 Public Health Nursing
Educative ( formative ) 
 How to develop an understanding of skills and ability
 How to understand the client better
 How to develop awareness of reaction and reflection on interventions
 How to explore other ways of working
Supportive ( restorative ) 
 Exploring the emotional reaction to pain , conflict and other feelings during
patient care can reduce burn out
Managerial ( normative ) 
 How to address quality issues
 How to ensure nurses work reach appropriate standards
PH nurses will be employed in a variety of work organisations both within and
outside NHS then creativity is required in order to achieve the best opportunity
to ensure clinical supervision takes place . The RCN recommends various ways
to create opportunities for personal or peer clinical supervision [ 39 ]  : 
 Utilise local specialist interest groups ( these may even be online forums ) 
 Meeting with nurses from other organisations ( it is within the standards
to register as a specialist community public health nurse to undertake a
minimum three weeks alternative practice within the training programme , 
many students on qualification commit to continue this practice for support
and bench-marking purposes ) 
 Consider the opportunities for supervision with other professionals ( this will
contribute to the multidisciplinary working remit for public health needs of
the population group ) 
 Using formal facilitated group supervision
 Using personal colleagues on a one-to-one basis
Whichever model is utilised , clinical supervision is supported by the NMC
and fits into the CPD requirements for PREP . 
Below is a short extract from a student ’ s reflection . This piece demonstrates
how critical reflection can aid learning and move practice forward . 
Case Study 9 . 3
The company was experiencing vast changes . The disbandment of local
Human Resource departments in favour of a central shared service centre in another region left groups and individuals feeling vulnerable and
disorientated . 
I analysed my feelings and what I was experiencing with this transition . 
I went from working within a team to an autonomous lone practitioner
where I was pushing personal comfort boundaries and growing into 
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Education and Continuing Professional Development 221
the role of a SCPHN OH . Similarly , groups and individuals were experiencing the similar dilemmas . Even more changes were thrust upon
them as they were taking ownership of sickness absence management
at a local management level . I identified change was a major issue
here for all involved . I applied what was happening using Tuckman ’ s
model of group development . My role within the organisation was
still forming . Line managers however were displaying characteristics
of the storming phase where as a group they had become polarized
and sub groups were forming which manifested as varying degrees
of resistance to my efforts to improve the standard of the OH referral forms . Tuckman describes this as reactions to power distribution
and some resistance to the task . Similarly , Lewin acknowledges such
a status quo as an existing equilibrium and identifies how one has to
unfreeze such an existing equilibrium to enable the moving on to a
new point . Lewin describes further the dynamics of change identifying
that it was often met with a force field of both driving and restraining
forces . In my case a driving force had emerged at government and
organisational level , which required a new way of conducting sickness
absence management , and it was essential for line managers to take
ownership of this to ensure success . 
Boud and Walker discuss that the responsible professional needs
to master the ability to learn from their experiences and more importantly translate that learning into applied action identifying how
essential reflective skills have become for me in my journey to become a SCPHNOH .  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
.  
. 
Note how her style of reflection has moved beyond the immediate picture 
( the current system of sickness absence management referral to OH not working effectively , preventing her performing her role to an appropriate standard
as a SCPHN )  . Her journal or diary entry for the day may well have included
a description of what happened , factual , related to practice , perhaps even
recording her feelings . These further reflections are seeking out explanations , 
the answers to why the referral process is not working . The practitioner is
looking at other influences on the situation and finding meaning by linking the
theory of Tuckman [ 40 ] and Lewin ’ s [ 41 ] change management . This is demonstrating how there is a ‘ stepping back ’ from the events and actions which led
to the different level of discourse . There is a sense of ‘ mulling about ’  , discourse with self and an exploration of the role of self in events and actions . 
There is consideration of the qualities of judgements and possible alternatives
for explaining and hypothesising . The reflection is analytical and integrative , 
linking factors and perspectives . This critical reflection has also evidenced an
awareness of multiple perspectives with a sociopolitical context . 
Using reflection the student practitioner was able to analyse the situation
and identify a suitable course of action to successfully work within a changing
environment . 
222 Public Health Nursing
Permission was granted to reproduce the above reflective writing , however , all practitioners need to be aware of their legal standing in relation to
confidentiality and reflective practice . The RCN states that where clinical supervision is required in a contract of employment the records belong to the
employer and could be used in a disciplinary procedure . If it is not part of
the contract of employment then the practitioner holds the records and confidentiality can be maintained as per the code of practice . For this reason it
is important for the practitioner to agree what is documented within clinical
supervision . 
Contributing to the CPD of self and others
The new code , standards of conduct , performance and ethics for nurses and
midwives [ 42 ] specifically relates to our role of assisting in the professional
development of colleagues in order to improve standards of care and to the
requirement for our own professional development . 
 You must facilitate students and colleagues to develop their competence
 You must be willing to share your skills and experience for the benefit of
your colleagues
 You must deliver care based on the best available evidence or practice
 You must keep your knowledge and skills up to date throughout your working life
 You must take part in appropriate learning and practice activities that maintain and develop your competence and performance
The NMC supports practitioners through lifelong learning to enable them to
practice in an environment which is constantly changing . In the field of PH as
with all health professional roles it is imperative to develop professional knowledge and competence to cope with the demands of increasing technological
advances in treatment , equipment and reorganisation of resources . The NMC
recognises that newly qualified registrants on any part of the register need
the support and guidance of a more experienced professional colleague as
they find their feet in practice . This would also apply to those returning to
practice after a break of five years or more . The NMC believes that newly
registered nurses need a period of preceptorship ( minimum period of four
months )  [ 43 ]  . A preceptorship period is also required for newly qualified SCPH
nurses . 
Standards to support learning and assessment in practice are the nursing
and midwifery standards for mentors , practice teachers and teachers [ 44 ]  . 
All student SCPH nurses have to be assessed and supported in practice by a
qualified practice teacher who is qualified in the same area of practice in which
the student is studying . All current qualified practitioners have the opportunity
to support students and contribute to the development and standards of the
Education and Continuing Professional Development 223
public health nursing workforce . Indeed , without the continued support from
current practitioners the public health workforce would not develop . 
The framework defines and describes the knowledge and skills nurses and
midwives need to apply in practice when they support and assess students
undertaking NMC-approved programmes . It is important to understand these
standards in order to support students and colleagues . The developmental
framework and underpinning principles of the standards have been designed
to allow personal and professional development . The domains and outcomes
enable nurses and midwives to plan and measure their achievement and
progress . The framework allows practitioners to map their previous learning
experiences to the new standards in order to readily identify their personal
learning needs : 
Stage 1 reflects the requirements of the code ; standards of conduct , performance and ethics for nurses and midwives [ 44 ]  . All nurses and midwives
must meet this defined requirement in particular :  ‘ you must , help students
and others to develop their competencies ’  . 
Stage 2 identifies the standards for mentors . This qualification is recorded on
a local register of mentors and sign off mentors . 
Stage 3 identifies the standards required of the practice teacher for assessing a SCPHN is fit to enter that part of the register . Some commissioners
of education also require the specialist qualification programme to use a
practice teacher for assessment , e . g . district nursing . This qualification is
also recorded on a local register . 
Stage 4 identifies the standard for a teacher of nursing and this is recordable
with the NMC . 
Figure 9 . 3 shows the stages , principles and domains of the standards to
support learning and assessment in practice . 
Domains
1
1
Mentor 2
Stages
Five
principles
A B C D E
Practice teacher
Teacher
Registrant
3
4
23 4
5678
Figure 9 . 3 The stages , principles and domains of the standards to support
learning and assessment in practice ( adapted from NMC [ 14 ]  )  . 
224 Public Health Nursing
Box 9 . 3 shows the NMC ’ s stages , principles and domains of the standards
required to support learning and assessment in practice . 
Box 9 . 3 The NMC stages , principles and domains
of the standards to support learning and
assessment in practice
Principle A states that the nurses and midwives who make judgments
need to be on the same part of the register or sub-register as that which
the student is wanting to enter
Principle B states that they must have developed their knowledge , skills
and competency beyond that of initial registration through CPD either
formal or informal
Principle C states that they will hold an appropriate level of professional
qualification to support and assess the students they mentor / teach 
( equal to or higher ) 
Principle D requires that they have been prepared for their role
Principle E states that those who have completed a teacher ’ s qualification to NMC standards may record the qualification with the NMC . 
The domains refer to the key areas of knowledge to which competencies
have to be achieved in order to reach the differing stages . 
The domains are :  
( 1 ) Establishing effective working relationships 
( 2 ) Facilitation of learning 
( 3 ) Assessment and accountability 
( 4 ) Evaluation of learning 
( 5 ) Create an environment for learning 
( 6 ) Context of practice 
( 7 ) Evidence-based practice 
( 8 ) Leadership
Due to the lack of qualified practice teachers in some pathways for the
SCPHN ( especially occupational health )  , the assessment of the specialist skills
is done by a registrant and shared accountability with a qualified practice
teacher is required for confirmation of overall proficiency to enter the third
part of the register as a SCPHN [ 44 ]  . 
Summary
To summarise , education and CPD is the responsibility of every nurse , midwife
and SCPHN . However , because PH is growing at an astonishing speed due
to public health need and the political drivers it is imperative that practicing
professionals and those students of PH nursing contribute to the development
Education and Continuing Professional Development 225
of self and others following the philosophy of the multidisciplinary team for
optimum benefit of resources and quality of service to the users . 
In this climate of reduced resources it is evident that all opportunities for
development need to be grasped and education does not always have a monetary cost . Any learning can be valued for CPD whether it is from watching a
television programme , surfing the web or a discussion with colleagues . What
does require the skill is to be able to reflect and identify the learning that
has taken place ; this skill can be learned and developed . Education for CPD
should be as exciting to the professional as the kaleidoscope is to a child . In
seeking for the different shapes and views , even creating the views , we strive
to enhance the quality of our practice in public health . 