THE CONTRIBUTORS 
ELLEN L. BARTON , JD, CPCU, DFASHRM, principal, ERM Strategies LLC, is an 
independent consultant. Previously, she held positions as vice president, risk management, MedStar Health, Inc., an integrated health care delivery system (1999 – 2000); 
vice president, claims and health care practice leader, Aon Risk Services, Inc., of 
Maryland (1998 – 1999); vice president, legal services for American Radiology 
Services, Inc. (1997 – 1998); and vice president and general Counsel of New American 
Health, Inc. (1996 – 1997). She served as president, Neumann Insurance Company, and 
director of risk management, Franciscan Health System (1987 – 1996). She also served 
as general counsel for Franciscan Health System (1993 – 1996) and as senior vice president, legal services (1994 – 1996). Barton sat on the board of directors and served as 
chairperson of Preferred Physicians Insurance Company, a Nebraska stock insurance 
company; Consolidated Catholic Casualty Risk Retention Group, Inc., a Vermont -
 based captive insurance company; and Alternative Insurance Management Services, 
Inc., a captive insurance company management fi rm based in Colorado. Barton also 
served as a member of the Trinity Health System Insurance Management Advisory 
Committee. She is a graduate of Rosemont College and received her JD degree from 
the University of Cincinnati. She is also a chartered property and casualty underwriter. 
Barton has conducted numerous seminars on risk management issues on a national as 
well as regional level and has published articles in related areas. She is admitted to the 
bars in Ohio, Maryland, and Pennsylvania and holds membership in the Maryland Bar 
Association, the Society of Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriters; the 
American Health Lawyers Association, in which she currently serves as chairperson 
of the Risk Management Affi nity Group of the Hospitals and Health Systems Practice 
Group; the Maryland Society for Healthcare Risk Management, of which she was 
president in 2002 – 2003, and the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, 
of which she was president in 1990. She is also the 1993 recipient of the Distinguished 
Service Award of the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM). 
In 2001, the ASHRM Modules Program, the Barton Certifi cate in Healthcare Risk 
Management, was named in her honor. 
ROBERTA L. CARROLL , RN, ARM, CPCU, MBA, CPHRM, CPHQ, LHRM, HEM, 
DFASHRM, is senior vice president, Aon Healthcare, based in Tampa, Florida. 
Previously she was director of Risk Management Consulting Services and senior vice 
president and manager of the health care unit, Aon Risk Services of Northern 
California. She has held a variety of positions, including vice president of risk and 
fbetw.indd xiii 3/2/09 1:54:38 PM
xiv The Contributors 
insurance management for UniHealth in Burbank, California; senior vice president 
and manager of the health care unit for Corroon & Black of Illinois; vice president of 
risk management, claims, and marketing for Premier Alliance Insurance Company; 
trust administrator and risk manager for Premier Hospitals Alliance in Chicago; and 
director of risk management at Mount Sinai Medical Center, Miami Beach, Florida. 
Carroll served on the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM) 
board for six years and was president in 1995 – 1996. She was elected to the board of 
the Southern California Association for Healthcare Risk Management (SCAHRM) 
and was one of the founding members, fi rst president, and board member of the Florida 
Society for Healthcare Risk Management and Patient Safety (FSHRMPS). In addition, 
she was one of the founders and an offi cer of the Florida Medical Malpractice Claims 
Council, Inc. (FMMCCI). She is a licensed healthcare risk manager (LHRM) in the 
state of Florida and faculty member for the health care risk management course at the 
University of South Florida (USF). Carroll is also a faculty member for the ASHRM -
 sponsored Barton Certifi cate program “ Essentials ” module. Previously, she was a faculty member for Module 1, “ The Fundamentals of Health Care Risk Management: 
Constructing the Comprehensive Program, ” for eight years. Carroll received a bachelor of science degree in health services administration and a certifi cate in emergency 
medical services systems administration from Florida International University and a 
master of business degree from Nova Southeastern University. She has earned the right 
to use the ARM, CPCU, HEM, CPHQ, and CPHRM designations. She is editor of the 
Risk Management Handbook for Health Care Organizations ’ second (1997), third 
(2000), and fourth (2004) editions and the series editor for the fi fth (2006) and student 
(2009) editions. Carroll has received numerous awards: in 1997, ASHRM ’ s highest 
honor, the Distinguished Service Award (DSA); 1998 Distinguished Alumni 
Achievement Award from the School of Business and Entrepreneurship, Nova 
Southeastern University; Most Contributing Member to Risk Management in 1996 
from the SCAHRM; and Most Valuable Contribution to the Field of Risk Management 
in 1993 from that same organization. She is a member of ASHRM, FSHRMPS, and 
the Publication Committee of the Risk Management Affi nity Group (RMAG) of the 
American Health Lawyers Associations (AHLA). She is a well - known author, speaker, 
and educator in the areas of alternative risk fi nancing, risk mitigation strategies and 
solutions, claims administration, early intervention programs, enterprise risk management (ERM), strategic planning, and reengineering. Her activities are on a local, state, 
and national level. Her professional and committee activities are numerous. 
HEDY COHEN , RN, BSN, MS, vice president for the Institute for Safe Medication 
Practices (ISMP). She received an associate of arts degree in nursing from Bucks 
County Community College in Newtown, Pennsylvania; a bachelor of science in nursing from LaSalle University in Philadelphia; a master ’ s degree in health systems 
administration from Rochester Institute for Technology, in Rochester, New York; and 
is presently a doctoral candidate in health policy at the University of the Sciences in 
Philadelphia. Her clinical nursing background of more than eighteen years was focused 
fbetw.indd xiv 3/2/09 1:54:38 PM
The Contributors xv
in critical care and nursing management. She is a frequent speaker for health care 
organizations on current issues in medication safety and has written numerous articles 
on improving the medication use process. She also edits ISMP ’ s monthly newsletter, 
Nurse Advise - ERR; cowrote a handbook on high - alert drugs; and is on the national 
advisory board for the Nursing Advance Journal and Davis ’ s Drug Guide for Nurses. 
Cohen has been appointed adjunct associate professor at Temple School of Pharmacy 
and faculty fellow in the Executive Patient Safety Fellowship, which is offered through 
Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond. She also serves as a medication 
error clinical analyst for the Pennsylvania Safety Authority ’ s reporting program. 
MARK COHEN , ARM, RPLU, CPHQ, CPHRM, DFASHRM, risk management consultant, Sutter Health Risk Services. Cohen began his career in risk management in 
1982 at the UCLA Medical Center and Center for the Health Sciences and was subsequently appointed director of risk management. In 1987, he moved to Sacramento to 
become director of risk management for the University of California, Davis Health 
System. Cohen joined Sutter Health as a corporate risk management consultant in 
1995. He provides a broad range of risk management consultation services to Sutter 
Health ’ s not - for - profi t network of acute - care hospitals; physician organizations; medical research facilities; regionwide home health, hospice, and occupational health networks; and long - term care centers that serve more than one hundred Northern 
California communities. Cohen writes and lectures on Emergency Medical Treatment 
and Labor Act (EMTALA) compliance and is a member of the faculty of the California 
Healthcare Association ’ s annual EMTALA seminars. He is a past president of both the 
Southern California Association for Healthcare Risk Management (SCAHRM) and 
the California Society for Healthcare Risk Management (CSHRM), and served as a 
member of ASHRM ’ s board in 2002 and 2003. He currently serves on the board of the 
Sacramento Risk Management Forum and the South Natomas Transit Management 
Association. Cohen has served on the faculty of ASHRM ’ s “ Modules ” and “ Essentials ” 
and CPHRM study session programs and on several ASHRM committees, most notably as longtime chair of the Online Education Committee. 
DOMINIC A. COLAIZZO , MBA, is managing director of Aon ’ s National Healthcare 
Alternative Risk Practice, based in Philadelphia. He is responsible for directing Aon 
resources for the development, implementation, and servicing of alternative risk transfer programs for the health care industry. His sixteen years of experience in health care 
administration and nineteen years of broking and consulting experience with Aon have 
provided him with a broad understanding of the issues faced by all health care providers. He had served as chief operating offi cer and senior vice president of a community 
hospital and has held various administrative positions in a major teaching hospital. He 
has extensive experience in developing and servicing alternative risk fi nancing and 
innovative insurance programs for profi t and not - for - profi t health systems, health 
insurers, managed care organizations, extended care organizations, and physicians ’ 
groups. Colaizzo also serves as a key adviser for Aon ’ s National Healthcare Practice. 
fbetw.indd xv 3/2/09 1:54:39 PM
xvi The Contributors 
He has earned a master of business administration for the Leonard Davis Institute for 
Health Economics at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. He has 
also earned a bachelor of arts degree in economics and mathematics from Washington 
and Jefferson College. Colaizzo is a diplomate of the American College of Health 
Care Executives and holds memberships in the American Society for Healthcare Risk 
Management (ASHRM), the American Hospital Association, and the Health Care 
Financial Association. He serves on the faculty for professional development seminars 
and has cowritten an article for the ASHRM Journal titled, “ Integrating Quality with 
Risk Financing Through a Risk Retention Group. ” 
HARLAN Y. HAMMOND JR. , MBA, ARM, CPHRM, DFASHRM, assistant vice 
president for risk management services, Intermountain Healthcare, Salt Lake City, 
Utah. His responsibilities include oversight for Intermountain ’ s risk fi nancing, loss 
prevention, loss control, and claims administration efforts and safety, security, and 
systemwide emergency response. Hammond received his bachelor ’ s degree in business administration from the University of Utah, followed by a master ’ s of business 
administration degree from the University of Washington. Hammond has served in 
various capacities with ASHRM, including twice as a member of the ASHRM board 
of directors and as a faculty member for the Barton Certifi cate in Healthcare Risk 
Management program. He received ASHRM ’ s Distinguished Service Award in 2000. 
MONICA HANSLOVAN , JD, formerly was an associate of Horty, Springer & Mattern, 
PC, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. She focuses her practice exclusively on hospital and 
health care law, with particular emphasis on medical staff matters. She advises clients 
on a wide range of medical staff issues, including development of, analysis of, and 
proposed revisions to medical staff bylaws and related documents; development of 
hospital and medical staff policies; and management of issues related to protection of 
peer review documents and sharing of confi dential peer review and credentialing information. Hanslovan received her doctor of law degree magna cum laude from Widener 
University School of Law and her bachelor of arts with high distinction from 
Pennsylvania State University. She is a member of the Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, 
and American Bar Associations and the American Health Lawyers Association. 
JUDY HART is executive vice president of Endurance Specialty Insurance, Ltd., and 
heads the company ’ s health care practice. Hart has more than thirty years of experience in the insurance industry and has been dedicated to health care risk fi nancing for 
the past twenty - six years. She spent most of her career at Alexander & Alexander 
Services, where she was a managing director and deputy national director of health 
care practice. During that time, she participated in the development of alternative risk 
fi nancing programs for health care organizations across the United States. Before joining Endurance, she spent four years as vice president of Employers Reinsurance 
Corporation, where she was responsible for marketing, new product development, and 
the development of health care strategies and was a member of the health care senior 
fbetw.indd xvi 3/2/09 1:54:39 PM
The Contributors xvii
leadership team. She is the current president of the Bermuda Society for Healthcare 
Risk Management. She is a frequent speaker and author on risk management issues 
associated with risk fi nancing, managed care, and the evolving risks facing health care 
providers. She attended Southeast Missouri State University and Washington University 
in Saint Louis, Missouri. 
PETER J. HOFFMAN , JD, is a partner of the Philadelphia law fi rm of McKissock & 
Hoffman, PC. He received his bachelor of arts degree from Washington and Jefferson 
College, his master of arts from the State University of New York Graduate School of 
Public Affairs, and his doctor of law degree cum laude from Temple University School 
of Law, where he was the executive editor of the Law Review. Hoffman was a member of 
the Pennsylvania Select Committee on Medical Malpractice from 1984 to 1986. He was 
a member of Governor Edward Rendell ’ s Medical Malpractice Task Force and is currently counsel to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Patient Safety Authority. He is a 
past president of the Pennsylvania Defense Institute. He was the recipient of the 
Defense Research Institute ’ s Exceptional Performance Citation in 1989 and the Fred 
H. Sievert Award in 1989. Hoffman was a coauthor of the book Laws and Regulations 
Affecting Medical Practice. He was chairman of Hearing Committee 1.15, Supreme 
Court of Pennsylvania Disciplinary Board, from 1993 to 1998 and serves on the faculty for the Temple University School of Law, Masters of Laws in Trial Advocacy, and 
Academy of Advocacy. He has been listed as a top attorney in Philadelphia Magazine 
each time the article appears and has been listed in Best Lawyers in America since 
1995. He was cited as one of the top hundred lawyers in Pennsylvania in Pennsylvania 
Super Lawyers, 2004 and 2005. Hoffman was a member of the Temple Inns of Court. 
He is a member of ASHRM, a Fellow of the International Academy of Trial Lawyers, 
of the American College of Trial Lawyers, and of the American Board of Trial 
Advocates. 
JOHN HORTY , JD, is the managing partner of Horty, Springer & Mattern, PC, and 
the editor of all HortySpringer publications. He presently serves as chair of the 
board and a faculty member of the Estes Park Institute in Englewood, Colorado, 
and president and chair of the Indigo Institute in Washington, D.C. He is an honorary fellow of the American College of Hospital Executives, a recipient of the Award 
of Honor of the American Hospital Association, and an Honorary Life Member of 
the American Hospital Association. He is a founding member of the American 
Academy of Hospital Attorneys; a past board member of the Hospital Association 
of Pennsylvania, the Health Alliance of Pennsylvania, and the Hospital Council of 
Western Pennsylvania; and was chair of Saint Francis Central Hospital in Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, from 1971 to 1999. 
SANDRA K. JOHNSON , RN, ARM, LHRM, FSHRM, is director of risk services for 
Broward Health in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. She began her career in risk management 
twenty - eight years ago, working for PHICO Insurance Group, Inc., in Mechanicsburg, 
fbetw.indd xvii 3/2/09 1:54:40 PM
xviii The Contributors 
Pennsylvania. Past positions include director, risk and insurance, for Keystone Health 
System in Drexel Hill, Pennsylvania; director, risk and insurance, at Holy Cross 
Hospital in Fort Lauderdale, Florida; and system director of risk management at 
Intracoastal Health System, West Palm Beach, Florida. She has served on many 
ASHRM committees and as a faculty member of the 1988 annual conference and 
nominations committee. She has served two terms on the ASHRM board of directors. 
While in Philadelphia, she held various offi cer and committee positions with the 
Philadelphia Area Society for Healthcare Risk Management and the Pennsylvania 
Association of Health Care Risk Management. She has also been recognized on three 
occasions for outstanding contributions to the fi eld of risk management by the 
Philadelphia Area Society for Healthcare Risk Management and the Pennsylvania 
Association of Health Care Risk Management. She is a past president and a board 
member of the Florida Society for Healthcare Risk Management and Patient Safety 
and was reelected as president for 2008 – 2009 term. Johnson is a member of the advisory board for the journal, Healthcare Risk Management, published by American 
Health Consultants, and has held positions on the Broward County Risk and Insurance 
Management Society board of directors. She was awarded the ARM designation in 
1990 and the FASHRM designation in 1991. She is a licensed health care risk manager 
(LHRM) in the state of Florida. 
TRISTA JOHNSON , PhD, MPH, is the director of performance measurement and 
analysis for Allina Hospitals and Clinics. Johnson provides coordinated, accurate analysis and results to drive organizational improvement. Previously, she served as the 
director of patient safety and coordinated initiatives and measurements across the 
eleven hospitals and forty - four clinics in the Allina system. She was involved in 
the creation of a standard data collection tool and taxonomy for patient safety events 
and continues to work with this system through analysis of the data and use of the 
results in safety collaboratives. A few examples of collaboratives conducted while 
leading patient safety include falls prevention, teamwork and patient safety, insulin 
safety, and the IHI trigger tool analysis. Johnson serves as a member of the Minnesota 
Alliance for Patient Safety (MAPS), which is involved in implementing the mandatory 
statewide reporting of the twenty - seven National Quality Forum events. She completed 
her doctoral work on the application of epidemiology to the study of medical errors. 
LEILANI KICKLIGHTER , RN, ARM, MBA, CPHRM, DFASHRM, principal, the 
Kicklighter Group, is an independent consultant offering health care risk management, 
patient safety consulting, and stress management education. She serves as a risk management consultant to ambulatory surgery centers and is the course coordinator and 
instructor for the health care risk management online certifi cate course offered by the 
University of South Florida. This is a preparatory course laying the foundation for 
licensure in Florida as a health care risk manager. Most recently, she served as the corporate director of risk management services and patient safety offi cer for a large long -
 term care and skilled nursing facility. Previously, she was a health care risk management 
fbetw.indd xviii 3/2/09 1:54:40 PM
The Contributors xix
consultant with a large global insurance broker and consulted throughout the United 
States and internationally. Kicklighter began her career as a registered nurse. Her 
experience in health care risk management spans more than thirty years and has 
afforded her experience in a variety of health care organizational settings, including a 
large teaching hospital, a university medical school, a large multispecialty clinic, a for -
 profi t community hospital, a not - for - profi t integrated health care multifacility system, 
and a large HMO. She has been a member of the American Society for Healthcare 
Risk Management (ASHRM), since its inception, serving on numerous committees, 
the board of directors, and as president in 1997 – 1998. Kicklighter has been awarded 
the DFASHRM designation from ASHRM. She is the past president and board member of the Florida Society for Healthcare Risk Management and Patient Safety. She 
has a master ’ s in business administration from Nova Southeastern University and has 
earned designations as an associate in risk management (ARM) and a certifi ed professional in health care risk management (CPHRM). Kicklighter is a licensed health care 
risk manager (LHRM) in the state of Florida. She is a well - known author and lecturer 
in the fi elds of infection control and risk management on the local, state, national, and 
international levels. 
JANE J. MCCAFFREY , MHSA, DFASHRM, is the director of Quality Management 
Services at Self Regional Healthcare in Greenwood, South Carolina. She has developed risk management programs at several South Carolina hospitals over the past 
twenty years. McCaffrey has served twice as president of the American Society for 
Healthcare Risk Management (1985 and 2003). She participates on several state - level 
patient safety and risk committees and was a faculty member for fundamentals of risk 
management for over a decade. McCaffrey received ASHRM ’ s Distinguished Service 
Award in 1994. She also serves on the editorial advisory boards for ECRI ’ s newsletter 
Risk Management Reporter and American Healthcare Consultants ’ Healthcare Risk 
Management. In 2005, she became a member of Health Research and Educational 
Trust ’ s 2005 – 2006 Patient Safety Leadership Fellowship Class. 
DENISE MURPHY , RN, BSN, MPH, CIC, Vice President and chief safety and quality 
offi cer at Barnes - Jewish Hospital JC Healthcare in Saint Louis. Before taking that 
position, she spent seven years as director of health care epidemiology and patient 
safety for BJC HealthCare. Murphy went to nursing school in Philadelphia, received 
her bachelor of science in nursing in Portland, Maine, and holds a master of public 
health degree from the Saint Louis University School of Public Health. Murphy ’ s early 
nursing experience was in pediatric ICUs, surgical nursing, and nursing management. 
She entered the fi eld of infection control in 1981, sitting for the fi rst certifi cation in 
infection control (CIC) exam in 1983. She has been an ICP in hospitals ranging from 
100 – 1200 beds in rural and urban settings. Her presentations and publications are 
numerous on prevention of surgical site infections, bloodstream infections, and ventilator - associated pneumonia and on redesigning infection control services, the business 
of infection control, and establishment of patient safety programs. Murphy is an active 
fbetw.indd xix 3/2/09 1:54:40 PM
xx The Contributors 
member of the Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology 
(APIC), the Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), and the 
American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM). She is a past president 
of the APIC Greater Saint Louis chapter and currently serves as a director on 
the APIC national board and chair of strategic planning. Murphy was a four - year member 
of the APIC annual conference task force and is currently the ICP representative 
on the SHEA educational conference planning committee. She graduated from the fi rst 
AHA/National Patient Safety Foundation - sponsored leadership fellowship training 
program in 2003. 
JUDITH NAPIER is corporate director, risk management and patient safety, for Allina 
Hospitals and Clinics in Minnesota. Before joining Allina, Napier was senior director, 
patient safety and risk management services, for Children ’ s Hospitals and Clinics in 
Minnesota. Napier has held the position of senior vice president for MMI Companies, 
an international health care risk management fi rm, where she was responsible for an 
international consulting division and product innovation and customization, specifi -
cally introducing new risk management strategies and products to the health care 
industry. Before her work with MMI Companies, she practiced nursing in high - risk 
perinatal units and taught maternal child nursing in several academic accredited nursing programs at both the baccalaureate and associate degree level. Her career includes 
clinical practice, consultation, teaching, and more than twenty years as an executive in 
the health care industry. Napier holds a bachelor ’ s degree in nursing from Niagara 
University and a master ’ s degree in maternal child clinical specialty nursing from 
California State University at Los Angeles. She has received a certifi cate of completion from HRET and the Health Forum Patient Safety Leadership Fellowship. Napier 
has been a frequent national and international speaker in the area of patient safety, 
quality, and risk management. 
PAMELA J. PARA , RN, MPH, CPHRM, ARM, FASHRM, is a nurse consultant for 
the Midwestern Consortium of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) in Chicago, Illinois. In this role, Para is responsible for the coordination of 
non - long - term care federal oversight functions in the Division of Survey and 
Certifi cation for transplant centers, organ procurement organizations, end - stage 
renal dialysis centers, critical access hospitals, home care, and hospice providers. 
Para has served as the director of professional and technical services for the American 
Society for Healthcare Risk Management of the American Hospital Association in 
Chicago. Other experience includes evaluating a variety of health care organizations, nationwide and in Puerto Rico, for potential medical professional, general, 
and workers ’ compensation liability exposures for a major commercial insurance 
carrier. She has also performed medicolegal reviews of potential and litigated claims, 
negotiated settlements, managed workers ’ compensation claims, and served as 
adviser to risk managers and other corporate claims coordinators of various self -
 insured health care facilities in the metropolitan Chicago area and nationwide for a 
fbetw.indd xx 3/2/09 1:54:41 PM
The Contributors xxi
third - party claims administrator. Para has nearly twenty - fi ve years of professional 
health care experience, beginning as a registered professional nurse in both civilian 
and military maternal - child clinical settings. She received a bachelor of science 
degree in nursing with a minor in Spanish from DePauw University in Greencastle, 
Indiana, and a master of public health degree from the University of Illinois at 
Chicago. She holds the designations of certifi ed professional in health care risk management (CPHRM), associate in risk management (ARM), and Fellow of the 
American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (FASHRM). Para is a published 
author, educator, and frequent presenter on risk management and workers ’ compensation topics. 
GINA PUGLIESE , RN, MS, vice president of the Safety Institute, Premier Inc., 
Chicago. She holds associate faculty appointments at the University of Illinois School 
of Public Health, Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, and Rush University 
College of Nursing, Chicago. Pugliese is on the editorial advisory board of the Joint 
Commission Journal on Quality and Safety and is the senior associate editor of 
Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology. She is the codirector of the international 
Healthcare Epidemiology Training Program sponsored by the Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America (SHEA) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC). For eight years, Pugliese was the director of safety of the American Hospital 
Association, Chicago. She was a founding board member and past president of the 
national Certifi cation Board of Infection Control (CBIC) and has served as a board 
member of the national Association for Professionals in Infection Control 
and Epidemiology (APIC). She is the author of more than 130 publications and has 
served on the faculty in more than 300 educational conferences in thirteen countries 
and has appeared in more than thirty videotape, television, and teleconference programs. Pugliese currently serves on several national committees, including the expert 
panel for the CMS National Surgical Infection Prevention (SIP) and Surgical Care 
Improvement Projects (SCIP), AHRQ ’ s Patient Safety Research Coordinating Center 
Steering Committee, and FDA ’ s Medical Product Surveillance Network (MEDSUN) 
Advisory Group. Pugliese is the 2001 recipient of the APIC Carole DeMille outstanding achievement award in safety and epidemiology. In 2004, the Gina Pugliese 
Scholarship was established for fi ve clinicians to attend each of the SHEA - CDC international health care epidemiology training courses, held every other year, in recognition of her contributions to health care epidemiology. 
MADELYN S. QUATTRONE , JD, is a senior risk management analyst for ECRI, 
Plymouth Meeting, Pennsylvania. She is editor of ECRI ’ s publication Continuing 
Care Risk Management and is a regular contributor to ECRI ’ s Healthcare Risk Control 
System. She has been a panelist in ECRI audioconferences discussing risk management and legal issues involving the health information privacy regulations and the 
security regulations of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA). Before joining ECRI, Quattrone was a shareholder in the law fi rm 
fbetw.indd xxi 3/2/09 1:54:41 PM
xxii The Contributors 
of George, Koran, Quattrone, Blumberg & Chant, PA, in Woodbury, New Jersey, concentrating on the defense of medical malpractice cases, from 1982 to 1999. A member 
of the bar of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, the U.S. District Court 
of New Jersey, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, and the U.S. Supreme Court, 
Quattrone achieved certifi cation by the New Jersey Supreme Court as a civil trial attorney in 1990 and was selected for membership in the American Board of Trial Advocates 
in 1993. Quattrone has also provided risk management consultation to physicians, 
hospitals, and professional liability insurers and contributed to the development of a 
clinical - legal correspondence course for the Medical Inter - Insurance Exchange of 
New Jersey. She has written regularly for numerous publications, including the 
Emergency Physician Legal Bulletin, the Emergency Nurse Legal Bulletin, and the 
Emergency Medical Technician Legal Bulletin. For many years, Quattrone cowrote a 
column on legal and risk management issues affecting emergency nurses in the Journal 
of Emergency Nursing. She has developed case scenarios and participated in mock 
medical malpractice trials for audiences of physicians, medical students, residents, 
and clinical engineers and has been a frequent speaker in numerous risk management 
areas, including informed consent, ethical and legal issues involving human reproduction, obstetrics, the provision of emergency care, and medical record documentation. 
Quattrone earned a doctor of law degree from Rutgers University School of Law, 
Camden, New Jersey, and a bachelor of arts degree in anthropology from Temple 
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
MICHAEL L. RAWSON is the former corporate director of safety, security, and environmental health for Intermountain Health Care (IHC) in Salt Lake City, Utah, where 
he has been employed for twenty - six years. His responsibilities include management of 
safety, security, and environmental health issues and compliance with regulatory activities specifi c to these areas. Rawson holds a bachelor of science degree in sociology with 
a certifi cate in law enforcement from the University of Utah and a master ’ s degree in 
administration of justice from Wichita State University. He is a certifi ed health care safety 
professional (CHSP), a certifi ed health care environmental manager (HEM), and a senior 
of the American Society for Healthcare Engineering (SASHE). Rawson has served on 
various committees with the American Society for Healthcare Engineering, the National 
Fire Protection Association (NFPA), the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs – Facilities (VA) and as president of the 
Mountain States Society for Healthcare Engineering (MSSHE). Rawson is a faculty 
member for ASHE - sponsored Environment of Care Joint Committee Survey Process 
Preparation programs and has presented programs on hospital security, safety, and emergency preparation and management throughout the United States. 
ELAINE RICHARD , RN, MS, earned a master ’ s degree in public health at the 
University of Minnesota, where she served on the faculty from 1972 to 1984. During 
her tenure there, she pioneered one of the fi rst post - RN and ANA - accredited geriatric 
nurse practitioner programs before nurse practitioner programs were recognized by 
fbetw.indd xxii 3/2/09 1:54:42 PM
The Contributors xxiii
the National League for Nursing. In 1977, she developed a National Institute of 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) graduate - level program in occupational 
health nursing and was subsequently promoted to associate professor. Richard later 
served as a NIOSH consultant reviewing university applications for occupational 
health training programs in the fi elds of medicine, nursing, safety, and industrial 
hygiene. She has lived in Tampa since 1984. Richard served as executive director of 
Saint Joseph ’ s HealthLine and Community Care over a period of ten years. In this 
capacity, she planned and developed the occupational health program and clinic and 
corporate wellness programs. As part of the Hillsborough County initiative to serve 
the indigent population, she developed and implemented Saint Joseph ’ s fi rst off - site 
primary clinics to serve this population. In 1995, she became the executive director 
and regional vice president of EverCare, a subsidiary of United Healthcare, and implemented the EverCare Program in Florida for residents in long - term care institutions. 
This successful Medicare demonstration project uses geriatric nurse practitioners to 
bring added value to patients residing in nursing homes. Since retirement, she has 
worked with the University of South Florida ’ s School of Aging Studies in the development and maintenance of the risk management course. 
SHEILA HAGG - RICKERT , JD, MHA, MBA, CPCU, PHRM, DFASHRM, associate 
system director of risk management, CHRISTUS Health. She is responsible for oversight of CHRISTUS ’ s loss prevention, claims management, and risk fi nancing programs. Previously, she served as corporate risk manager for both for - profi t and not -
 for - profi t acute care and long - term care health systems, as an insurance broker, and as 
a health care risk management consultant. She has served on the board of directors for 
the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM) and has presented 
and written extensively on health care risk management and health law topics. She 
served as faculty for ASHRM ’ s Advanced Forum, the third learning module in the 
Barton Certifi cate program, for more than a decade. Hagg - Rickert holds a doctor of 
law degree from the University of Iowa and masters degrees in both business administration and health care administration from Georgia State University. She has earned 
chartered property and casualty underwriter (CPCU) and certifi ed professional in 
health care risk management (CPHRM) designations and is a Distinguished Fellow of 
the American Society of Healthcare Risk Management (DFASHRM). 
FREDERICK “ RICK ”ROBINSON , JD, is partner in charge of the health law practice 
in Fulbright & Jaworski ’ s Washington, D.C., offi ce. His cases cover all phases of 
trial and appellate practice in both criminal and civil matters, including qui tam or 
 “ whistleblower ” lawsuits under the federal False Claims Act. He helps health care 
providers create and implement corporate compliance programs and with voluntary 
disclosure matters. Robinson graduated with honors from Duke University School of 
Law in 1982 and is admitted to the bar in Maryland and the District of Columbia. He 
has written numerous articles and is a regular speaker at seminars and conferences 
regarding health care litigation and compliance matters. 
fbetw.indd xxiii 3/2/09 1:54:42 PM
xxiv The Contributors 
JEANNIE SEDWICK , ARM, is a former health care broker for Aon Risk Services, 
Inc., based in Winston - Salem, North Carolina. Previously, she was director of risk 
management for Wake County Hospital System, Inc., in Raleigh, North Carolina, for 
more than twenty years. She held the position of vice president of marketing for the 
Medical Protective Company/Employers Reinsurance Company and was responsible 
for production of health care accounts for the southern United States. She served as 
managing director for property casualty for Insurance Resource, Inc., a division of the 
American Hospital Association, in Chicago, Illinois. She served on the ASHRM board 
for six years and was president in 1996 – 1997. She is a founding member of the North 
Carolina Chapter of ASHRM and has served as its president and board member and on 
many committees. She was recognized for her contributions to the North Carolina 
ASHRM chapter and was awarded the Distinguished Service Award in 1996. Sedwick 
was named to the Business Insurance Risk Manager of the Year Honor Roll in 1997 
for her contributions to the fi eld of risk management and for her achievements as risk 
manager at Wake County Hospital System. 
KATRINA A. SHANNON , BA, JD, risk management coordinator for Barnes - Jewish 
Hospital in Saint Louis, and adjunct professor at Maryville University in Saint Louis. 
Shannon received her bachelor of arts degree in business management and her certifi -
cate in health information management from Saint Louis University. She received her 
doctor of law degree from Saint Louis University School of Law and a health law certifi cate from the Saint Louis University School of Law Center for Health Law Studies. 
She is licensed to practice in Missouri. Shannon is a former law clerk for the BJC 
Health System, Armstrong Teasdale LLP, and a former associate attorney for Lashly 
 & Baer, PC. In these roles, Shannon practiced corporate, government, education, and 
health care law. Shannon is a member of the Missouri Bar Association, the Mound 
City Bar Association, the Saint Louis Area Health Law Association, the Saint Louis 
Association for Health Care Risk Managers, and the American Society for Healthcare 
Risk Management. 
RONNI P. SOLOMON , JD, is executive vice president and general counsel at ECRI, a 
nonprofi t health services research agency in suburban Philadelphia that focuses on the 
safety, quality, and cost - effectiveness of patient care. Solomon has approximately 
twenty years ’ experience in health care risk management, patient safety, law, and regulation. She works with leaders at hospitals, health systems, government agencies, continuing care organizations, and insurance providers to implement patient safety and 
quality assessment systems. She has published numerous articles and book chapters 
and has lectured frequently in the United States and abroad. Solomon serves as the 
center director for ECRI ’ s Collaborating Center for the World Health Organization in 
patient safety, health care technology and risk management. She is a past member of 
ASHRM ’ s board of directors and has served in many other leadership roles for 
ASHRM. She received ASHRM ’ s fi rst Award for Writing Excellence. 
fbetw.indd xxiv 3/2/09 1:54:42 PM
The Contributors xxv
NANCY TUOHY , RN, MSN, is a medication safety specialist at ISMP. She is also the 
assistant editor for ISMP ’ s Nurse Advise - ERR and a contributor to the other ISMP 
medication safety alert publications. Tuohy ’ s interests include patient safety and health 
care systems analysis, including the evolution of health care informatics. Her prior 
work experiences cover a broad range of health care settings, including pediatrics, critical care, outpatient clinic, elementary school, pharmaceutical research, and prehospital care as an emergency medical technician. Tuohy obtained her bachelor of science 
in nursing degree at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and her master of 
science in nursing degree at the University of Pennsylvania. She also holds a bachelor ’ s degree in psychology from Wake Forest University. 
JOHN C. WEST , JD, MHA, DFASHRM, is a senior health care consultant with AIG 
Consultants Inc., Healthcare Management Division. He holds a bachelor ’ s degree from 
the University of Cincinnati, a law degree from Salmon P. Chase College of Law, and 
a master ’ s degree in health services administration from Xavier University. He received 
the Distinguished Service Award from ASHRM in 2001, the highest honor bestowed 
by that society. He also received the designation of Distinguished Fellow of the 
American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (DFASHRM) in 1999. West has 
been a frequent speaker at national and regional educational programs and has published numerous articles on various aspects of health care risk management. He currently writes the “ Case Law Update ” column on a quarterly basis for the Journal of 
Healthcare Risk Management.
KIMBERLY M. WILLIS , CPCU, ARM, is senior vice president of Endurance U.S. 
Healthcare Insurance Services. In this capacity, she is responsible for developing and 
executing strategy for the U.S. Healthcare practice. Prior to joining Endurance, Willis 
served as vice president, fi eld underwriting, for Berkley Medical Excess Underwriters. 
She was responsible for management of underwriting strategy, achievement of profi tability and premium volume goals, and oversight of distributor relationships. Willis 
also served as managing director, health care syndication, for Aon Risk Services. She 
managed a team responsible for the design, negotiation, and broking of over $ 500 million in health care professional liability premiums. Willis earned her bachelor of science degree in business administration at the University of Missouri and a master of 
business administration degree from Maryville University. She holds the chartered 
property and casualty underwriter (CPCU) and associate in risk management (ARM) 
designations. 
SHEILA COHEN ZIMMET , BSN, JD, is associate vice president for Regulatory 
Affairs at Georgetown University Medical Center. Previously she was associate dean, 
research compliance, at Weill Medical College of Cornell University, where she serves 
as the course director for the Tri - Institutional Responsible Conduct of Research 
course for Weill Cornell Medical College, Rockefeller University, and Memorial 
fbetw.indd xxv 3/2/09 1:54:43 PM
xxvi The Contributors 
 Sloan - Kettering Institute. She previously served as Director of Research Assurance 
and Compliance and as senior counsel for Georgetown University Medical Center. 
She started her professional career as a neonatal intensive care nurse after earning her 
undergraduate nursing degree from Georgetown University in 1971. After she received 
her JD from Georgetown in 1975, Zimmet pursued a legal career with the federal government in occupational and mine safety and health. She returned to Georgetown 
University in 1984, where her health law practice focused on clinical, bioethical, and 
biomedical research issues, professional liability and risk management, and other hospital and higher education legal issues involving patients, students, faculty, and staff 
that are common to academic medical centers. Zimmet also serves as a member of the 
National Advisory Research Resources Council to the National Institutes of Health. 
fbetw.indd xxvi 3/2/09 1:54:43 PM
xxvii
PREFACE 
 The student of risk management is entering a fi eld in health care fi lled with challenges, 
excitement, obstacles, passion, frustration, and confusion, all combined with a strong 
sense of purpose and commitment. You ’ ll either love it or be frightened by it. Risk 
management is not a stop on the road; it is a journey. For individuals who like a challenge, consider themselves change agents, understand organizational systems and 
processes, and have the ability to see the big picture and connect the dots, this is the 
profession for you. 
 The position of risk manager is an engaging one with never - ending tasks and a 
boredom factor of zero. You ’ ve heard the phrase “ The job is what you make it. ” 
Nothing could be truer in health care risk management. The experience and expertise 
necessary (or as required in the job description) to carry out the assigned responsibilities and tasks are often discussed, but seldom identifi ed are the other skills or personal 
attributes that are equally important if one is to succeed as a risk management professional. They include good judgment, common sense, tenacity, intuition, critical thinking skills, the ability to team well and lead well, and excellent communication skills, 
both verbal and written. These essential personal attributes are generally not specifi ed 
in job descriptions, are hard to test, and are often diffi cult to assess during the interview process. 
 This Student Edition offers a blend of necessary technical information and guidance on how to apply that information using the personal attributes just mentioned. 
 “ What does all this mean to the risk management professional? ” is a question that is 
answered throughout the book. The Student Edition is thus intended to be both practical and technical. It offers a wide range of expertise from twenty - nine nationally recognized experts on a variety of health care - related risk subjects. 
 Although the focus of responsibilities for the risk management professional has 
changed over time, the underlying principle of asset preservation through safe patient 
care has not. Nothing in risk management ever seems to go away; we keep adding to 
the wealth of information through new practices, procedures, protocols, systems, legislation, technological advances, value - based purchasing strategies, and so on. What 
has changed is how we evaluate organizational risks, the impact that one risk has on 
another, and our approach to eliminate or manage those risks through alternative risk 
fi nancing strategies and risk control initiatives. The fi eld of health care risk management continues to evolve, mature, and expand as the concept of enterprise risk 
 management takes hold in health care organizations. This necessitates that the professionals responsible for managing risk also grow and change. 
fpref.indd xxvii 3/3/09 3:03:26 PM
xxviii Preface
 In today ’ s health care environment, the risk management professional is a facilitator, mediator, negotiator, coordinator, orchestrator, and agent of change. The function 
has also changed, from employing tactical skills to developing and implementing 
strategy. Consequently, the role is becoming more proactive and less reactive. What 
comes to mind is a famous line from the movie All About Eve: “ Fasten your seatbelts; 
it ’ s going to be a bumpy night. ” The challenge for the risk management professional is 
how to get it all accomplished and in a timely manner given limited resources (fi nancial, human, and time) while preserving our own quality of life. 
 Preparing this book for publication has required the resolve of a dedicated team. 
I want to express my gratitude and thanks to all the members of the Student Edition 
and Faculty Guide work group for their determination and commitment to this project: 
Kathryn Hyer, University of South Florida; Peggy Martin, Lifespan Risk Services; 
Glenn Troyer, Kreig DeVault, LLP; Sylvia Brown, Premier, Inc.; Ben Gonzales, 
Montana Health Network, Inc.; Peggy Nakamura, Adventist Health; Kathleen Shostek 
and Karen Holloway, ECRI; and Joe Pixler, American Society for Healthcare Risk 
Management. 
 I also extend a personal thank - you to my family for allowing me to miss many 
meals and stimulating conversations so that I could concentrate on getting this Student 
Edition ready for publication. A special thank - you goes to Terrance “ Red ” Carroll, my 
brother, who continues to support all my efforts. 
 We hope you fi nd this Student Edition easy to use and a valuable resource for your 
reference library. 
 Welcome to the world of risk management! 
Roberta L. Carroll, Editor
■ ■ ■
fpref.indd xxviii 3/3/09 3:03:27 PM
xxix
ABOUT THIS BOOK
The goal in developing the Student Edition of the Risk Management Handbook for 
Health Care Organizations was to offer students of risk management from a variety of 
backgrounds and settings a handbook that could be used both as a tool for study and as 
an authoritative reference text for later consultation. The Student Edition of the 
Handbook is not meant to be the fi nal authority on any risk subject covered but rather 
an incitement to whet the appetite for additional reading and further learning. That 
being said, however, a beginning risk management professional desirous of implementing a risk management program could pick up this book and have a comprehensive road map of what to do, how to do it, and why it must be done.
The Student Edition begins by addressing basic concepts and considerations such 
as developing a risk management program, the risk management professional and 
stages in professional development, relationship with patient safety, legal concepts 
made easy, and the importance of effective governance. The student then progresses to 
recognize and understand the complexity and risks associated with medication safety, 
documentation, noncompliance with statutes, standards and regulations, and accreditation and licensure requirements. Basic claims administration, an introduction to risk 
fi nancing and its basic principles and coverage, and the different internal and external 
methods used to identify organizational risks are all covered in a basic, uncomplicated 
manner. Ethics in patient care, risk management metrics and benchmarking, emergency management, and occupational health and safety, are discussed in terms of organizational culture and environment, organizational preparedness, and measurement.
These chapters have been carefully selected for the Student Edition from among 
the fi fty-nine chapters in the three-volume Risk Management Handbook for Health 
Care Organizations, Fifth Edition. Consideration was given to what could reasonably 
be covered in a one-semester university course at either the graduate or undergraduate 
level. Other chapters could have been included, covering a whole host of other subjects (all equally relevant to health care risk management); however, the desire was to 
keep the Student Edition an introduction to the subject of risk management that can be 
used as a basic guide.
The design of the Student Edition also lends itself to the study of a specifi c topic by 
the nonacademic student. For anyone desiring to learn more about health care risk management or to understand a particular topic more fully, this text fi ts that need as well.
To facilitate the learning process, each chapter has been expanded to include 
learning objectives, key concepts, key terms, and acronyms. The learning objectives at 
the beginning of each chapter will highlight, in a concise manner, relevant questions 
flast.indd xxix 3/2/09 1:57:52 PM
xxx About this Book
the student should be able to answer after reading the material. The key concepts are 
fundamental principles of the chapter; combined with the learning objectives, they set 
expectations for the student reader. They identify the focus of the chapter and concepts 
to keep in mind as they study the material. At the back of each chapter are lists of 
important key terms and acronyms used in the chapter. These can serve as a quick test 
to see how easily students can identify their meanings.
Health care professionals speak a language of their own. To complement the 
Glossary at the back of the book and to assist students who do not have a clinical or 
medical background or may not work in a health care setting, a “Guide to Medical 
Terminology” has been included in the Student Edition.
This book has been developed for the academic environment; therefore, an accompanying Faculty Guide is available online. The Faculty Guide will track each chapter 
and offer the faculty member, teacher, or learning facilitator additional tools not offered 
in the Student Edition, such as chapter outlines, case scenarios, vignettes, puzzles, 
word games, test questions and answers, and other materials supporting specifi c topics. The Faculty Guide can be quickly updated and new material easily added. In this 
manner, the teacher can keep the course fresh and up-to-date without changing the 
core information in the Student Edition. It is anticipated that its shelf life will be long, 
making it a desirable book to own.
Roberta L. Carroll, Editor
■ ■ ■
flast.indd xxx 3/2/09 1:57:52 PM
1
CHAPTER
1
DEVELOPMENT OF A RISK 
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 JANE J. McCAFFREY , SHEILA HAGG - RICKERT 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to describe the key elements necessary to have a successful risk 
management program 
 ■ To be able to discuss three barriers for successful risk management program 
development and provide at least one strategy for overcoming each 
■ To be able to discuss one nonclinical area of related risk for a health care 
organization 
■ To be able to identify the various organizational structures that can be successful in implementing a risk management program
c01.indd 1 3/3/09 3:06:41 PM
2 Development of a Risk Management Program
 Organizations and individuals have always sought ways to identify and reduce the 
risks that threatened their existence. In primitive agrarian societies, where families and 
villages produced barely enough to meet their most basic needs, the loss of a year ’ s 
harvest, whether to forces of nature or to the plunder of warring tribes, surely spelled 
disaster. The attempts of such cultures to protect their food supplies and other necessities of life from destruction by fi re, fl ood, and theft represent history ’ s earliest risk 
management efforts. As societies developed into industrialized economies, individuals 
and organizations continued to seek ways to understand and anticipate the risks associated with such perils in an attempt to protect valuable property from such threats, 
ultimately establishing mechanisms for transferring the fi nancial consequences of such 
losses through policies of insurance. 
 Despite the age - old concern with protecting assets from the risks associated with 
accidental losses, risk management has existed for only about fi fty years. 1
 Health 
care risk management in its present form did not really begin to emerge until the malpractice crisis of the mid - 1970s, when hospitals and other health care entities experienced rapid rises in claims costs, and subsequently insurance premiums, and witnessed 
the exit of several major medical professional liability insurers from the market. 2
 This 
crisis formed the basis for health care entities to develop the fi rst risk management 
programs. The American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM; formerly known as the American Society for Hospital Risk Management) was established 
in 1980 in response to this developing interest in risk management among health care 
organizations. Over the years, health care risk management has moved from a discipline focused almost exclusively on medical professional liability issues to a profession 
concerned with all of the risks associated with accidental losses facing a health care 
organization. 3
 In addition to hospitals, managed care organizations, long - term care, and 
ambulatory care, other providers of health care have come to realize the value of 
effective risk management and have developed formalized programs. 4
 Increasingly, 
risk management is moving toward the concept of enterprise risk management and 
considering the myriad of complex legal, regulatory, political, business, and fi nancial 
risks facing health care organizations. As risk management moves toward this more 
strategic orientation and risk management professionals prepare themselves for new 
roles as chief risk offi cers, such factors as diverse work experience, higher education, 
and broad - based business, fi nancial, and technical skills will be valued in health care 
risk management professionals more than ever before. 5
 Another recent development in 
risk management has been the return focus on patient safety.
 The patient safety movement was prompted in large part by the 1999 publication of 
To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System,6
 which articulated the fi ndings of an 
Institute of Medicine study of the devastating consequences of widespread medical error
in the nation ’ s hospitals. Risk management professionals who had long had primary
responsibility for investigating, analyzing, and maintaining data regarding adverse patient 
incidents joined with colleagues from performance improvement, health care administration, and a variety of clinical disciplines in an attempt to systematically identify the 
c01.indd 2 3/3/09 3:06:42 PM
 RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT 
 Whatever the health care setting or the sophistication of the risk management professional, an effective risk management program requires certain elementary building 
blocks: key structural elements, suffi cient scope to cover all applicable categories of 
risk, appropriate risk strategies, and written policies and procedures. This chapter 
focuses on these building blocks, giving the novice risk management professional 
guidance in developing a comprehensive risk management program and providing the 
experienced risk management professional with a program overview that may be used 
as a self - assessment guide. 
■ ■ ■
 Developing a comprehensive risk management program depends on addressing 
several specifi c considerations. An effective risk management effort is built on key 
structural elements that enable the risk management professional to develop and enforce 
a risk management plan and enact the necessary changes in organizational policy. The 
program must include a defi ned scope of risks to be managed, including an examination 
of the risks associated with patients, medical staff, employees, governing bodies, property, automobiles, and other risks that subject the health care organization to potential 
liability or the threat of loss. Risk management strategies represent the mix of techniques 
employed to prevent or reduce potential losses and preserve the organization ’ s assets. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Risk management as a discipline is focused on all risks of an organization.
■ An effective risk management program incorporates several building blocks, 
including key structural elements, suffi cient scope to cover all organizational risks, 
appropriate risk strategies, and written policies and procedures.
■ Risk management as a process uses a fi ve-step management decision-making model.
■ Risk management programs protect organizational assets through the delivery of 
safe patient care.
■ Risk management program responsibilities vary in terms of organizational structure, 
size, scope of services, available resources, management commitment, and location.
underlying causes of medical errors in their organizations and to design and implement 
effective interdisciplinary organizationwide patient safety programs. 
Risk Management Program Development 3
c01.indd 3 3/3/09 3:06:42 PM
4 Development of a Risk Management Program
The fi nal building block is a set of written policies and procedures that ensures program 
uniformity and consistency and assists in communication of the program to affected 
parties. This chapter describes how each of these four important considerations contributes to an effective risk management program. 
 KEY STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS OF THE RISK 
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 The exact structure of a health care organization ’ s risk management program depends 
on the size and complexity of its functions and the scope of other services that it offers. 
Several key structural components are necessary for any health care risk management 
program to succeed. Whether an entity is just beginning to organize its risk management program or is seeking to revamp or expand an existing program, attention to 
these structural factors will help ensure that the program has a solid foundation. 
 Authority 
 The risk management professional in a health care organization must maintain suffi cient 
authority and respect to enact the changes in clinical practice, policies and procedures, 
and employee and medical staff behavior that are necessary to fulfi ll the purpose of the 
risk management program. The risk manager must deal on a daily basis with highly sensitive and confi dential information that directly affects the organization ’ s public image 
and fi nancial status. The risk management professional is responsible for coordinating 
risk management activities with members of the medical staff and outside parties and 
with managers and employees at all levels of the organization. For these reasons, the risk 
management professional ’ s position should be relatively high in the organizational hierarchy. Ideally, the risk management professional should report directly to the CEO, or at 
least to another member of the senior administrative management team. Risk management professionals whose positions rank below the department manager level on the 
organizational chart will almost certainly face diffi culty in dealing authoritatively with 
medical staff, nursing administration, and department managers. They may also have diffi culty gaining access to senior management and representing the organization in its relations with insurers, attorneys, and other outside parties involved in the risk management 
process. In many nonhospital health care organizations and in smaller hospital facilities, 
the designated risk management professional may serve primarily as a senior manager or 
clinician and devote only a relatively small percentage of work time to risk management 
activities. Under such a model, risk fi nance and insurance program administration are 
typically handled by the organization ’ s fi nance department, workers ’ compensation programs are managed by human resource personnel, and safety programs are developed and 
overseen by a facility or maintenance manager. Although this division of labor might be 
effi cient for apportioning the workload required for a successful risk management effort, 
it creates special challenges when establishing ownership of the risk manage ment function and creating an identity for those activities that comprise risk management. Such 
part - time risk management professionals, especially those who view their risk management 
c01.indd 4 3/3/09 3:06:43 PM
responsibilities as subordinate to their other job duties, might fi nd it diffi cult to acquire 
the wide range of expertise necessary to adequately fulfi ll their risk management obligations and to stay abreast of rapidly changing and often complex legal and regulatory 
developments affecting the fi eld. 
 Visibility 
 The risk management professional should be highly visible in the health care organization. No one individual can perform every function of a comprehensive risk management program single - handed, even in the smallest health care facility. Therefore, it is 
necessary for the organization ’ s risk management professional, through consciousness -
 raising, education, and communication, to foster an awareness of risk management 
practices and techniques among senior management and the governing body, medical 
staff members, and employees at all organizational levels. The risk management professional ’ s position should be structured to enhance opportunities for interaction with 
others through service on appropriate committees, participation in educational activities such as employee orientation and staff in - service offerings, and access to organizationwide communication mechanisms. 
 Communication 
 As health care facilities have merged into alliances and networks and acquired physician practices, clinics, and managed care organizations to form integrated delivery 
systems (IDSs), additional issues relating to potential liability, insurance coverage, 
claims management, and loss control have emerged. To anticipate risk management 
pitfalls and opportunities in this environment, the risk management professional must 
be an insider who is provided with information on proposed mergers, acquisitions, and 
joint ventures early in the due diligence process. Equipped with such information, the 
risk management professional is in a position to advise senior management on the risk 
management implications of various new business arrangements, many of which can 
be substantial but are frequently overlooked by executives not attuned to risk management issues and specifi c insurance requirements. 
 Coordination 
 Because of the wide range of risk management functions and the diversity of activities 
necessary for a successful risk management program, the health care organization 
should establish both formal and informal mechanisms for the coordination of the risk 
management program with other departments and functions. To adequately integrate 
and coordinate risk management with other functions, the risk management professional needs to establish reporting and communication relationships with key individuals within the organization: 
■ The chief executive offi cer (CEO) provides a vital link to the entity ’ s governing board and medical staff and establishes the necessary support for the risk management program. The CEO serves as the key decision maker for many activities crucial 
Key Structural Elements of the Risk Management Program 5
c01.indd 5 3/3/09 3:06:43 PM
6 Development of a Risk Management Program
to the risk management program, such as authorizing the settlement of larger claims 
and establishing insurance limits. Furthermore, the CEO often heads the team of senior 
managers responsible for the development of new business opportunities, mergers, 
and acquisitions. 
■ The chief fi nancial offi cer (CFO) may have multiple risk fi nancing responsibilities and provides valuable information for the risk management program. These functions include establishing limits on self - insured retentions or trusts, monitoring the 
fi nancial operations of captives, and overseeing the performance of actuarial analyses. In 
some organizations, the CFO is the primary purchaser of insurance coverages and must 
therefore rely on information provided by the risk management professional to make 
appropriate decisions regarding risk fi nancing activities on behalf of the organization. 
■ The performance improvement or quality management director serves as an 
important source of information regarding adverse clinical events occurring within the 
facility that have potentially serious risk management implications. The risk management standards promulgated by The Joint Commission (until 2007 known as the Joint 
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, or JCAHO) emphasize the 
interdependence of risk management and performance improvement activities. 7
 Both 
the development of proactive patient safety initiatives and an effective root cause analysis process for post - occurrence sentinel events depend on the active leadership and 
close coordination of the risk management professional and performance improvement 
director. The performance improvement director may also be able to assist a risk management professional who lacks clinical training in interpreting and analyzing information contained in medical records, and in providing clinical loss prevention services. 
■ The patient safety director or offi cer is responsible for systematically analyzing the sources of human error and systems issues that affect patient care. Patient 
safety directors or offi cers may report to the risk management professional or performance improvement director or to senior management in a health care organization. 
Patient safety directors or offi cers are very involved in the development of clinical risk 
management loss prevention initiatives. 
■ The compliance offi cer guides the development of policy and staff education 
efforts related to legislative and regulatory initiatives such as HIPAA, Sarbanes - Oxley, 
and Medicare fraud and abuse prevention. 8
■ The infection control practitioner (ICP) provides information on patient 
infections that might give rise to liability claims and can assist the risk management 
professional in understanding infection control protocols aimed at reducing the frequency and severity of hospital - acquired infections and establishing guidelines for 
coping with AIDS, tuberculosis, and other communicable diseases. 
■ The safety offi cer may have primary responsibility for, or assist the risk management professional in, performing fi re safety, hazardous materials management, 
emergency preparedness, and employee safety activities in compliance with Joint 
Commission standards. The safety offi cer usually chairs the organization ’ s safety committee, which serves as a vital source of risk management information and organizational problem solving. 
c01.indd 6 3/3/09 3:06:44 PM
■ The patient representative (or ombudsman) relays information regarding patient 
complaints and works with patients and families who have experienced diffi culties with 
the organization or specifi c staff members to reach satisfactory resolutions of their concerns. Patient representatives, whether employees or volunteers, must be trained to recognize and appropriately manage risk management concerns that arise in the course of 
their activities and to relay information to the risk management professional. 
■ The employee health nurse (or workers ’ compensation coordinator or personnel 
director) may, in some organizations, manage the daily operational aspects of the facility ’ s workers ’ compensation program and provide claims and injury information to the 
risk management professional. Often this individual is instrumental in developing transitional return - to - work and other injury management programs. The risk management professional in some health care organizations is personally responsible for the operation of 
workers ’ compensation programs but must nonetheless coordinate activities with the 
human resource director and various line managers. 
■ The health information manager (or medical records director) notifi es the risk 
management professional of requests from attorneys for medical records that might 
signal initiation of legal proceedings or claims. The health information manager also 
develops policies and procedures relating to the documentation of patient care activities, patient confi dentiality, and appropriate release of information and ensures the 
organization ’ s compliance with HIPAA privacy requirements. 
■ The medical director (or chief medical offi cer) serves as a liaison between the 
risk management program and the medical staff and assists the risk management professional in “ selling ” risk management to physicians. The risk management professional 
must also work with the medical staff services professional to ensure that the organization ’ s medical staff appointment, credentialing, privileging, and disciplinary procedures 
are conducted in accordance with sound risk management practices. 
■ The patient accounts representative works with the risk management professional 
to identify patient complaints and concerns that surface during the billing and collections 
process. Such concerns may be based on perceived patient care problems. They hold the 
potential for becoming liability claims if collection efforts are vigorously pursued. 
■ Nursing and departmental managers offer the risk management professional 
the technical and clinical expertise necessary to identify and analyze potential patient 
care risks and assist with the investigation of liability claims and incidents. Middle 
management personnel also play a crucial role in building and maintaining support for 
the risk management program and in educating and raising the risk management consciousness of employees within their areas of responsibility. 
■ The education director (or in - service program coordinator) assists the risk 
management professional in identifying staff education needs pertaining to risk management and in planning, organizing, and presenting orientation and in - service education programs. 
■ The human resource director maintains responsibility for developing effective 
job descriptions and performance appraisal processes, employee background checks and 
competency testing, verifi cation of licenses and certifi cations, and maintenance of a 
Key Structural Elements of the Risk Management Program 7
c01.indd 7 3/3/09 3:06:44 PM
8 Development of a Risk Management Program
drug - free workplace, all of which are crucial to the prevention and defense of medical 
professional liability actions. In addition, the human resource staff generally take the 
lead in preventing and managing claims and complaints related to issues such as alleged 
sexual harassment, discrimination, and wrongful termination. 
 Accountability 
 Just as risk management professionals need suffi cient authority to perform assigned 
functions, they should be held accountable for that performance. Every health care 
organization ’ s risk management professional, including those in small institutions that 
have job duties in addition to risk management, should have a written job description 
that outlines key risk management responsibilities. Annual performance appraisals 
assessing the risk management professional ’ s achievement of specifi c, measurable risk 
management goals and objectives should be conducted to gauge and document the 
individual ’ s effectiveness. The risk management professional should submit an annual 
report to senior management and the governing body that summarizes claims, insurance, and risk management program activities and documents the progress made 
toward the attainment of established goals. 
 SCOPE OF THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 The purpose of a health care risk management program is to protect the organization 
against risks associated with accidental losses, regardless of the cause. One of the 
building blocks of an effective program is suffi cient scope to cover all potential sources 
of risk. Although many risk management professionals focus on the medical professional liability aspects of health care risk management, the discipline extends into 
many other areas that are equally important to the survival of the modern health care 
organization. Defi ned broadly, health care risk management is concerned with a tremendous variety of issues and situations that hold the potential for liability or casualty 
losses for the organization. To be truly comprehensive, a risk management program 
must address the full scope of the following categories of risk: 
■ Patient care – related 
■ Medical staff – related 
■ Employee - related 
■ Property - related 
■ Financial 
■ Other 
 Patient Care – Related Risks 
 Over the course of the last several years, U.S. health care institutions and practitioners 
have once again experienced a “ malpractice crisis ” evidenced by rising jury verdicts, 
c01.indd 8 3/3/09 3:06:45 PM
settlement amounts, 9
 insurance premiums, 10 dwindling insurance availability due to 
carrier withdrawals from the medical malpractice market, 11 and the imposition of more 
stringent underwriting criteria. 12 The reduction in insurers ’ investment income resulting from the general economic downturn in the early part of the twenty - fi rst century 
and the huge unanticipated insurance losses associated from the terrorist attacks of 
September 11, 2001, only served to exacerbate the worsening trends for health care 
medical professional liability insurers and their insureds. 
 Given the substantial proportion of total health care risk management costs associated with medical professional liability claims and insurance premiums and the current national focus on patient safety issues, it is not surprising that most health care 
risk management efforts begin with patient care – related issues. Patient care or clinical risk management, including information gathering, loss control efforts, medical 
professional liability risk fi nancing, and claims management activities, forms the core 
of most health care risk management programs. Although most patient - related risk 
management activity focuses on direct clinical patient care activities and the consequences of inappropriate or incorrectly performed medical treatments, other important patient - related issues also confront the risk management professional, including 
the following: 
■ Confi dentiality and appropriate release of patient medical information, especially 
in light of HIPAA and other privacy requirements 
■ Protection of patients from abuse and neglect and from assault by other patients, 
visitors, or staff 
■ Securing appropriate informed patient consent to medical treatment 
■ Nondiscriminatory treatment of patients, regardless of race, religion, national origin, or payment status 
■ Protection of patient valuables from loss or damage 
■ Appropriate triage, stabilization, and transfer of patients presenting to dedicated 
emergency departments (DEDs) 
■ Patient participation in research studies and the use of experimental drugs and 
medical procedures 
■ Utilization review decisions related to the timing of patient discharges and the 
provision of medically necessary services under various third - party managed care 
arrangements 
■ Access to care concerns 
 Medical Staff – Related Risks 
 Closely aligned with patient care – related risk management issues are those experienced 
by medical staff and other clinically privileged practitioners. Many, if not most, of the 
Scope of the Risk Management Program 9
c01.indd 9 3/3/09 3:06:45 PM
10 Development of a Risk Management Program
potentially serious occurrences related to the delivery of clinical patient care involve a 
facility ’ s medical staff. It is imperative that the health care risk management professional include physicians in clinical loss prevention and claims management programs 
and elicit their support for overall risk management activities. Risk management concerns that stem from the unique relationship between a health care organization and its 
medical staff merit the risk management professional ’ s particular attention. Of special 
importance are the following: 
■ Medical staff peer review and performance improvement activities and maintaining the confi dentiality and protection of the data generated through such peer 
review processes 
■ Medical staff credentialing, appointment, and privileging processes 
■ Medical staff disciplinary proceedings, due process considerations, and potential 
allegations of antitrust and restraint of trade 
■ Identifi cation and treatment of impaired physicians and other credentialed providers who pose a threat to patient or employee safety 
■ Business arrangements and fi nancial incentives to physicians that might have fraud 
and abuse or other implications under federal Medicare regulations 13
■ Physician gatekeeper obligations and incentives under various managed care plans 
 In this era of expanding legal theories of corporate liability and vicarious liability, 
the activities of the medical staff are often deemed the activities of the health care 
organization. It has become increasingly diffi cult for defense attorneys to persuade 
judges and juries to distinguish between the institution and its independent contractor 
physicians. As physicians become business partners with health care entities and 
assume ownership interests in new ventures, and as hospitals and other organizations 
purchase or assume management of physician practices, the distinctions become even 
more blurred. 
 Employee - Related Risks 
 Several issues relating to the employment of personnel deserve the health care risk 
management professional ’ s attention. Of obvious importance is maintaining a safe 
work environment for employees, reducing the risk of occupational illness and injury, 
and providing for the treatment and compensation of workers who suffer on - the - job 
injuries and work - related illnesses. In this regard, it is important that risk management 
professionals maintain a working knowledge of relevant state workers ’ compensation 
laws and regulations promulgated by the federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA). Such understanding allows them to work effectively with 
human resource departments, employee health nurses, and designated safety offi cers 
to establish successful employee injury and management programs. 
c01.indd 10 3/3/09 3:06:46 PM
 Posing particularly serious problems for today ’ s health care organization are allegations of discrimination in recruitment, hiring, and promotion based on age, race, 
sex, national origin, or disability; wrongful termination; and other claims fi led with the 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). Claims involving alleged sexual harassment are also increasingly common. 14 The risk management professional 
must work closely with the facility ’ s human resource director to help minimize such 
claims exposures, manage the claims that do occur, and fi nance the costs associated 
with such losses. 
 Property - Related Risks 
 Many complex health care entities have signifi cant property assets, including large 
hospital and clinic structures, medical offi ce buildings, and valuable medical and data 
processing equipment. It is incumbent on the risk management professional to protect 
these assets from risk of loss due to fi res, acts of God, fl oods, natural disasters, and 
other perils that might damage or destroy such property. In addition, health care institutions typically maintain a large volume of paper and electronic records that are 
essential to the ongoing operations of the entity, and they must be protected from damage or destruction. Obviously, the costs associated with repairing and replacing 
 damaged assets can be signifi cant, and the revenues lost during the period of business 
interruption can have disastrous effects on the organization. 
 Many health care employees routinely handle cash, checks, and credit cards in the 
course of their job duties. Hospitals and nursing homes are often requested to safeguard cash and other valuables belonging to patients and residents. Home health workers, who function independently and without direct supervision in a client ’ s home, are 
particularly vulnerable to allegations of theft. Thus it is important for the risk management professional to evaluate hiring and screening protocols for such workers, to 
review policies and procedures for handling cash and safeguarding valuables, and 
to consider various bonding and insurance alternatives to adequately protect the facility from such losses. 
 Financial Risks 
 Although the ordinary business risks associated with new ventures or services and the 
continued fi nancial viability of the organization ’ s existing operations are traditionally 
considered to be outside the sphere of risk management concerns, there are at least two 
areas of fi nancial risk with which the risk management professional must be 
concerned. 
 First, the directors and offi cers of health care organizations, like those of other 
corporate entities, may face liability imposed by suits from shareholders or others 
alleging inappropriate conduct in the fulfi llment of the directors ’ and offi cers ’ duties. 
Corporate charters and bylaws frequently require the entity to defend and indemnify 
its directors and offi cers against such claims. Likewise, the entity itself may be 
Scope of the Risk Management Program 11
c01.indd 11 3/3/09 3:06:46 PM
12 Development of a Risk Management Program
named in such actions. It is therefore important for the risk management professional to understand the corporate structure of the organization; any requirements 
imposed by the charter, bylaws, or other documents; and the opportunities to transfer 
such risks through policies of insurance, to adequately protect the organization ’ s 
assets. 
 Second, risk management professionals who represent the interests of health care 
providers who contract with managed care organizations (MCOs) on an “ at - risk ” 
basis (typically through capitated payment arrangements) need to consider available 
options for limiting the fi nancial risks inherent in such agreements. These risks may 
be characterized as either specifi c, in which case the costs associated with providing 
care to an individual plan subscriber greatly exceed expectations, or aggregate, in 
which case the total costs of providing required health care services under the plan 
agreement are higher than anticipated. Various options exist for contractual transfer 
of risks above a certain level back to the MCO or for the purchase of “ stop - loss ” 
insurance coverage. 
 Other Risks 
 There are, of course, other areas of potential concern for the health care risk management professional. Among these are property and liability losses related to the operation 
of automobiles, trucks, vans, and ambulances owned or leased by the organization. 
Many facilities also own or operate helicopters or fi xed - wing air transport services or 
maintain heliports or helipads that pose additional liability and property risks. 
 Since September 11, 2001, U.S. health care institutions have become increasingly aware of their vulnerability to terrorist and bioterrorist attack. Organizations 
have sought to augment existing disaster and emergency preparedness plans to address 
scenarios in which the facility itself is the target of such an attack and those in which 
the institution plays a key role in triage and treatment response to an attack occurring 
elsewhere. Planning for such contingencies requires an analysis of patient care, 
employee - related and property - related risks of potentially staggering proportions, 
and the coordination of resources on a local, statewide, and national level. 15 (For more 
information on emergency management, see Chapter Sixteen .) Although typically 
representing a lesser proportion of the total cost of risk, hospitals and most other 
health care entities are accessible by the public and vulnerable to a wide variety of 
general liability claims stemming from visitor injuries caused by slips, falls, and other 
mishaps. The risk management professional must therefore be concerned with the 
overall maintenance of buildings, parking lots, and sidewalks and with visitor access 
and supervision. 
 Hazardous materials management is yet another area of concern for health care 
risk management. Ensuring that appropriate protocols are in place for the safe storage, 
use, and disposal of the myriad toxic chemicals and radioactive materials routinely 
used by health care organizations is a highly regulated and important risk management 
activity. 16 The implications for patients, employees, and the community at large should 
c01.indd 12 3/3/09 3:06:47 PM
such materials fi nd their way into the environment are chief considerations in managing 
hazardous materials programs. Proper disposal of infectious biological waste generated 
by hospitals and other health care entities continues to be a signifi cant public health and 
environmental concern. 
 Special issues involving auxiliary personnel and other volunteers who may provide services at hospitals and students involved in clinical training experiences who 
sustain injuries in the course of their duties or may infl ict harm on others also merit 
the risk management professional ’ s attention. Such individuals may not be routinely 
covered under the organization ’ s workers ’ compensation and liability insurance programs, and the risks pertaining to both groups must be specially considered by the 
risk management professional from both a risk fi nancing and loss prevention perspective. Requirements for training and supervision of volunteers and students and 
clearly delineated duties appropriate for such nonemployees must be adequately 
defi ned. 
 For senior - level health care risk management professionals rising within their 
organizations to the level of chief risk offi cer (CRO), an even larger universe of 
potential risks merits attention. The CRO concept was developed initially in the banking and fi nancial services industries to describe the role of a broadly experienced 
executive charged with responsibility for identifying and analyzing risks to an organization, whether or not insurable, developing strategies for handling such risks, and 
advising the governing board and senior management team. While still rare in health 
care sett ings, CROs often address issues ranging from the risk of increased market 
competition to the risk of regulatory sanctions if a certain course of corporate conduct is pursued and typically work closely with an organization ’ s internal audit, legal, 
and fi nance departments to formulate risk identifi cation, loss prevention, and risk 
fi nancing strategies. 
 THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
 Viewing risk management as a process helps the risk management professional set priorities and assists in ensuring a comprehensive risk management effort. The risk management process consists of fi ve steps (see Figure 1.1 ): 
 1. Identify and analyze loss exposures. 
 2. Consider alternative risk techniques. 
 3. Select what appears to be the best risk management technique or combination of 
techniques. 
 4. Implement the selected techniques. 
 5. Monitor and improve the risk management program. 17
 The sections that follow describe how each step of the risk management process 
should be considered in developing a comprehensive risk management program. 
The Risk Management Process 13
c01.indd 13 3/3/09 3:06:47 PM
FIGURE 1.1. Steps in Risk Management Decision Making
Source: George L. Head and Stephen Horn II, Essentials of Risk Management, 3rd ed., vol. 1 
(Malvern, PA: Insurance Institute of America, 1997), p. 15. Reprinted with permission.
Identifying and Analyzing Loss Exposures
Identification Analysis
Types of
Exposures
Methods of
Identifying Exposures 
Organizational
Objectives Significance
• Loss Frequency
• Loss Severity
• Property
• Liability
• Personnel
• Net Income
• Standardized
 Surveys/Questionnaires
• Loss Histories
• Financial Statements
• Records and Files
• Flowcharts
• Personal Inspections
• Experts
• Profit
• Continuous
 Operation
• Stable Earnings
• Growth
• Humanitarian
 Concerns
• Legal Requirements
Examining Feasibility of Alternative Techniques
Risk Control to Stop Losses Risk Financing to Pay for Losses
• Exposure Avoidance Retention Transfer
• Loss Prevention
• Loss Reduction
• Segregation of
 Exposures—Separation
• Segregation of
 Exposures—Duplication
• Contractual Transfer for
 Risk Control
• Current Expensing 
 of Losses
• Unfunded Reserve
• Funded Reserve
• Borrowing
• Captive Insurer 
• Contractual Transfer 
 for Risk Financing
• Commercial
 Insurance
• Hedging (for
 Business Risk Only)
Property of AICPCU/IIA
Monitoring and Improving the Risk Management Program
Purposes Control Program
• Results Standards
• Activities Standards
• To Ensure Proper
 Implementation
• To Detect and Adapt to
Changes
Selecting Apparently Best Techniques
Choosing Selection Criteria Decision Rules Applying Criteria
• Risk Control 
• Risk Financing 
• Financial Criteria
• Criteria Related to Other 
 Objectives
Implementing the Chosen Techniques
• Technical Decisions
• Managerial Decisions
Property of AICPCU/IIA
c01.indd 14 3/3/09 3:06:47 PM
 Step 1: Identify and Analyze Loss Exposures 
Risk identifi cation is the process whereby the risk management professional becomes 
aware of risks in the health care environment that constitute potential loss exposures 
for the institution. Such exposures can include loss of fi nancial assets through liability 
judgments and out - of - court settlements or casualty losses to physical plant and property, human losses through death or injury of employees, and intangible losses to public image and reputation. 
 The risk management professional uses many information sources to identify 
potential risks. Incident reporting, in which employees report accidents and occurrences not consistent with normal operating routines or expected outcomes, is the cornerstone of most risk identifi cation systems. Incident reporting systems range from 
sophisticated point - of - service electronic reporting and analysis packages to simple 
paper forms. Regardless of the format, incident reporting systems allow caregivers to 
provide the risk management department with basic early warning information about 
occurrences that are inconsistent with normal, expected patient care processes and that 
result (or have the potential to result) in injury to patients, visitors, staff, or property. 
Other common risk identifi cation processes include the following: 
■ Generic occurrence screening. Generic occurrence screening is a risk management process often performed as part of a health care organization ’ s performance 
improvement program. In a generic occurrence screening process, patient records are 
reviewed retrospectively to determine whether the care provided meets specifi c predetermined criteria. Generic screening criteria of interest to the risk management professional might include “ Did the patient sustain a fall during this admission? ” or “ Were 
all medications administered as ordered? ” Although generic occurrence screening 
often provides information that duplicates that reported through incident reports, the 
systematic nature of the process may capture incidents that should have been reported 
but were not. The major disadvantages of generic occurrence screening from a risk 
management perspective are the time lag inherent in reviewing records retrospectively 
and the fact that only incidents meeting preselected criteria will be identifi ed though 
the process. 
■ Patient complaints and satisfaction survey results. Survey data tallied by 
patient representatives (or community relations or marketing departments) is another 
source of risk management information. Such survey results may provide insight into 
individual patient issues and may offer aggregate trend data regarding patient experiences with the health care organization. 
■ Prior medical professional liability, property and casualty, and workers ’ 
compensation claims data. The analysis of such claims is a frequently used and valuable risk identifi cation tool. By studying the specifi c services, procedures, and activities that have resulted in claims against the organization in the past, the risk management 
professional is in a better position to anticipate future areas of concern and take appropriate action to mitigate subsequent losses. 
■ Surveys by The Joint Commission, the National Committee on Quality 
Assurance (NCQA),18 liability or other insurers, and risk management consultants.
The Risk Management Process 15
c01.indd 15 3/3/09 3:06:48 PM
16 Development of a Risk Management Program
Such survey processes help the risk management professional identify sources of 
potential risk that might have previously been overlooked by the organization. Outside 
experts and consultants draw on their experience to provide insight into the risk identifi -
cation process for the organization and compare the organization ’ s performance with 
national standards, pointing out areas meriting the risk management professional ’ s 
additional attention. 
■ State licensure surveys. These surveys play an important role in risk identifi cation. Although sometimes less important in hospitals and acute care settings, state surveys are an important part of risk management programs in long - term care facilities and 
outpatient settings. Findings from such surveys frequently identify areas of concern for 
risk management and performance improvement and guide loss prevention efforts. 
■ Contracts, leases, and other agreements. A review of salient contract provisions entered into by the organization frequently reveals risk exposures that must be 
addressed through modifi cation of the contract or agreement, insurance, or enhanced 
loss prevention activities. 
■ Information generated through the facility ’ s infection control and performance improvement functions. The data generated through such related functions 
should be routinely reviewed by the risk management professional to the extent permitted by law. (Concerns have been expressed in some jurisdictions that free access to 
medical staff peer review information by a risk management professional, who might 
use it in part to prepare for the defense of medical professional liability claims, may 
waive statutory protections provided under state peer review protection statutes. Seek 
the counsel of an attorney with expertise in this area when developing a mechanism 
for reviewing such information.) 
■ Informal discussions with managers and staff. Line managers and other staff 
members are excellent sources of information about potential risks with which the risk 
management professional may previously have been unfamiliar. 
Risk analysis is the process of determining the potential severity of the loss associated with an identifi ed risk and the probability that such a loss will occur. Together, 
those factors establish the seriousness of a risk and guide the risk management professional ’ s selection of an appropriate risk treatment strategy. Risk management professionals need to give priority to the areas of greatest potential risk of fi nancial loss, such 
as an anesthesia or obstetrical mishap, even though claims in these areas may occur 
infrequently. Ordinarily, less emphasis is given to small claims that occur frequently, 
unless the total costs associated with a certain type of incident are especially signifi -
cant. Although risk analysis is in part an art — a judgment call based on the training, 
experience, and instincts of the risk management professional — it is also a science in 
that certain data and objective sources of information are taken into consideration 
in evaluating a given risk. In particular, closed claims data, which reveal the frequency 
and severity of prior losses, should be reviewed to gain insight into the analysis of current risks. The organization ’ s legal counsel, insurance brokers, and insurance carriers 
c01.indd 16 3/3/09 3:06:48 PM
may be consulted for additional information (for more information on risk identifi cation and analysis, see Chapter Six ). 
 Step 2: Consider Alternative Risk Techniques 
 Risk management techniques or treatments refer to the range of choices available to risk 
management professionals for handling a given risk. Risk treatment strategies include 
two general categories: risk control and risk fi nancing. Risk control involves preventing 
losses or mitigating the magnitude of losses, while risk fi nancing involves paying for 
those losses that do occur. 
 Risk Control Risk control includes the following treatments or techniques: 
■ Exposure avoidance 
■ Loss prevention 
■ Loss reduction 
■ Segregation of loss exposures (separation or duplication) 
■ Non - insurance transfer l 
 Exposure Avoidance 
Exposure avoidance reduces the possibility of a loss to zero. Whereas other risk control techniques will reduce the frequency or severity of a loss, avoidance is the only 
risk control technique to eliminate any possibility for the loss to occur. When a given 
risk poses a particularly serious threat that cannot be effectively reduced or transferred, 
think about eliminating it. For example, a hospital might elect not to provide obstetrical 
services, thereby avoiding the risk of a birth trauma claim. Although the strategy might 
be very effective in terms of controlling risk exposure, it could come at the high cost of 
a loss of hospital mission effectiveness, market share, revenues, patient satisfaction, 
and medical staff relations, which could outweigh the risk management benefi t of the 
avoidance technique. 
Loss Prevention 
Loss prevention as a risk control technique reduces the likelihood of an untoward event 
occurring and focuses on reducing the frequency of loss. Loss prevention efforts are at the 
core of most health care risk management programs, are proactive, and include staff education, policy, and procedure review and revision. These interventions aim to control the 
number of adverse occurrences without unduly eliminating potentially risky activities. 
Loss Reduction 
Loss reduction or minimization involves various loss control strategies aimed at limiting the potential consequences of a given risk without totally accepting or avoiding 
them, thus focusing on reducing the severity of losses. Loss reduction or minimization 
The Risk Management Process 17
c01.indd 17 3/3/09 3:06:49 PM
18 Development of a Risk Management Program
efforts may also include risk management techniques, such as establishing and maintaining a rapport with injured patients and their families, thus limiting the severity of a 
loss that has already occurred. Other loss reduction treatments include prompt incident 
investigation, disaster and business continuity drills, written plans to support emergency management, fi re drills, and building structures equipped with sprinkler and 
alarm systems. Also, a facility offering obstetrical services may develop a protocol to 
save placentas from births meeting certain criteria for pathological review. Such an 
examination may encourage an early settlement if the examination is unfavorable and 
does not support quality care. If the review does support the care rendered, the pathological fi ndings become a defense tool in any subsequent claim against the facility or 
the practitioner. Although such a process does not prevent poor obstetrical outcome, it 
tends to reduce the potential fi nancial consequences of such occurrences to the 
organization. 
 Accreditation agencies such as The Joint Commission have instituted formal 
requirements for clinical loss prevention efforts, such as prescribed root cause analysis 
(RCA) and failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) processes. These analytical 
methodologies have long been intuitively applied by risk management professionals 
and are considered key patient safety and risk control activities. RCA represents a systematic approach to identifying the underlying causes of adverse occurrences so that 
effective steps can be taken to modify processes and prevent future losses. Through the 
use of FMEA, organizations analyze processes associated with high - risk procedures 
and clinical services so as to identify weaknesses in systems before a problem actually 
occurs. The processes examined need not be complex but are typically those that can 
have serious consequences if a systems failure occurs. The Universal Protocol, a methodology adopted by health care organizations to reduce the occurrence of wrong - site 
surgeries, was the result of an FMEA process. 19
Segregation of Loss Exposures 
 The fourth risk control technique is segregation of loss exposures. This technique 
involves arranging an organization ’ s activities and resources so that if a loss occurs, it 
will not affect the entire organization. Segregation of loss exposures consists of two 
categories: separation and duplication. 
Separation Separation, when properly applied, results in the distribution of a particular activity or asset over several locations, thereby confi ning the extent of the loss to 
only a portion of the organization should a loss occur at a single location. For example, 
a medical supply company might distribute its inventory among multiple warehouses 
or purchase supplies from different vendors to reduce the potential losses associated 
with a warehouse or manufacturing plant fi re. In a medical offi ce, separation may be 
evidenced by obtaining medications from multiple suppliers and the practitioner ’ s 
maintaining staff privileges at several hospitals. 
Duplication Duplication results in a reserve, or substitute for a product or service, 
being available for use even if the primary source or activity is affected by a loss. 
c01.indd 18 3/3/09 3:06:49 PM
Keeping copies of electronic records and computer fi les is a form of duplication. 
Although duplication of records is generally a convenient method to mitigate loss, 
duplicate records and fi les should be stored off - site to prevent accidental loss.
 Non - Insurance Transfer Non - insurance transfer reduces the transferor ’ s loss exposure by contractually shifting legal responsibility for a loss through leases, contracts 
and agreements. 
 Courts often refuse to enforce non - insurance transfers which: 
■ Unreasonably interfere with the rights of others (against public policy); or 
■ Were not fairly bargained between the parties (unconscionable because they 
are so drastically unfair to the transferee) 
 Risk Financing Risk fi nancing strategies include many ways to generate funds to 
pay for losses that risk control techniques do not entirely eliminate. These treatment 
techniques include both risk retention and risk transfer.
 Risk Retention One strategy for managing an identifi ed risk is risk retention. This 
treatment strategy involves assuming the potential losses associated with a given risk 
and making plans to cover the fi nancial consequences of such losses. The retention 
options open to health care organizations include the current expensing of losses, using 
an unfunded loss reserve (an accounting entry denoting a potential liability to pay for 
a loss), using a funded loss reserve (a reserve backed by set - aside funds within the 
organization), borrowing funds to pay for losses, and providing insurance through an 
affi liated captive insurer. 20 Another (less thought of) form of risk retention occurs 
when the risk of exposure to loss is unknown and has not been identifi ed by the organization or risk management professional, and therefore the opportunity to evaluate 
appropriate risk fi nancing strategies is lost. Failure to identify a risk will result in 
unwitting risk retention unless insurance coverage is available under an existing policy. Risk retention is most appropriate for managing (1) risks that cannot be otherwise 
reduced, transferred, or avoided; (2) risks for which the probability of loss is not great 
and for which the potential consequences are within the institution ’ s ability to self -
 fund; (3) losses that are quantifi able and predictable; and (4) small risks (such as 
 missing dentures and eyeglasses) for which the purchase of cost - effective insurance 
coverage might not be feasible. 
 For purposes of illustration, assume that a risk management professional has identifi ed a risk of injuries related to misdiagnosis of patients seen in the facility ’ s emergency department. Because the hospital ’ s governing board and administration might 
have identifi ed the provision of emergency services as central to both its mission and 
its market - positioning strategy, the hospital is unwilling to forgo providing such services as a means of eliminating the risk. The hospital may then choose to self - insure 
for losses associated with injuries (retention) or perhaps purchase an insurance policy 
to cover such losses (a risk transfer strategy). The purchase of insurance combined 
with a deductible, or a program of primary self - insurance, may be a viable option to 
The Risk Management Process 19
c01.indd 19 3/3/09 3:06:50 PM
20 Development of a Risk Management Program
help reduce cost. Likewise, a physician ’ s offi ce practice in California may elect (absent 
any loan covenants, mortgage restrictions, or regulatory requirements to the contrary) 
not to purchase earthquake insurance coverage on its offi ce building. The risk management professional may determine that the chances of the building ’ s being seriously 
damaged or destroyed in an earthquake are suffi ciently remote and the costs of securing such coverage are suffi ciently high to merit “ going bare ” for the exposure. If such 
a risk retention strategy is selected, it may be appropriate for the risk management professional to increase loss prevention and loss reduction efforts, such as the installation 
of sway bracing near sprinkler heads to reduce potential water damage in the event of 
an earthquake. Thus risk retention, like other available risk treatment strategies, should 
not be viewed in isolation but rather should be regarded as part of an overall strategy 
for managing an identifi ed risk. 
Risk Transfer Contractual transfer techniques for risk fi nancing involve shifting the 
fi nancial obligation for a loss, but not the ultimate legal responsibilities for losses, to 
an outside entity through the purchase of insurance from a third - party, unaffi liated 
insurer or noninsurance transfer through a contract provision, commonly described as 
a hold - harmless agreement. Through risk transfer, an institution can continue to 
engage in a risk - producing activity while transferring the fi nancial risk of loss to 
another party. For example, a hospital may purchase a medical professional liability 
policy to pay for any losses associated with medical malpractice, thereby transferring 
the fi nancial obligation for the loss to an insurance company while remaining legally 
liable for patient injuries caused by the negligence of its staff. 
 Step 3: Select the Best Risk Management Techniques 
 Selecting the best risk management technique or treatment for a specifi c situation is a 
two - part activity. The fi rst part requires forecasting the effects that the available risk 
management options are likely to have on the organization ’ s ability to fulfi ll its goals. 
The second is defi ning and applying criteria that measure how well each alternative 
risk management technique contributes to the organization ’ s objectives in a cost -
 effective way. 21 For most identifi ed risks, the health care facility will employ a combination of risk treatment and risk fi nancing techniques to manage a given risk. At a minimum, one risk control technique and one risk fi nancing technique should be combined 
to address each signifi cant exposure. The risk management professional may elect to 
employ any available combination of risk control and risk fi nancing techniques 
to obtain the desired results. Typically, health care organizations accept a certain 
amount of patient care liability risk through an insurance deductible or self - insured 
retention; attempt to limit potential risk by not offering some inherently high - risk 
 services; seek to reduce the severity of loss for incidents that have already occurred 
through prompt incident investigation and claim resolution; prevent future losses through 
in - service education, appropriate staffi ng, and credentialing; and transfer the remaining 
fi nancial risk by purchasing insurance. 
c01.indd 20 3/3/09 3:06:50 PM
 Step 4: Implement the Selected Techniques 
 The implementation process involves both the technical risk management decisions 
that must be made by risk management professionals and the related decisions that are 
made by other managers within the organization to implement the chosen risk management techniques. Technical expertise exercised by risk management professionals 
may include selecting an appropriate insurer and choosing appropriate policy limits 
and deductibles. In working with managers and other personnel, risk management professionals advise and infl uence others in implementing selected techniques that are not 
within their direct areas of responsibility. 
 Step 5: Monitor and Improve the Risk Management Program 
 The fi nal step in the risk management process is to evaluate and monitor the effectiveness 
of the risk management program by assessing the adequacy and appropriateness of the 
techniques employed to identify, analyze, and treat risks. Risk management evaluation 
involves not only the risk management professional but also senior management, medical staff and governing board, insurers, claims managers, and legal counsel. A multidisciplinary approach to evaluating the risk management program ensures that the impact of 
risk management activities on various constituencies is measured accurately and that 
additional opportunities to improve the risk management function are fully explored. To 
facilitate the risk management evaluation process, the risk management professional 
needs to prepare a comprehensive annual report of risk management efforts, highlighting 
signifi cant claims activity, new program developments, changes in insurance coverage, 
and contractual modifi cations having risk management signifi cance. These results should 
be compared against clearly defi ned benchmarks that have been identifi ed in advance of 
the review. Such benchmarks can be internal or external to the organization and may be 
as simple as comparing the current program results against those from the previous year. 
The risk management professional can also use data from independent but similar organizations against which to benchmark. Benchmarks frequently include a comparison of 
claims data. Claims data provide frequency and severity information for losses incurred, 
including the number of events reported and dollars spent to defend and settle them. (For 
more on benchmarking and program evaluation, see Chapter Fifteen .) 
 EVOLUTION OF THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 As the delivery of health care continues to change, so must the structure of risk management programs. The existing and emerging principles that apply to risk management will need to adapt to ensure safe, cost - effective, and clinically effective care. The 
health care organization as it is known today will be different in the future, with multiple levels and both horizontal and vertical integration. Interdependency on organizational strategic and fi nancial goals must be integrated into risk management program 
development and must meet the needs of the changing customer base and payer mix. It 
is possible that within one organization there will be a need to create different risk 
Evolution of the Risk Management Program 21
c01.indd 21 3/3/09 3:06:50 PM
22 Development of a Risk Management Program
management program structures and take different steps in assessing risk management 
needs in the health organization ’ s different areas. 
 SELECTING AN APPROPRIATE RISK MANAGEMENT 
PROGRAM STRUCTURE 
 A variety of risk management program structures can be considered, based on organizational size, scope of services and activities, available resources, and locations. 
Generally, acute care hospitals have preexisting systems that introduce and enhance 
risk management program components, whereas integrated delivery systems, long -
 term care settings, physician ’ s offi ce practices, home health care, and ambulatory care 
centers are less likely to have formalized risk management efforts. 
 The overall level of risk management responsibility can vary greatly. It can be any 
one of the following (or a combination, depending on organizational structure and 
expectations): 
■ All related risk management functions. In a traditional model, this structure 
requires an experienced risk management professional and a vast array of resources that 
can address each type of service provided within the organization. Knowledge of and 
experience in clinical care delivery, plant engineering, safety, claims, and fi nance are 
particularly helpful in large, multi - institutional organizations. The newest enterprise 
risk management model encompasses strategic planning, marketing, and even branding 
components. In many situations, on - site risk management coordinators integrate activities with the corporate or home offi ce. In many smaller organizations, all related risk 
management activities may be managed by one department or by one person. A physician ’ s offi ce practice is an example where one employee may be responsible for risk 
management, quality improvement, safety, medical records, disaster planning, infection 
control, and other functions. 
■ Responsibility for a set of defi ned risk management activities and services.
This structure continues to be the model of choice at community hospitals and hospitals in a system. Responsibility in this structure is spread among multiple departments. 
The coordination and facilitation of activities that affect risk management activities 
should still be managed and controlled out of a single offi ce, preferably the risk management department. In this model, there are generally separate departments for safety, 
security, quality improvement, corporate compliance, education and in - service, risk 
fi nancing, contract review and negotiating, claims administration, and so on. For 
example, the CFO may be responsible for the risk fi nancing program, in - house legal 
administration may be responsible for the claims administration and contract review, 
or the director of the emergency department may be responsible for disaster planning. 
The hospital or other health care setting that is part of an organized health system also 
has a limit to the breadth and depth of risk management responsibility at the local 
level. In many cases, the corporate offi ce mandates the risk fi nancing program and 
c01.indd 22 3/3/09 3:06:51 PM
may also manage all claims. Risk management positions at the local site generally 
revolve around loss control activities and are far more common than control of all risk 
management functions. The intent of systemwide programs is to create a general operational structure that encourages consistency and cost control while allowing for fl exibility, timeliness, and accountability at the lowest possible levels. 
■ Role referred to external consultants or an outsourced professional. At times, 
an organization may choose to supplement its risk management functions. Consistent 
with the consulting and outsourcing structure model is a process to internally manage 
the fl ow of information and facilitate communication. Consultative and outsourcing 
structures are commonly used during times of merger, acquisition, and divestiture, 
when the organization faces severe fi nancial constraints, has a loss of key risk management personnel, or is undergoing reengineering efforts or management change. It is 
not unusual that in this structure the need still exists for a risk management professional. This individual then becomes the contact point between the outsourced organization or consultant and senior management, and the outsourced organization becomes 
the risk management “ back room. ” 
 Regardless of the health care organization ’ s choice of formal structure, its risk 
management program should incorporate the basic elements, components, and functions described throughout this chapter. All risk management activities require alignment with the organization ’ s mission and strategic plan. 
 ASSESSING AREAS OF THE ORGANIZATION THAT NEED 
RISK MANAGEMENT 
 Assessment methodology may vary, but consistency in its application should be maintained. Assessment fi ndings, and any improvement strategies, should be presented uniformly so that the organization and individuals maintain a clear understanding of the 
fi ndings and resulting recommendations. 
 Any assessment can be approached in various ways, but most risk management 
professionals fi nd that having written guidelines helps avoid overlooking key points. 
There are many tools from which to choose, one of which is the Risk Management 
Self - Assessment Manual . 
22 Other sources can be found through literature searches and 
in outside organizations such as insurance companies, regulatory agencies, and consulting fi rms. 
 Identify the Various Areas for Assessment 
 Because assessments can take time, after evaluating basic organizational structures, 
the focus should usually start with high - risk, high - volume, and high - visibility areas. In 
multi - institutional organizations, assessments should be tailored so that organizationwide processes and institutional specifi c programs are assessed. This will allow for 
more comprehensive fi ndings that refl ect the organizational status. 
Assessing Areas of the Organization That Need Risk Management 23
c01.indd 23 3/3/09 3:06:51 PM
24 Development of a Risk Management Program
 In general, profi ling the organization ’ s current services and business relationships 
is important in identifying the various areas for assessment. The assessment process 
should include the organization on an enterprisewide basis, assessing it from an operational, clinical, and business perspective. This process could be viewed as taking 
inventory of activities that might have potential risk and as fi nding a starting point for 
developing or renewing the risk management program ’ s focus. This inventory includes 
a systematic review of the organization ’ s functions, data, budget, and workforce and a 
survey of perceptions about the effectiveness of systems and processes already in 
place. The assessment may reveal fi ndings and needs that differ according to the organization ’ s various areas. An example could be if an organization decides to institute a 
research department but lacks a defi ned and operational institutional review board, 
which could result in regulatory noncompliance and direct patient risk. 
 Analyzing Current Systems 
 The second phase of the assessment is to analyze systems that are already in place for 
minimizing risk and then determine current effectiveness. Profi les should include 
identifi cation of key contacts and responsibilities, level and types of risk fi nancing, 
contractual relationships, and risk management activities (including policies, orientation, job and credentialing requirements, integration into current organizational structure, and safety and quality program integration). Areas or topics to be inventoried 
may include these: 
■ Educational relationships — levels and types of agreements, formal or informal 
■ Staff relationships — employed, contracted, independent, network (where staff 
fl oat from one entity of a large organization to another), or consulting (may involve 
the assessment of staff issues) 
■ Scope of services — not only types but also where and to what degree; might also 
include reporting relationships 
■ Subsidiaries owned, partnered, or otherwise associated with the organization 
■ Accreditations, licenses, certifi cations, or other designations in which any or all 
parts of the organization participate 
■ Human resource issues, with focus on preemployment screening, ongoing competency evaluation, and staffi ng 
■ Information management methodologies, computerized information and access, 
and other information issues such as retention and release 
■ Clinical technology issues — selection, maintenance, user training, and product 
and equipment problem - tracking systems — and level of support technology, such 
as bar coding and order entry software 
■ Level of consistent application of systems throughout the organization 
c01.indd 24 3/3/09 3:06:52 PM
■ Assessment of the organizational core values, including philosophy and practice 
with regard to disclosure and nonpunitive environment 
■ Loss assessment data, loss runs, and results of inspection by regulatory agencies 
■ Credentialing and orientation processes for nonemployee staff, both initially and 
at reappointment 
■ Contract management protocols 
■ Safety and quality management program structure and its integration and 
effectiveness 
■ Emergency preparedness protocols and emergency management relationships 
external to the organization 
 Assessing Compliance 
 Risk management programs must meet not only organizational needs but also the 
requirements of outside entities that by choice or mandate make demands on the health 
care organization ’ s operation. The managed care market may require not just a slate of 
activities and reporting provisions but also that certain accreditations be maintained. 
Rules set forth by regulatory agencies must also be factored into the activities and 
 processes as the risk management program develops and expands. One should fi rst 
review and analyze the most recent fi ndings of all external reviews, inspections, and 
surveys and any reports from consultants. These reports and the status of the action 
taken in response, along with appropriate standards issued by various bodies, can be 
used to compile assessment tools that can assist in evaluating the risk management 
program and in planning for improvement. During this review of external demands, 
attention to the organization ’ s ability to identify, track, and integrate external mandates should also be assessed. 
 Reviewing the Assessments 
 Assessments are often performed to identify risk management program strengths and 
opportunities for improvement. Analysis should include categorizing fi ndings according to severity, frequency, effect on the organization ’ s strategic plan, areas identifi ed 
for improvement, and best practices identifi ed. Good practice without supporting documentation should be assessed as both a practice strength and an information weakness. For example, even if it is identifi ed that the patient care process might need no 
immediate attention, the recording or tracking of patient care information might require 
integration into a better - defi ned information process to substantiate practice patterns. 
 Setting Priorities for Program Implementation 
 Established risk management programs should undergo continuous reassessment, particularly as new areas are added or for those previously identifi ed as weak. Regulations 
and other external mandates, along with areas of severe loss, should command the 
Assessing Areas of the Organization That Need Risk Management 25
c01.indd 25 3/3/09 3:06:52 PM
26 Development of a Risk Management Program
most immediate attention. Organizational emphasis (what the strategic plan and 
the mission support) will also need to be factored into the list of areas to be addressed 
fi rst. One useful tool is to map out a strategy to take advantage of the many activities 
that are interdependent. Some risk management activities that might seem less important may need to be initiated to lay the groundwork for success in high - impact areas. 
An example might be the development of user - friendly reporting or early identifi cation tools that are adapted for the organization ’ s various departments and services. 
Such a project could be multidisciplinary and supported by various areas within the 
organization, which can lead to an enhanced quality - improvement database. In setting 
priorities for program implementation, risk management professionals should clearly 
defi ne the desired outcome. Having done an analysis, the risk management professional should be aware of the organization ’ s strengths and weaknesses and of improvements or expansions that need to be accomplished. Preliminary work may consist of 
collecting data and drafting early versions of future measurement tools. Another key 
item is to identify levels of understanding, not only during the assessment but also 
once an analysis has been formulated. The result of action or inaction must be clearly 
defi ned in relation to the direct effect on the organization. 
 KEY COMPONENTS FOR GETTING STARTED 
 For any risk management program to achieve its goals, several key components must 
be in place. Organizational commitment — that is, acceptance of roles and support for 
program aspects by the various levels of leadership, starting with the board — is a 
necessity. Commitment is often demonstrated through assignments of responsibility, 
adoption of accountability systems, approval of the program, and participation in 
aspects requiring support and action. The ultimate goal is to integrate risk management 
components, systems, and strategies into the overall organizational culture of safety. 
 Access to all levels of the organization, with defi ned accountabilities and identifi -
cation of resources, is also part of the initial structure formation. No risk management 
program can function in isolation; its integration with other initiatives, particularly 
safety, is crucial to its success. By relying on already established relationships, risk 
management professionals can enhance programs with limited resources by strengthening operational linkages and avoiding duplication of effort. Negative perceptions 
about the risk management program might damage its credibility before it even gets 
under way. Physicians often perceive that risk management ’ s involvement after an 
event has occurred only makes matters worse or that the only motivation is to minimize costs. Frequently, risk management programs are viewed as reactive to crisis 
rather than proactive in creating a safe culture. 
 Risk management activities should focus on support and service, using facilitative 
techniques in guiding the clinicians ’ understanding of the nonnegotiable forces (regulatory 
fi nes, accreditations, citations, and agency requirements) and the alternatives available. 
Clinical staff should have input into both the risk management process and the analysis, 
redesign, and monitoring stages. Most program elements that affect clinical functions 
c01.indd 26 3/3/09 3:06:52 PM
require that clinical staff members become committed to risk management concepts and 
understand the desired outcomes. Ensuring that duplication of effort is minimized can be a 
key selling point to staff members in accepting their roles in the risk management effort. 
Simplifi cation of any process is always welcome. A method for seeking continual staff 
feedback should also be developed to ensure ownership of the program by all staff. 
 WRITING A RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM PLAN 
 The written risk management program plan includes an overview of the purpose, structure, and process of risk management activities within the organization. Within this 
framework, organizational performance objectives can be developed in addition to policies and guidelines to support the identifi ed processes that maximize achievement of the 
program ’ s objectives. It is critical to maintain an integrated approach at this point of 
development to achieve consistency of purpose within the organization and to avoid 
duplication of effort. Rather than create new systems for the risk management process, 
the risk management professional should evaluate how best to enhance existing systems. 
 As with all programs that have a data collection and monitoring function, reports, 
memos, and minutes will be generated as communication tools. To be most effective, 
these tools must meet the needs of those responsible for the implementation and change 
of risk management and safety practices. Therefore, it is important that those served by 
such information have input into its ultimate design and format as a means of maximizing 
its usefulness. (See Appendix A for an example of a risk management program plan.) 
 ACHIEVING PROGRAM ACCEPTANCE 
 Often the quickest way to gain support for a program is to provide visibility and education on its related topics. A well - designed risk management program will not be successful unless staff members at all levels understand its purpose and methods. In some 
cases, the risk management professional may even provide unrelated services simply 
as a means to gain the acceptance and trust vital to the program ’ s success. Often the 
support of an interested medical staff member serving as an advocate familiarizes others with the merits of the risk management program. The risk management program 
achieves visibility through participation in employee orientation and continuing education activities. A focus on the prevention aspects of risk management creates a less 
threatening atmosphere and aligns efforts with the increasing focus on safety. 
Maintaining a subject fi le on risk management topics such as consent, information 
release, falls, medication process, human factors that contribute to error - prone behavior, and credentialing allows the risk management professional to have supplemental 
resources when participating in education and quality and performance improvement 
projects. Another strategy is to become involved in the organization ’ s efforts in 
responding to external initiatives or mandates such as The Joint Commission ’ s 
National Patient Safety Goals, insurance carrier criteria, state licensing requirements, 
and conditions of participation from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
 Achieving Program Acceptance 27
c01.indd 27 3/3/09 3:06:53 PM
28 Development of a Risk Management Program
 SUMMARY 
 Establishing a risk management program is no simple task, particularly in today ’ s 
complex health care environment. Assessment of the health care organization ’ s internal and external relationships and forces will provide an excellent basis for the issues 
the risk management program must address. Establishing risk management ’ s role 
in the overall safety initiatives and safety culture development must also be included 
in the risk management program. Obtaining commitment to the program from all levels of the organization, top to bottom, can be a slow process but must be achieved for 
full integration to occur. Translating a written plan into functional risk management 
processes requires collaboration and facilitation skills now more than ever. No matter 
how detailed the risk management plan may be, the program will always be evolving 
as it adapts to the changes in health care. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Accidental loss 
 Adverse occurrence 
 Adverse medication event 
 Adverse outcome 
 Ambulatory care 
 Chief risk offi cer 
 Error 
 Event 
 Exposure 
 Hospital - acquired infection 
 Incident 
 Incident reporting 
 The Joint Commission 
 Loss 
 Loss control 
 Loss prevention 
 Loss reduction 
 Loss run 
 Malpractice 
 Neglect 
 Negligence 
 Outcome 
 Patient safety 
 Risk analysis 
 Risk avoidance 
 Risk control techniques 
 Risk fi nancing 
 Risk identifi cation 
 Risk management 
 Risk reduction 
 Risk transfer 
 Sentinel event 
 ACRONYMS 
 ASHRM 
 CEO 
 CFO 
 CMS 
 CRO 
 DED 
 EEOC 
 FME 
 HIPAA 
 IDS 
 MCO 
 NCQA 
 OSHA 
 RCA 
c01.indd 28 3/3/09 3:06:53 PM
NOTES 
 1. Kuhn, A. M. “ Introduction to Risk Management. ” In B. J. Youngberg (ed.), The 
Risk Manager ’ s Desk Reference . Gaithersburg, Md.: Aspen, 1988. 
 2. Ibid., p. 1. 
 3. Ibid. 
 4. Taravella, S. “ The Rise of Risk Management. ” Modern Healthcare, Oct. 8, 1990. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6. Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, J. M., and Donaldson, M. S. (eds). To Err Is Human: 
Building a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 
1999. 
 7. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. 2005 
Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals. Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.: Joint 
Commission, 2004. 
 8. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (P.L. 104 - 191); 45 
CFR, Parts 160 and 164 (Aug. 14, 2002); Sarbanes - Oxley Reform Act (P.L. 
107 - 204); 116 Stat. 746, USC, Title 15, § § 7201 et seq. 
 9. Medical Malpractice: Verdicts, Settlements and Statistical Analysis. Horsham, 
Pa.: LRP Publications, 2002. 
 10. “ What ’ s Ahead on the Medical Liability Front in 2002? ” Medical Liability 
Monitor, Jan. 21, 2002. 
 11. Ibid. 
 12. Ibid. 
 13. 42 USC 1320. 
 14. Laughinhouse v. Risser, 786 F.Supp. 920 (Kan. 1992); Trotta v. Mobil Oil Corp.,
798 F.Supp. 1336 (D.C. N.Y. 1992); Jewell v. Palmer Broadcasting Ltd., Iowa 
Dist. Ct. No. CL94 - 56040, Dec. 30, 1993. 
 15. Gamble, R. H. “ The Insurance Renewal Marathon, ” http://businessfi nancemag.com
/article/insurance - renewal - marathon - 0201 , Feb. 1, 2002. 
 16. Hazard Communication Standard: Final Rule. Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, 29 CFR 1910 - 1200. 
 17. Head, G. L., and Kwok - Sze, R. W. Risk Management for Public Entities . Malvern, 
Pa.: Center for the Advancement of Risk Management Education, 1999, pp. 4 – 5. 
 18. JCAHO, 2005 Comprehensive Accreditation Manual; National Committee on 
Quality Assurance. NCQA Standards for Accreditation (CR 8.0, CR 13.0). 
Washington, D.C.: National Committee on Quality Assurance, 1995. 
Notes 29
c01.indd 29 3/3/09 3:06:53 PM
30 Development of a Risk Management Program
 19. Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. Universal 
Protocol for Preventing Wrong Site, Wrong Procedure, Wrong Person Surgery.
Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.: Joint Commission, 2004. 
 20. Head and Kwok - Sze, Risk Management for Public Entities, pp. 4 – 5. 
 21. Ibid. 
 22. American Hospital Association, Risk Management Self - Assessment Manual.
Chicago: American Hospital Association, 2000. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Brown, B. L. Risk Management for Hospitals: A Practical Approach. Rockville, Md.: 
Aspen, 1979. 
Healthcare Risk Control, published monthly by the Emergency Care Research Institute 
(ECRI), 5200 Butler Pike, Plymouth Meeting, PA 19462. 
Hospital Peer Review, published monthly by American Health Consultants, Inc., 3525 
Piedmont Road NE, Building 6, Suite 400, Atlanta, GA 30305. 
Hospital Risk Management, published monthly by American Health Consultants, Inc., 
3525 Piedmont Road NE, Building 6, Suite 400, Atlanta, GA 30305. 
 Jessee, W. F. Quality of Care Issues for the Hospital Trustee: A Practical Guide to 
Fulfi lling Trustee Responsibilities. Chicago: Hospital Research and Educational 
Trust, 1984. 
 Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. Hospital Patient 
Safety Standards: Examples of Compliance. Chicago: Joint Commission 
Resources, 2002. 
Journal of Healthcare Risk Management, published quarterly by the American Society 
for Healthcare Risk Management of the American Hospital Association, One 
North Franklin, Chicago, IL 60606. 
 Kraus, G. P. Health Care Risk Management: Organization and Claims Administration. 
Owings Mills, Md.: National Health Publishing, 1986. 
Risk Management Pearls series, published by the American Society for Healthcare 
Risk Management of the American Hospital Association, One North Franklin, 
Chicago, IL 60606. 
 Rowland, H., and Rowland, B. Hospital Risk Management: Forms, Checklists, and 
Guidelines. Gaithersburg, Md.: Aspen, 1993. 
c01.indd 30 3/3/09 3:06:54 PM
31
CHAPTER
2
THE HEALTH CARE 
RISK MANAGEMENT 
PROFESSIONAL 
 JEANNIE SEDWICK 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to describe six functional areas of risk management in health care 
settings 
■ To be able to describe seven health care settings in which a risk manager 
might function 
■ To be able to develop two examples of common risks associated with each 
setting 
■ To be able to identify two skill sets and two attributes required for success as 
a health care risk manager 
■ To be able to identify the major professional education programs for health 
care risk management professionals 
c02.indd 31 3/2/09 12:00:39 PM
32 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
 Health care has changed dramatically over the past forty years, and this has led to an 
expansion in the role and responsibilities of health care risk management professionals. In the early years of the profession, health care risk managers focused primarily on 
exposures that related to general and professional liability. Today, health care risk 
management professionals must manage not only those exposures but also exposures 
that relate to managed care and capitation risks, mergers and acquisitions, employment and workers ’ compensation risks, and risks related to corporate compliance and 
organizational ethics. Despite the signifi cant changes in health care over the past 
decades, the risk management process has remained virtually unchanged and continues to serve the same purpose: to maintain a safe and effective health care environment 
for patients, visitors, and employees, thereby preventing or reducing losses to the organization. Many risk management professionals are adopting the enterprise risk management (ERM) approach, described as a comprehensive process that evaluates all 
risk exposures confronting an organization from the top down. ERM is a discipline 
broad in scope and refl ects an organizationwide, ongoing commitment to risk management principles. To be effective, ERM should be part of the organization ’ s strategic 
plan and viewed as both a proactive and a reactive process. 
 This chapter provides an overview of the role of the health care risk management 
professional and the skills necessary for performing this function in an ever - changing 
health care environment. Information is provided about the educational and experiential backgrounds of risk management professionals and about commonly held designations. Educational programs for individuals who wish to enter the fi eld or for those 
in the fi eld who wish to further their education are also discussed. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Enterprise risk management is a comprehensive approach to identifying and managing all risks to an organization.
■ The role of the risk management professional is infl uenced by an organization’s 
size, location, structure, and risk fi nancing program.
■ The risk management professional is active in six functional areas: loss prevention 
and reduction, claims management, risk fi nancing, regulatory and accreditation 
compliance, risk management operations, and bioethics.
■ The risk management professional working with an integrated delivery system, a 
multifacility health system, or an academic or teaching medical center generally requires a higher level of expertise and has broader responsibilities in risk fi nancing 
and claims management than would be required in the single acute care hospital.
c02.indd 32 3/2/09 12:00:41 PM
 THE RISK MANAGER ’ S JOB: FUNCTIONAL AREAS OF 
RESPONSIBILITY 
 The roles and responsibilities of health care risk management professionals vary 
widely. Risk management program components — and therefore the roles of the risk 
management professional — are greatly infl uenced by the size and structure of the 
organization and by the risk fi nancing strategies it employs. The profession itself 
has evolved along functional needs and growing regulatory mandates, without benefi t of extensive scientifi c study or a well - defi ned body of knowledge. Until recently, 
no attempt had been made to quantify the many activities that have come to make 
up the health care risk management professional ’ s functional job responsibilities. 
Thus it is not possible to describe the “ typical ” health care risk management professional ’ s job. 
 The risk management professional often performs specifi c duties that may result 
in a variety of titles for the position, including risk manager, chief risk offi cer, or 
patient safety offi cer, refl ecting the expanding roles and responsibilities of the health 
care risk professional. The chief risk offi cer (CRO) in the health care setting is gaining 
more visibility in larger organizations and usually resides at the senior management 
level. The title of chief risk offi cer was fi rst used by James Lam at GE Capital in 1993 
to describe a function to manage “ all aspects of risk, ” including risk management, 
back - offi ce operations, and business and fi nancial planning. 1
 The CRO position is 
quickly fi nding a place in health care organizations to respond to increased regulatory 
pressures and a variety of business risks better known as ERM. 
 The role of the patient safety offi cer (PSO) is founded on the growth of the modern patient safety movement and new patient safety regulations and requirements. 
Restructuring within health care organizations so as to formalize the PSO responsibilities offers risk management professionals and others an opportunity to highlight their 
current contributions to patient safety, develop additional skills, and expand their profi le. The job description for a patient safety offi cer can vary, but the basic functions are 
identifi ed in Exhibit 2.1 . Risk management professionals assuming the additional 
responsibilities of the PSO may need to enhance their job descriptions with the responsibilities at level one, two, or three as indicated in Exhibits 2.2 , 2.3 , and 2.4 , respectively. (Additional information on the patient safety offi cer program can be found in 
Chapter Three .) 
 In 1999, the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management (ASHRM) conducted the fi rst role delineation study in health care risk management. 2
 The purpose 
of this study was to identify those activities that make up a health care risk management professional ’ s job and thereby defi ne health care risk management ’ s body of 
knowledge. A list of approximately 160 task statements describing various risk management functions and activities was sent to 2,500 health care risk management professionals, who were asked to rate the importance of each task. The fi ndings suggest 
that the health care risk management professional ’ s job responsibilities can be divided 
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 33
(Continued on page 50)
c02.indd 33 3/2/09 12:00:42 PM
34 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.1. Patient Safety Offi cer Job Description
Position Summary
The Patient Safety Offi cer will supervise personnel responsible for the delivery of patient 
safety services and risk management. The Patient Safety Offi cer incorporates and utilizes 
methods to improve all aspects of patient safety, risk management, and quality. The PSO 
will oversee the collection, analysis and dissemination of PS data and information. The 
PSO will analyze clinical processes, identify potential risks for patients and employees 
and develop strategies to maximize safety, effectiveness and effi ciency. The PSO will 
oversee the development and implementation of medical error reduction strategies in 
collaboration with all departments and patient care areas. Additionally, the Patient 
Safety Offi cer will be primarily responsible for communication and marketing related to 
patient safety initiatives.
Reports To: Chief Patient Safety and Quality Offi cer
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTABILITIES AND ESSENTIAL DUTIES OF THE JOB
Service Excellence (100% of time)
■ Provides excellent service to all customers, meeting or exceeding their needs/expectations, to ensure continuous improvement of customer-focused environment. 
■ Exemplifi es excellent customer service towards physicians, patients, families, staff, 
visitors, co-workers and other departments. Shows courtesy, compassion, and 
respect in communication with all customers. 
■ Contributes to teamwork and harmonious working relationships. 
■ Partners with healthcare teams, patients and families to continuously solicit feedback and information to improve patient safety and quality. Actively supports 
patients, families and employees involved in serious PS events.
Provides clinical and operational guidance to all personnel performing patient safety 
and risk management duties (100% of time)
■ Acts as coach and mentor to PS and Risk Management personnel, providing feedback about performance routinely.
■ Performs all duties of manager at BJH including: hiring and fi ring, budget preparation, performance appraisals and other human resource/personnel functions.
■ Assists Chief Patient Safety and Quality Offi cer and Chief Medical Offi cer with all 
responsibilities related to PS.
c02.indd 34 3/2/09 12:00:43 PM
Responsible for Data Management, Analysis, and Safety Event Reporting (30% of time)
■ Oversees activities related to data collection, data review, analysis and dissemination 
of patient safety information.
■ Reviews safety event data from Safety Event Reporting databases. 
■ Identifi es trends, clusters, and risk factors; establishes benchmarks for comparison.
■ Oversees the dissemination of accurate, user-friendly PS reports in a timely fashion to 
key stakeholders.
■ Demonstrates expertise in use of PS software and databases.
Oversee all activities related to: Risk Prevention and Medical Error Reduction (30% 
of time)
■ Uses risk factor data to develop evidence-based PS interventions and process 
improvement strategies.
■ Collaborates with healthcare teams to rapidly identify risk, employ prevention and 
risk reduction strategies.
■ Demonstrates expertise and participates in PI team facilitation, leadership and 
membership.
■ Participates in Root Cause Analysis (RCA), Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) 
and cluster investigation.
■ Utilizes systems thinking, human factors and complexity science, principles of epidemiology and PI improvement to prevent and mitigate risk to patients and 
employees.
Education, Training, and Safety Performance Maintenance (10% of time)
■ Oversees the development and implementation of basic PS education and training 
curriculum, on-going training, employee orientation, and competency testing.
■ Collaborates with clinical and administrative leaders to identify areas of educational 
need to enhance PS.
■ Provides just-in-time education and routine PS presentations to key stakeholders.
■ Actively participates in Patient Safety Council Forums and educational programs.
■ Promotes a culture where errors and near-misses are openly discussed and used as 
learning opportunities.
■ Provides education and consultation to patients, families, visitors, and healthcare 
teams on PS issues.
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 35
(Continued)
c02.indd 35 3/2/09 12:00:43 PM
36 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.1. (Continued)
■ Conducts patient safety rounds to gather information and educate on routine 
basis.
Committee and Team Responsibilities:
■ Patient Safety and Quality Committee.
■ PI, RCA, FMEA teams.
■ Patient Safety Council.
■ May be member of policy-making committees of hospital or medical staff (e.g., 
Infection Control Committee, Risk Mgt. & Safety Council, Pharmacy & Therapeutics, 
Unit Practice Council).
Experience and Position Requirements
■ At least 10 years of clinical experience and 5 years of management experience 
preferred.
■ Masters in nursing, public health or other related fi eld required.
■ Team building and budget experience required.
■ Demonstrates excellent: written and verbal communication skills, computer profi -
ciency, relationship management and confl ict negotiation problem-solving skills. 
■ Use of quality improvement tools and methods preferred.
Source: Barnes Jewish Hospital, 2005. Reprinted with permission.
EXHIBIT 2.2. Risk Manager Position Description, Level One
Position Summary
The risk manager is responsible for the facility’s risk management activities, which 
include, but may not be limited to, a general knowledge of facility insurance programs, 
managing claims against the facility, interfacing with defense legal counsel, administering the risk management program on a day-to-day basis, managing and analyzing risk 
management data, and conducting risk management educational programs, complying 
with risk management related standards by JCAHO and other accrediting and regulatory 
agencies with the objective of enhancing patient safety, promoting patient safety, quality care, and minimizing loss to protect the assets of the facility. This individual participates 
c02.indd 36 3/2/09 12:00:44 PM
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 37
in formulating policy and/or organizational changes, but must seek advice and approval 
from higher authority. Risk management may be one of several areas of responsibility for 
this individual.
OPERATIONS/COMPLIANCE
Overview
The level one risk manager has specifi c responsibilities regarding gathering and analyzing data and preparing reports to management and outside agencies as required, which 
may be subject to fi nal approval by facility management. Responsible for keeping management advised of developments in professional liability, entailing ongoing review of 
applicable literature. May recommend budget items to management.
Specifi c Activities
■ Develops, coordinates, and administers facility-wide systems for risk identifi cation, 
investigation, and reduction; maintains a network of informational sources and 
experts; performs risk surveys and inspects patient care areas; reviews facility and to 
assess loss potential.
■ Participates on committees directed towards promoting patient safety issues.
■ Maintains risk management statistics and fi les in compliance with JCAHO and state 
and federal agencies; promotes maximum confi dentiality by limiting access of such 
information. Also strives to verify that the following information is accurate, available, 
and secure: includes medical records, patient billing records, policies and procedures, 
incident reports, medical examiners' reports (if available), as well as any other data 
pertinent to a particular claim. 
■ Collects, evaluates, and distributes relevant data concerning patient injuries: aggregate data summaries, monthly trend analyses of incidents, claims profi les, and 
workers' compensation trends; provides aggregate analysis of risk data; maintains 
statistical trending of losses and other risk management data.
■ Informs directors of service and department heads regarding occurrences, issues, 
fi ndings, and risk management suggestions; provides feedback to directors at all levels in the effort to eliminate risks; assists clinical chairs and department heads in 
designing risk management programs within their departments. 
■ Works with legal counsel to coordinate the investigation, processing, and defense of 
claims against the facility; records, collects, documents, maintains, and provides to 
defense attorneys any requested information and documents necessary to prepare 
testimony in pending litigation.
(Continued)
c02.indd 37 3/2/09 12:00:44 PM
38 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.2. (Continued)
■ Responds to professional liability and facility liability questions posed by physicians, 
nurses, and other personnel.
■ May have on-call responsibility.
■ Advises security on procedures to reduce the frequency and/or minimize the severity 
of property loss or assets.
■ Provides assistance to departments in complying with Joint Commission or other 
accrediting agencies, regarding risk management related standards.
■ Recommends appropriate revisions to new or existing policies and procedures to 
reduce the frequency of future occurrences; recommends ways to minimize risks 
through system changes; reviews and revises facility policies as appropriate to maintain adherence to current standards and requirements.
LOSS PREVENTION/PATIENT SAFETY
Overview
The level one risk manager is responsible for development of loss prevention programs 
that may include but not limited to patient safety issues. Periodic in-services and routine 
orientation may be conducted for facility employees/ medical staff regarding health 
care risk management and related subjects. This position may utilize outside speakers 
and faculty for such programs, subject to the approval of management, and may coordinate such efforts with the facility’s education department.
Specifi c Activities
■ Proactive analysis of patient safety and medical errors processes.
■ Participates in the process of disclosure for medical errors.
■ Participates in root cause analysis investigation and reporting of adverse drug events 
and sentinel events to the appropriate parties.
■ Maintains awareness of legislative and regulatory activities related to health care risk 
management.
■ Complies with various codes, laws, rules, and regulations concerning patient care, 
including those mandated by state and federal agencies' incident reporting. Includes 
investigation activities of federal, state, and local enforcement authorities.
■ Provides in-service training to medical center personnel to enhance their awareness 
of their role in reducing liability exposures.
c02.indd 38 3/2/09 12:00:45 PM
■ Disseminates information on claim patterns and risk control, as well as legislative 
and regulatory changes.
■ Maintains a risk management education calendar.
■ Takes steps to ascertain that risks are minimized through follow-up and actions on all 
regulatory/insurance survey report recommendations/defi ciencies.
■ Receives and investigates reports of product problems to determine appropriate 
response (in-house recalls, independent evaluations, etc.).
■ Participates on select committees related to provision of patient care.
■ Receives incident reports and other information regarding untoward occurrences in 
the facility, such as quality assurance outliers or variations, and collates such information systematically to permit analysis pursuant to risk management policy and 
procedure.
■ Reviews collated data to identify trends regarding accidents or occurrences, and recommends corrective action to management, if appropriate. 
■ Prepares reports to management regarding trends/patterns and fi ndings. Recommends electronic data programming initiation and improvement.
CLAIMS MANAGEMENT 
Overview
The level 1 risk manager receives complaints/claims related to professional and general 
liability and transmits that information to the appropriate department manager, 
administrative representative, patient ombudsman, insurance carrier, or legal counsel. 
At the request of management, legal counsel, or the adjuster, participates in responding to the complaint or claim to obtain information and facilitate settlement at an 
early stage. Works in coordination with patient ombudsman or acts as same to resolve 
complaints before they develop into professional/general liability claims. 
Specifi c Activities
Designs, implements, and maintains a direct referral system for staff to report unexpected events and potential claims against the facility through such input sources as 
medical records, business offi ce, patient advocate, nursing, medical staff, quality 
improvement, etc.
■ Investigates and analyzes actual and potential risks in the institution; assesses liability and probability of legal action for potential notifi cation of insurance carriers.
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 39
(Continued)
c02.indd 39 3/2/09 12:00:45 PM
40 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.2. (Continued)
■ Directly refers to administration those incidents with claims potential; reports to 
higher authority any serious event involving actual or potential injury to patients, visitors, or employees.
■ Assists in processing summons and complaints served on present and previous 
employees; assists defendants in completing necessary documents.
■ With director of patient representatives, reviews patient complaints that may be the 
source of potential legal action; discusses and offers solutions when possible to 
resolve with patient and/or family any grievances perceived as potential liability 
claims.
■ Participates in evaluation of claims for settlement; negotiates settlement of small 
claims within administrative authority; advises collection department of appropriate 
action for unpaid accounts involved in litigation; approves payment for or replacement of lost property after evaluating claim.
■ Reviews national and local claims data; analyzes prior claims, lawsuits, and complaints against the facility.
RISK FINANCING
Overview
The level 1 risk manager has general knowledge of, and is familiar with, the facility’s 
insurance coverage against liability and casualty loss, including self-insurance funding 
and budgeting for payment of deductibles, risk retention, and coinsurance. Usually participates in management reviews of insurance coverage and related issues. May prepare 
summaries of the facility’s insurance program for management and staff.
Specifi c Activities
■ Notifi es the liability insurance carrier of all actual and potential claims, including primary and excess carriers as necessary.
■ May verify with the Medical Staff Services Coordinator that each independent practitioner provides proof of adequate professional liability insurance at the time of initial credentialing and at reappointment.
■ May act as liaison with the insurance carrier; completes insurance applications and 
responds to surveys; prepares materials necessary for renewal of primary and excess 
insurance policies.
■ Provides insurance information to outside agencies; assists in compliance with state 
insurance reporting requirements.
c02.indd 40 3/2/09 12:00:46 PM
SUGGESTED PARAMETERS FOR POSITION
■ Experience is entry level, 0-3 years in risk management.
■ Position title risk analysis, risk manager, patient safety coordinator, various titles 
refl ecting combined job responsibilities i.e. QA/RM, Medical Staff Coordinator, 
Human Resources Manager.
■ Reports to position of middle to top level management, Director of Risk 
Management.
■ Certifi cation/Education may include associate degree, RN, ARM, pursuing CPHRM.
■ Organization size may be one facility/organization with less than 100 licensed beds.
■ Key attributes: Strong written and oral communications skills, presentation skills, 
team player, ability to infl uence change without direct authority, and negotiation 
skills.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. Reprinted with permission. 
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 41
EXHIBIT 2.3. Risk Manager Job Description, Level Two
Position Summary
The risk manager is responsible for the facility’s risk management activities, which include, 
but may not be limited to, coordinating insurance coverage and risk fi nancing, managing 
claims against the facility, interfacing with defense legal counsel, administering the risk 
management program on a day-to-day basis, managing and analyzing risk management 
data, conducting risk management educational programs, complying with risk management related standards by JCAHO, all with the objective of maintaining patient safety, 
enhancing quality care, and minimizing loss to protect the assets of the facility. The level 
two risk manager performs these functions reporting to management at the vice-president level. This individual is responsible for reviewing and formulating policy or organizational changes and making recommendations for fi nal approval by senior management.
OPERATION/COMPLIANCE
Overview
The level two risk manager performs the functions outlined under level one and, in addition, manages a facility department or offi ce of risk management. Is responsible for data 
management, claims management, and the education components of the facility’s risk 
(Continued)
c02.indd 41 3/2/09 12:00:46 PM
42 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.3. (Continued)
management program. Promotes the organizational patient safety initiatives. Develops 
department budget for management approval. Works directly with legal counsel as a 
team member in the defense of claims. Has ongoing access to facility liability defense 
counsel to consult regarding both preventive and corrective measures to be taken in situations having legal connotation. On request, may provide information to facility management concerning reasonableness of cost and quality of legal services.
Specifi c Activities
■ Has full responsibility for operations of the risk management program that may 
include an enterprise liability approach to exposures.
■ Directs loss control/loss prevention activities and reports results to senior 
administration.
■ Supervises the statistical trending of losses and analyzes patterns.
■ Designs and implements risk management surveys and studies; conducts surveys, 
studies, and special projects to assist in long-term planning and changes to facility 
policies and systems that reduce risk and losses.
■ Responsible for identifying and communicating regulatory requirements.
■ Leads development of organization-wide approach on disclosure of medical errors 
and obtains physician support.
■ Designs and/or administers safety systems and procedures to minimize loss from 
employee casualties, and complies with OSHA regulations.
■ Analyzes the risk of loss versus cost of reducing risk.
■ Supervises accumulation of risk management cost data for budgetary and historical 
purposes: prepares budgets for departmental operations.
■ Works with Medical Staff Services to develop and maintain risk management profi les on physicians and integrates that information into the credentialing process in 
compliance with state and federal agencies, Joint Commission and/or other accrediting bodies, and institutional requirements.
■ Submits recommendations for changes in the existing risk control and risk-fi nancing 
procedures based on changes in properties, operations, or activities. 
■ Evaluates correspondence from attorneys, patients, and other outside sources, and 
formulates responses, as necessary.
■ Records, collects, documents, maintains, and communicates to insurance carrier 
and/or attorney any information necessary to prepare testimony in pending 
litigation.
c02.indd 42 3/2/09 12:00:47 PM
■ Directs and coordinates release of records and information in response to subpoenas, court orders, attorney requests, state and federal agency investigations, and 
other inquiries from outside sources.
■ Maintains legal case fi les and strives to maintain maximum protection from discoverability of such fi les.
■ Approves defense postures or settlement values at lower levels routinely.
■ Answers medical/legal inquiries of physicians, nurses, and administrators regarding 
emergent patient care issues and loss control.
■ Resolves treatment issues, including patient decisions made against medical advice 
(AMA), refusals of treatment, and consent issues; initiates court orders as appropriate via in-house and outside legal counsel.
■ Reviews relevant contracts for risk exposure and insurance purposes before approval, 
including affi liation agreements, leases, construction agreements, and purchase 
orders, as appropriate.
■ Maintains awareness of legislative activities that may affect risk management programs and participates in the legislative process.
LOSS PREVENTION/PATIENT SAFETY
Overview
The level two risk manager performs the functions as outlined under level one and, in 
addition, organizes and manages facility-wide educational programs on health care risk 
management and related subjects for health care practitioners. Presents such programs 
in conjunction with the facility’s education department or other organizations. Supports 
the patient safety initiatives through direct participation on committees/task forces. 
Develops risk management budget for senior management approval.
Specifi c Activities
■ Plans, develops, and presents educational material to administration, the medical 
staff, nursing personnel, and other department personnel on topics related to risk 
management as they affect personnel.
■ Develops and implements educational programs designed to minimize the frequency 
and reduce the severity of actual and potential safety hazards throughout the 
facility.
■ Leads root cause analysis and makes recommendations for improvement.
■ Active participation in patient safety goals by providing data to support priorities.
■ Active role in FMEA (Failure Mode and Effects Analysis).
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 43
(Continued)
c02.indd 43 3/2/09 12:00:47 PM
44 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.3. (Continued)
■ Acts as resource, internal consultant, and educator for patient safety/risk management issues.
■ Complies with various codes, laws, rules and regulations concerning patient care, 
including those mandated by state and federal agencies, incident reporting, also 
includes investigative activities with federal, state, and local enforcement authorities.
■ Leads investigations for adverse drug events and sentinel events.
CLAIMS MANAGEMENT
Overview
The level two risk manager performs the functions outlined under level one and, in addition, works actively with legal counsel or the adjuster in investigating claims, developing 
defense strategy, and evaluating the monetary value of the claim. Participates as a team 
member in negotiating settlements for management approval. In litigated claims, assists 
legal counsel in accessing facility records and personnel and may act as a corporate representative during pretrial and trial. Recommends defense strategies for approval by CEO, 
governing board, and legal counsel. Provides advice to senior management or the chief 
fi nancial offi cer regarding reasonableness of expenses for claims defense.
Specifi c Activities
■ Authority to initiate medical write-offs to mitigate potential claims.
■ Oversees investigation of incidents/accidents/events that could lead to fi nancial 
loss, including professional liability, general liability, and workers' compensation.
■ Investigates risks involving actual or potential injury to patients, visitors, and employees; collects information necessary to prepare for the defense of claims.
■ Serves as liaison to brokers and insurance company representatives in negotiating 
and settling specifi c general liability claims; directs conferences with claimants, attorneys, and insurance carriers, when applicable.
■ Interacts with legal counsel, insurance carrier, and patients/families to effect timely 
settlement.
■ Coordination of defense with co-defendants.
■ Provides direction and advice to medical staff, as necessary, in connection with malpractice litigation and medicolegal matters.
■ Reports patient care-related incidents to the Department of Health if required by 
law; directs investigation and development of corrective plans; submits required 
reports to state and federal agencies.
c02.indd 44 3/2/09 12:00:48 PM
RISK FINANCING
Overview
The level two risk manager performs or coordinates the functions outlined under level 
one and, in addition, participates in negotiating coverage issues with carriers or trust 
administrators, including levels of coverage, scope of coverage, and premiums. 
Participates in formulating recommendations for purchase of coverage or funding of 
self-insurance for submission to management for fi nal approval. Participates in preparing other fi nancial analyses of facility’s insurance program for the information of management and the governing body.
Specifi c Activities
■ Reviews and maintains insurance policies; analyzes existing policies for coverage and 
exclusions; anticipates and deals with policy expirations.
■ Participates in managing the facility's insurance programs and fi nancing by preparing statistical data to support the continuation or reduction of premiums paid or 
reserves.
■ Participates in negotiating policy provisions.
■ May assess appropriate reserve funding levels, both insured and self-insured, in conjunction with an actuary.
SUGGESTED PARAMETERS FOR POSITION
■ Experience is intermediate level position with 4-8 years in risk management.
■ Position title may include Risk Manager, Director RM, Director Patient Safety.
■ Reports to VP Risk Management, COO, CFO, or CEO.
■ Certifi cation/Education may include Bachelor Degree, RN, single risk management 
certifi cation, ARM, CPHRM, FASHRM. 
■ Organization size may include 1-2 facilities, with 100-400 licensed beds.
■ Key attributes: All in Level I job description, plus management of insurance portfolio 
and claims handling.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. Reprinted, with permission.
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 45
c02.indd 45 3/2/09 12:00:48 PM
46 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.4. Risk Manager Position Description, Level Three
Position Summary
The risk manager is responsible for the facility’s risk management activities, which include, 
but may not be limited to, procurement of insurance coverage and risk fi nancing, managing claims against the facility, interfacing with defense legal counsel, administering an 
enterprise risk management program on a day-to-day basis, managing and analyzing risk 
management data, conducting risk management educational programs, complying with 
risk management related standards by JCAHO other accrediting and regulatory agencies 
with the objective of promoting patient safety, enhancing quality care, and minimizing 
loss to protect the assets of the facility. While the level 3 position may be responsible for 
the functions in level one and two job descriptions, this position most often supervises 
and offers overall program direction to staff performing the task in the fi rst two job 
description levels. This position reviews, formulates, and implements policy and organizational changes, performing within general programmatic authority delegated by the 
CEO, chief fi nancial offi cer, or governing body.
OPERATIONS/COMPLIANCE
Overview
The level three risk manager performs the functions outlined under levels one and two 
and, in addition, oversees aspects of data management and analysis for the organization’s loss control program. Establishes budget for data management and analysis 
aspects of loss control. Directs risk management program for a large health care system 
and/or multi-hospital system with facility risk managers. Works within broad guidelines 
established by the CEO, chief fi nancial offi cer, or governing body regarding the use and 
integration of loss control data with other types of organizational data systems for 
audit and accountability purposes on a facility or system-wide basis. May serve as the 
organization’s compliance offi cer. Leads patient safety initiatives in the organization. 
Responds to all regulatory/compliance issues and strives to incorporate processes to 
address the results of these surveys/requirements.
Specifi c Activities
■ Works with senior leadership in organizational operations, quality, etc.
■ May serve on subcommittees of the Board of Directors.
■ Authorities to retain, direct, and approve compensation of defense counsel.
■ Conducts systems analyses to uncover and identify patterns that could result in 
compensable events.
c02.indd 46 3/2/09 12:00:49 PM
■ Assists clinical chairs and department heads in designing risk management programs 
within their departments.
■ Develops and implements departmental and facility policies and procedures that 
affect liability exposures.
■ Minimizes risk by responding to all regulatory/insurance survey report recommendations/defi ciencies.
■ Selects and utilizes services of consulting services, brokers, carriers, etc.
■ Provides board summary reports on incidents, claims, reserves, claim payments, etc.
■ Works with Medical Staff Services Coordinator to provide risk management information into the credentialing process in compliance with state and federal agencies, 
accrediting bodies, and institutional requirements.
■ Complies with various codes, laws, rules, and regulations concerning patient care/
safety, including those mandated by state and federal agencies, incident reporting, 
also includes the investigation activities of federal, state, and local enforcement 
authorities.
■ Implements relevant statutes and regulations, including mandated mechanisms of physician monitoring with feedback to medical staff offi ce, reappointment process, etc.
■ Assumes responsibility for contract compliance within appropriate guidelines and 
legal concepts; in preparing contracts for board approval, provides advice on contract language necessary to fulfi ll insurance and risk management requirements; 
evaluates each contract negotiated by the organization to verify that insurance and 
liability issues are adequately addressed and that risk is transferred to the other 
party, if feasible; establishes insurance requirements for all projects and contracts; 
where appropriate, negotiates changes in contracts with other parties; verifi es that 
affi liated institutions have adequate insurance coverage.
■ Reviews and approves plans and specifi cations for major new construction, alterations, and installation of equipment.
LOSS PREVENTION/PATIENT SAFETY
Overview
The level three risk manager performs the functions outlined under levels one and two 
and, in addition, develops loss control educational programs for the organization’s use. 
This position establishes education budget, subject to approval of the CEO, chief fi nancial offi cer, or governing body. May develop educational programs relative to health care 
risk management utilizing well known experts in the fi eld for national or regional representation. May develop risk management educational programs with broad appeal for
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 47
(Continued)
c02.indd 47 3/2/09 12:00:49 PM
48 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.4. (Continued)
marketing to other organizations. May serve as Patient Safety Offi cer/Advocate or 
Sponsor.
Specifi c Activities
■ Plans and implements a facility-system wide program for both loss prevention and 
loss control, and a comprehensive orientation program; those programs will be 
directed to all current and future employees of the board, physicians, and employees 
to advise them of their responsibilities, obligations, and part in the facility’s risk management program.
■ Participates in new business development activities by providing due diligence on 
new ventures/acquisitions.
■ Serves as FEMA consultant/process expert.
■ Directs and conducts educational sessions on risk management for medical staff and 
employees.
■ Procures outside loss prevention services.
CLAIMS MANAGEMENT 
Overview
The level three risk manager performs the functions outlined in levels one and two and, 
in addition has authority within broad guidelines established by the CEO, chief fi nancial 
offi cer, or governing body to approve settlement of claims against the facility or system. 
Has authority to direct legal counsel and other personnel involved in claims management and to give fi nal approval to defense strategies. Approves payment of fees of 
defense counsel and payment of other expenses of claims defense.
Specifi c Activities
■ Manages the claims program, which contains the following components: reporting 
procedures, system maintenance, detailed claim investigations, establishment of 
reserves, selection and monitoring of legal counsel, conferring directly with claimants, attorneys, physicians, employees, brokers, carriers, and consultants, settlement 
of claims, selection and utilization of actuarial fi rms, as needed and/or required.
■ Compliance with Medicare/Medicaid regulations as related to claims.
■ Recommendations to senior management for funding requirements and necessary 
limits of coverage.
c02.indd 48 3/2/09 12:00:50 PM
■ Reporting claims information to senior management.
■ Directs activities of investigators.
■ Directs claims handling and defense preparation activities of the insurance company 
and defense counsel.
■ Is responsible for administering claims initiated in the boiler/machinery, fi re, and 
other loss areas.
■ Projects future costs of losses, services, insurance, and other risk management 
expenses.
■ Authority to manage and resolve claims within self-insured programs. 
RISK FINANCING
Overview
The level three risk manager performs or coordinates the functions outlined under levels one and two and, in addition, manages the organization’s insurance or self-insurance program within broad guidelines established by the CEO, chief fi nancial offi cer, or 
governing body. This position has authority to fi nalize selection and retention of carriers 
or self-funding mechanisms in conjunction with the chief fi nancial offi cer. Ensures the 
preparation of loss experience reports and summaries for the information of the CEO, 
chief fi nancial offi cer, and governing body.
Specifi c Activities
■ Evaluates property exposures, including new construction and renovation programs, 
to provide coverage and minimize risk.
■ Develops familiarity with insurance markets through frequent market contact and 
attendance at meetings and market symposiums.
■ Plans, coordinates, and administers a broad, comprehensive insurance program 
involving such activities as insurance purchasing, insurance consulting, administering self-insured coverage, and coordinating claims handling for all insurance lines.
■ Directs and coordinates all aspects of insurance management for the institution, 
including developing alternatives such as self-insurance, excess insurance, and other 
risk-fi nancing mechanisms.
■ Develops and manages the overall risk management program, involving risks of all 
types, which may include using deductibles, self-insurance, captive insurance companies, fi nancial plans, commercial insurance, and insurance/reinsurance programs.
■ For property insurance, boiler and machinery insurance, crime insurance, student 
health insurance, automobile insurance, and all other purchased insurance coverage, 
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 49
(Continued)
c02.indd 49 3/2/09 12:00:50 PM
50 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.4. (Continued)
analyzes values and verifi es that exposures are adequately insured; in the event of a 
loss, prepares data required by brokers and carriers and manages process through to 
settlement of claim.
■ Prepares specifi cations for competitive bidding; negotiates with brokers, agents, or 
companies on insurance coverage, premiums, and services.
■ Establishes and administers self-insurance trust funds for various types of insurance 
needs.
SUGGESTED PARAMETERS FOR POSITION
■ Experience is senior level position with 8-10 years in risk management
■ Position title may include Vice President Risk Management/ Patient Safety, Chief Risk 
Offi cer, VP Legal Services Reports to CEO, Board of Trustees/Directors
■ Certifi cation/Education may include JD, Masters Degree, multiple certifi cations such 
as ARM, CPHRM, DFASHRM, CPCU
■ Organization size may include multiple facilities, IDS, with more than 400 licensed 
beds
■ Key Attributes: Include all of those in Levels I and II, plus advanced business/healthcare management skills.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. Reprinted with permission.
into six major functional areas: loss prevention and reduction, claims management, 
risk fi nancing, regulatory and accreditation compliance, risk management operations, 
and bioethics. 
 Loss Prevention and Reduction 
 This category encompasses all aspects of risk identifi cation, loss prevention, and loss 
reduction and represents the largest functional area. 
■ Developing formal and informal mechanisms for risk identifi cation, such as incident reporting, staff referrals, medical record reviews, review of patient complaints, and review of pertinent quality - improvement information 
■ Developing and maintaining collaborative relationships with key departments, 
such as quality management, nursing, medical staff, safety, security, and infection 
control, to enhance program effectiveness 
(Continued from page 33)
c02.indd 50 3/2/09 12:00:50 PM
The Risk Manager ’ s Job: Functional Areas of Responsibility 51
■ Developing statistical and qualitative reports on risk management trends and patterns and communicating this information effectively to appropriate audiences 
■ Developing root cause analysis and failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) for 
incidents and potential areas of risk 
■ Developing policies and procedures in key areas of risk management interest, such 
as informed consent, product recalls, confi dentiality, and handling of sentinel events 
■ Developing educational programs for all levels of staff on a variety of risk management topics 
■ Developing a program for management of exposures resulting from contracts, 
such as affi liation agreements, construction agreements, leases, management contracts, and purchase agreements 
■ Serving as a resource to organizational staff on issues related to professional liability and other risks 
 Claims Management 
 This category includes all activities associated with managing actual or potential 
claims, from reporting and investigation to resolution. 
■ Notifying carriers of actual or potential claims 
■ Establishing claim fi les and coordinating investigation 
■ Supervising investigators, third - party administrators (TPAs), and defense counsel 
■ Coordinating the organization ’ s response to discovery requests and interrogatories 
■ Developing standards for the selection and evaluation of service providers 
■ Setting expense and indemnity reserves 
■ Approving and authorizing settlements 
■ Ensuring that the organization ’ s senior management is kept informed of high -
 exposure cases and aggregate claims experience, including their effect on the risk 
fi nancing program 
 Risk Financing 
 This category includes many activities associated with fi nancing losses, whether the 
organization transfers or retains the risk. 
■ Maintaining and coordinating exposure data for the organization 
■ Coordinating insurance applications and renewals 
■ Collaborating with brokers, underwriters, actuaries, and other service providers to 
determine the risk fi nancing needs of the organization 
c02.indd 51 3/2/09 12:00:51 PM
52 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
■ Evaluating coverage limits, deductibles, attachment points, and lines of coverage 
to ensure that all exposures are adequately covered 
■ Evaluating risk fi nancing options such as commercial insurance, retention, captives, and risk retention groups and selecting the best option based on the organization ’ s needs 
■ Monitoring and evaluating the organization ’ s risk fi nancing program 
 Regulatory and Accreditation Compliance 
 This category includes all activities associated with compliance with accreditation 
standards and with major health care regulations. 
■ Promoting compliance with requirements to report specifi c incidents to state and 
federal agencies 
■ Promoting compliance with regulations such as the Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA), Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), Patient 
Self - Determination Act (PSDA), Safe Medical Devices Act (SMDA), Emergency 
Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), Health Care Quality Improvement 
Act (HCQIA), Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 
and the patient safety initiatives prompted by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) 
report 
■ Promoting compliance with Joint Commission requirements, including those pertaining to sentinel events and national patient safety goals and standards 
■ Promoting compliance with requirements to report deaths to the medical examiner 
or coroner 
■ Collaborating with key departments to ensure compliance with life safety codes 
and emergency management 
■ Promoting compliance with specifi c regulatory initiatives and programs such as 
Project Lookback 
 Risk Management Operations 
 The Operations category covers activities associated with managing a risk management department. 
■ Developing an organizational risk management policy statement and plan 
■ Training and supervising risk management staff 
■ Coordinating and administering risk management and patient safety committees 
■ Developing annual goals for the risk management department 
■ Evaluating the effectiveness of risk management activities 
c02.indd 52 3/2/09 12:00:51 PM
 Bioethics 
 This category includes all activities related to issues such as do not resuscitate (DNR) 
orders, brain death criteria, advance directives, withdrawal of life support, and human 
subjects research. 
■ Reviewing policies and procedures related to end - of - life issues for conformance 
with ethical principles and adherence to applicable regulation 
■ Reviewing policies and procedures relating to human subjects research for adherence to applicable regulation and organizational policy 
■ Providing risk management consultation for specifi c ethical dilemmas 
■ Providing education for staff, patients, families, and communities on patients ’ rights 
 HEALTH CARE RISK MANAGEMENT ACROSS A SPECTRUM 
OF SETTINGS 
 As mentioned earlier in the chapter, the roles and job responsibilities of health care 
risk management professionals are determined by the characteristics of the organizations in which they work. The size and structure of the organization determine the 
needs of the organization, and this in turn infl uences the size, structure, and function of 
the risk management program. The risk fi nancing strategies of the organization are 
also important determinants of risk management program structure and function. 
 The following sections examine the role of the risk management professional in several health care settings — the acute care hospital or medical center, academic medical 
center, integrated delivery system (IDS), multihospital system, ambulatory care setting, 
physician practices and clinics, and long-term care facility. For each setting, the relative 
importance of each of the six major functional areas of responsibility are examined, as 
are other unique characteristics of risk management programs in these settings. 
 The Acute Care Hospital or Medical Center 
 According to ASHRM ’ s 2005 member survey, 37 percent of respondents are employed in 
an acute care hospital or medical center, by far the largest category. 3
 (See Table 2.1 for an 
inventory of the type of organizations represented by respondents in the ASHRM survey.) 
Acute care hospitals or medical centers can range in size from fewer than one hundred 
licensed beds to more than fi ve hundred. They can be classifi ed as community hospitals, 
which tend to be smaller and typically do not have their own residency programs, and 
teaching hospitals, which tend to be larger and often have multiple residency programs. 
 Acute care hospitals or medical centers offer a range of services, although not all 
hospitals offer every type of service. Patient care services typically offered in acute 
care hospitals or medical centers include general medicine and surgery, medical and 
surgical subspecialties such as cardiology and orthopedic surgery, and primary care 
services such as family medicine, pediatrics, and obstetrics. Most have intensive care 
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 53
c02.indd 53 3/2/09 12:00:52 PM
54 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
TABLE 2.1. Types of Organizations
Organization Percentage of Total
Acute Care Medical Center 32
Academic Medical Center 7
Free-Standing Community Hospital 6
Integrated Delivery System 12
Multihospital System 9
Pediatric Hospital 1
Specialty Hospital 1
Tertiary Care Facility 1
Insurance Brokerage 2
Insurance Company 9
Law Firm 1
Long-Term Care Facility 1
Managed Care Provider 1
Physician Offi ce 1
Behavioral/Psychology Health Care Facility 1
Rehabilitation Facility 1
Risk Management Consulting Firm 2
Self-Employed 1
Other 11
Base: 911 respondents.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, ASHRM Membership Survey, 2005. Reprinted with permission.
c02.indd 54 3/2/09 12:00:52 PM
units of some type and also have emergency departments. More complex services, such 
as transplant surgery and advanced trauma care, are typically found in academic medical centers, which are discussed later in this section. The types of services a hospital 
offers are typically controlled through the state ’ s certifi cate of need program. 
 Even within this category, risk management program structures and functions vary 
widely. At a small - to medium - size community hospital, it is common practice for the 
risk management professional to assume responsibilities for several related areas, such 
as quality improvement, safety and patient safety, or infection control. The limitations 
of the hospital ’ s resources, together with a smaller workload, make this arrangement 
an attractive one for these organizations. More recently, risk management professionals in such settings have also been called on to assume the role of the corporate compliance offi cer, patient safety offi cer, or chief risk offi cer. 
 Small - to medium - size hospitals are usually commercially insured, thereby decreasing the administrative burden for the risk fi nancing and claims management functions on 
the risk management department itself. Responsibilities for workers ’ compensation programs often rest with the human resource department. Thus the risk management professional ’ s role in such settings often focuses on the activities associated with loss prevention 
and reduction: risk identifi cation and analysis, management of serious adverse events, 
staff education, and policy and procedure review and development. Risk management 
professionals in these hospitals are also often responsible for ensuring compliance with 
major health care regulations and requirements and for accreditation activities. Smaller 
hospitals often face risks associated with access to care, specifi cally access to specialized 
or intensive care, not faced by larger hospitals. The risk management professional may 
also be quite involved in clinical ethics consultations, because smaller organizations typically do not have the resources to employ an ethicist or in - house counsel. 
 The risk management professional ’ s role in risk fi nancing at smaller hospitals is 
often limited to collecting and coordinating exposure data and managing the insurance 
renewal process. The chief fi nancial offi cer typically assumes the burden for evaluation of carriers and insurance options, selection of new carriers, and decisions regarding risk - fi nancing options. The risk management professional ’ s interaction with brokers and underwriters may be limited. 
 When risk is transferred, responsibilities for claims management also decrease. In 
a smaller, commercially insured hospital, the risk management professional ’ s role in 
claims management is limited to coordinating the investigation and defense activities 
of the investigators, adjusters, and attorneys employed or retained by the insurance 
carrier. In this setting, the risk management professional is not responsible for setting 
reserves or authorizing settlements, as this is usually the exclusive right and responsibility of the insurance carrier. 
 Risk management professionals in small - to medium - size community hospitals often 
enjoy high visibility. They are often viewed as the primary resource on a wide range of 
topics because the organization cannot afford to employ experts in a variety of disciplines. They very often function as the hospital ’ s liaison to outside counsel and as such 
become involved in a variety of interesting legal issues. Risk management professionals 
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 55
c02.indd 55 3/2/09 12:00:53 PM
56 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
in such settings have the opportunity to work and interact with nearly every health care 
discipline. Thus these positions offer excellent opportunities for learning and collaboration and also opportunities for advancement by assuming responsibility for related 
areas. 
 In medium to large community hospitals or medical centers, risk management professionals typically have somewhat greater and better - defi ned responsibilities than in 
smaller hospitals. They generally retain responsibility for all loss prevention and control functions but may be assisted by one or more staff members. Such staff assistants 
often have clinical experience or expertise that enables them to interact very effectively 
with patient care providers. The nature of loss prevention and reduction activities at 
such hospitals is essentially the same, though the volume tends to be greater than at 
smaller facilities. An enterprise risk management program is desirable, as it encourages risk management professionals to act in concert with other managers to fully 
 evaluate the organization ’ s exposures and promotes thinking “ outside the box ” for 
s olutions. Potential partners with the risk management professional may be internal 
audit, treasury, security, institutional research, quality and performance improvement 
teams, or even individuals outside the corporate family that have a direct effect on risk, 
such as credit agencies, regulatory and licensing agencies, fi re and rescue, and police. 
 Credentialing and informed consent issues assume greater signifi cance in these 
settings because of the greater number of specialists on staff and the riskier nature of 
treatments and procedures offered. 
 Medium to large hospitals and medical centers usually employ a greater number 
of professionals specializing in a variety of disciplines, so risk management professionals in such hospitals are less likely to assume multiple job responsibilities. Usually, 
safety and infection control professionals are employed, and often the quality improvement function is separate from risk management. Thus the risk management professional in such settings focuses almost exclusively on risk management functions, and 
there is little confusion among the staff as to who the risk management professional is 
or what the function comprises. 
 Although many are commercially insured, medium to large hospitals and medical 
centers are often in the position to use alternative risk fi nancing strategies. It is common for such organizations to have in place self - insured trusts, large deductibles, or 
captive insurance companies to fi nance primary liability risks. If that is the case, the 
risk management professional has a greater role in risk fi nancing and claims management. The risk management professional typically works collaboratively with the chief 
fi nancial offi cer and other executives in the development of loss exposure data, setting 
reserves, monitoring of program results, and evaluating existing and alternative 
arrangements. Claims management also becomes a higher - risk management priority 
in such circumstances, and the risk management professional is often responsible for 
directing the activities of an in - house claims staff or third - party claims administrators, 
investigators, and attorneys. Risk management professionals in such settings typically 
have a great deal of interaction with brokers, underwriters, and actuaries and may also 
have responsibility for self - funded workers ’ compensation programs. 
c02.indd 56 3/2/09 12:00:54 PM
 Risk management professionals in medium to large hospitals and medical centers 
are often quite involved in regulatory compliance, but in many cases, there is a designated compliance offi cer with responsibility for the corporate compliance program. 
Thus the risk management professional takes a more advisory role, serving as a content 
expert in areas that relate to risk management. Most often risk management professionals in these settings continue to play a signifi cant role in accreditation, but this is usually 
a collaborative effort with other administrators. They are involved in ethics consultations, as are their counterparts in smaller hospitals, but their role may be more advisory 
because larger hospitals typically have more resources devoted to their ethics programs. 
As the risk management department tends to be larger, the risk management professional in such a setting typically devotes more time to department administration. 
 Risk management professionals in medium to large hospitals and medical centers 
require the same skill set as those in smaller hospitals. Effective communication skills 
and the ability to work collaboratively in other disciplines are critical success factors 
in either setting. In addition, risk management professionals who work in larger and 
more complex settings need to develop a better understanding of more complex risks 
and of risk fi nancing and claims management. 
 The risk management professional job descriptions for level one and level two 
presented in Exhibits 2.2 and 2.3 are most consistent with the functions of the risk 
management professional in the acute care hospital or medical center. 
 Academic Medical Centers 
 Academic medical centers pose unique risk management challenges. They tend to be 
large and complex organizations, and the care they provide is equally complicated. 
Risk management professionals and chief risk offi cers in these settings must deal with 
risks ranging from simple clinical misadventures to complicated issues involving clinical research, affi liation agreements, and academic freedom. 
 Academic medical centers tend to have risk management departments with several professional staff members. Some organizations may have their risk management 
staff or program segmented into areas of clinical risk of the medical center and the 
affi liated university or school risk. Most often the risk management staff for the medical center will include staff with clinical training. This is a great advantage given the 
complex nature of the clinical risks encountered in these settings. 
 Risk prevention and reduction activities in academic medical centers are made 
more diffi cult because of the many individuals involved in patient care. Unlike other 
hospitals, patients in academic medical centers are often cared for by students, residents, fellows, and specialists not commonly found in other settings. Because of the 
involvement of so many individuals in patients ’ care, there is a greater potential for 
error; thus risk is increased. In addition, staff rotations and turnover tend to be higher 
in academic medical centers, and there is a constant need for education and reinforcement of risk management policies and procedures, including reporting requirements. 
 Risk management professionals in academic medical centers often spend a great 
deal of time educating the staff about risk management principles and practices. They 
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 57
c02.indd 57 3/2/09 12:00:54 PM
58 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
also devote a great deal of time to the investigation of incidents, because facts and circumstances tend to be more complicated and harder to discern. Credentialing and 
human subject research also pose special risks in academic medical centers with which 
the risk management professional is involved. 
 Academic medical centers often face unique risks that make commercial insurance vehicles unattractive. As a result, academic medical centers are often involved in 
alternative risk fi nancing arrangements such as captives. The risk management professional in an academic medical center is likely to have some involvement in risk fi nancing arrangements and must therefore have expertise and knowledge in this area. The 
level of the risk management professional ’ s involvement will depend on many factors, 
including whether or not the organization is involved in a group risk fi nancing arrangement, and on the culture of the organization. Often academic medical centers ’ risk 
fi nancing functions are administered at high administrative levels, and the risk management professional ’ s role in these functions may be limited. 
Claims management in an academic medical center is usually handled within the 
organization rather than outsourced. Therefore, the responsible manager must have 
the ability to effectively investigate claims, manage the activities of defense counsel, 
and establish appropriate reserves. The volume of claims in an academic medical center is such that several dedicated claims professionals may be required. It is especially 
true if the department is expected to manage other types of claims, such as general liability, directors ’ and offi cers ’ liability, and property claims. (See Chapter Eleven for 
information on basic claims administration.) 
 Regulatory and corporate compliance and accreditation activities in academic 
medical centers are complicated and time - consuming activities usually handled by 
professional staff dedicated to those functions; however, the risk management professional typically serves as an adviser. 
Bioethics consultation in an academic medical center is usually a collaborative 
effort in which the risk management professional plays an important role. Because of 
the strong research orientation of academic medical centers, they often have strong 
clinical ethics programs with dedicated staff. Risk management professionals are often 
members of the ethics committee and institutional review board (IRB). (See Chapter 
 Eight for more information on ethics in patient care.) 
 Risk management department operations consume a great deal of time because 
the department tends to be larger in an academic medical center. Also, the risk management professional in an academic medical center may be expected to support the 
organization ’ s teaching and research mission by accepting interns, teaching in the 
medical school, and assisting in risk management – related research. All of these activities increase the administrative burden of the risk management department. 
 The level three risk management job description presented in Exhibit 2.4 is most 
representative of the scope of responsibilities in an academic medical center. Depending 
on the organizational structure, a chief risk offi cer may be better suited for this position. The CRO job description in Exhibit 2.5 provides some suggestions for job 
responsibilities. 
c02.indd 58 3/2/09 12:00:54 PM
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 59
EXHIBIT 2.5. Chief Risk Offi cer Position Description
Position Summary
The Chief Risk Offi cer (CRO) has broad responsibility for the protection of the institution and its staff from fortuitous loss. The Chief Risk Offi cer advises and consults with 
senior leadership and the Board on potential sources of loss and makes decisions on 
how to eliminate or minimize loss.
Major Responsibilities
The following are the major areas of responsibility for the chief risk offi cer. These 
responsibilities include oversight, facilitation, coordination, supervision and technical 
competence in the following areas:
RISK FINANCING
Coordinates, advises and facilitates risk-fi nancing strategy with the CFO on issues that 
could fi nancially put the organization at risk.
Specifi c Activities
■ Reviews documents and issues that impact the availability of risk fi nancing options 
such as: changes to bond covenants, materials presented to bond rating agencies, 
all fi nes and sanctions levied through the OIG, FBI, CMS, and other issues of similar 
impact.
■ Finalize the selection and retention of insurance carriers or self-funding mechanisms 
in conjunction with the CFO, and corporate offi ce.
■ Administer self-insurance trust funds.
■ Evaluate property exposures, including new construction and renovation programs.
■ Develop familiarity with insurance markets through frequent market contact and 
attendance at meetings and market symposiums.
■ Plan, coordinate, and administer a comprehensive insurance program involving such 
activities as insurance purchasing, insurance consulting, claims coordination, and 
administration of self-insured program.
■ Directs and coordinates all aspects of insurance management, including developing 
alternative insurance programs such as self-insurance, risk retention groups, captives, deductible programs, fi nancial plans, reinsurance, commercial insurance, and 
excess insurance.
(Continued)
c02.indd 59 3/2/09 12:00:55 PM
60 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.5. (Continued)
■ Analyze values and ensure that exposures for property insurance, boiler and machinery insurance, crime insurance, automobile insurance and all other purchased insurance are adequately insured; in the event of loss, prepare data required by brokers 
and carriers and manage the process through to the settlement of claim.
■ Develop familiarity with insurance markets through frequent market contact.
■ Prepare specifi cations for competitive bidding; negotiate with brokers, agents or 
companies.
CLAIMS ADMINISTRATION / EVENT REPORTING
Specifi c Activities
■ Approve settlement of all claims against the facility within broad guidelines established by the CEO, CFO, and/or governing body.
■ Direct legal counsel and other personnel involved in claims management and give 
fi nal approval to defense strategies.
■ Approve payment of fees for defense counsel and payment of other claims defense 
expenses.
■ Develop and implement an “early intervention program.” Include disclosure of 
unanticipated events, use of apology, alternate dispute resolution mechanisms, early 
payments strategy, lessons learned/prevention activities, and the use of employee 
assistance programs.
■ Ensure appropriate reporting to all required outside agencies including the NPDB 
and/or HIPDB.
■ Manage the claims program, which contains the following components: 
– Reporting procedures 
– System maintenance
– Detailed claims investigations
– Establishment of reserves
– Use of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms
– Monitoring of legal counsel
– Conferring directly with claimants, attorneys, physicians, employees, 
brokers and consultants 
– Settlement of claims
– Selection and utilization of actuarial fi rms as needed or requested
c02.indd 60 3/2/09 12:00:55 PM
■ Comply with Medicare/Medicaid regulations.
■ Make recommendations to senior management regarding funding levels and coverage limits.
■ Report claims to senior management and board of directors.
■ Direct investigative activities.
■ Procure outside loss prevention services if necessary to supplement in-house 
activities.
■ Project future cost of losses, services, insurance, and other risk fi nancial vehicles.
PATIENT SAFETY
Specifi c Activities
■ Develop, implement and monitor the Patient Safety Plan. 
■ Coordinate all patient safety activities with other clinical loss control, quality management, performance improvement, and infection control initiatives.
■ Coordinate and facilitate all initiatives to comply with the JCAHO Patient Safety 
Initiatives.
■ Plan for creative ways to enhance patient safety by the use and support of technological advances including CPOE, bar coding, EMR, and the like. 
■ Monitor the Internet and professional journals and publications to remain abreast of 
current projects and initiatives regarding patient safety.
LOSS CONTROL (CLINICAL AND NON-CLINICAL)
Specifi c Activities
■ Plan and implement an institution-wide program of clinical and non-clinical loss control, including a comprehensive orientation program.
■ Direct and conduct educational sessions on risk management for medical staff and 
employees. 
■ Develop, implement, and manage the event reporting system.
■ Conduct systems analyses to uncover and identify patterns that could result in compensable events. 
■ Assist clinical chiefs and department heads in the design of risk management
programs specifi c to their department and unique risk. 
■ Research, write, and implement departmental and facility policies and procedures 
that affect liability exposures and assist in regulatory compliance. 
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 61
(Continued)
c02.indd 61 3/2/09 12:00:56 PM
62 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.5. (Continued)
■ Oversee patient relations /advocate programs.
■ Ensure that risks are minimized by following-up and acting on all regulatory/insurance survey report recommendations/defi ciencies. 
■ Select and utilize all necessary outside consulting services offered insurance carriers, independent risk management consultants, and third-party administrators.
■ Provide senior management and board of directors with summary reports of incidents, claims, reserves, claims payments, sentinel events, and near misses highlighting lessons learned and risk control initiatives implemented.
■ Develop and maintain risk management profi les on individual physicians and ensure 
the integration of that information into the credentialing process in compliance with 
state and federal agencies, NCQA, JCAHO, and institutional requirements.
■ Ensure compliance with various codes, laws, rules, and regulations concerning 
patient care, including those mandated by state and federal agencies, incident 
reporting, and investigation activities.
■ Review and approve all plans and specifi cations for new construction, alterations, 
and installation of new equipment. Ensure that outside insurance carrier has signed 
off on plans as appropriate.
CORPORATE COUNSEL
The CRO will offer assistance to the organizations General Counsel with those legal, 
regulatory issues that can impact the organization from a patient safety, public relations, marketing, and risk fi nancing standpoint. Those issues might include:
■ Fraud/abuse allegations.
■ Reporting to outside federal and state agencies.
■ Reporting to the NPDDB, state licensing boards, CDC.
■ The levying of any sanctions or fi nes.
■ Recommendations that affect licensing and accreditation.
■ Review of new and existing legislation to determine appropriate risk response.
HUMAN RESOURCES
The CRO will work with the human resource executive to identify, analyze, and manage 
through risk control and risk fi nancing techniques those risks related to the workforce.
c02.indd 62 3/2/09 12:00:56 PM
Specifi c Activities
■ Review all employee related surveys, questionnaires, etc. that address employee 
morale, turnover, and the climate/culture of the organization.
■ Coordinate strategy to reduce turnover, improve morale and to promote an organizational culture that support patient and employee safety.
■ Identify and develop with Human Resources initiatives to improve the organizations 
ability to recruit all positions within the work force including physicians, and to 
enhance the work experience and educational level of all staff.
■ Identify and develop with Human Resource methods to reduce:
 Employee fatigue
 Absenteeism/presenteeism 
STRATEGIC PLANNING & MARKETING
The CRO advises senior leadership on mitigation strategy for risk inherent in the following activities:
■ Advertising campaigns including all print, TV, and mixed media materials.
■ Physician recruitment activities.
■ Mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures. 
■ Joint ventures. 
■ New clinical programs.
■ New facilities/construction.
■ Clinical research.
INTERNAL AUDIT
The CRO and Internal Auditor are in a unique position to assist each other. Internal 
audit is charged with the identifi cation and mitigation of the organizations exposure to 
loss, much like the CRO. Area of assistance and communication can be:
■ Investigation of employee related crime issues, e.g., embezzlement.
■ Implementation of educational initiatives for the Board of Directors on issues related 
to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
■ Corporate Compliance Program.
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 63
(Continued)
c02.indd 63 3/2/09 12:00:57 PM
64 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.5. (Continued)
CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION
Assume responsibility for contract administration to include the following components: 
■ Assist with the development of appropriate working guideline and legal concepts 
for contract review.
■ Work with senior management to develop contract language to protect the institution from liability and fi nancial loss.
■ Review all contracts prior to administrative approval for compliance with written 
guidelines. 
■ Negotiate necessary changes to bring the contract into compliance with written 
guidelines.
■ Maintain a database (or purchase software) for contract tracking.
■ Assume responsibility as the central repository for all contracts.
POSITION QUALIFICATIONS
Experience
■ A minimum of 10 years of progressive experience in healthcare administration with 
specifi c experience in healthcare risk management.
Education
■ Bachelor degree required; master’s degree preferred.
■ Clinical background helpful, RN/MD.
■ JD, CPCU, and/or MBA desired.
■ Associate in Risk Management (ARM) desired.
■ Certifi ed Professional in Healthcare Quality (CPHQ) desired.
■ Certifi ed Professional in Healthcare Risk Management (CPHRM) desired
KNOWLEDGE AND ABILITIES
■ Knowledge of NCQA, HEDIS, and JCAHO, ISMP, NPSF, Leapfrog, IHI initiative, regulations and other patient care-related initiatives to improve outcomes. 
■ Knowledge of regulatory codes, legal requirements, and healthcare law.
■ Effective presentation skills, articulate, persuasive, and eloquent communicator both 
verbally and in writing.
c02.indd 64 3/2/09 12:00:58 PM
■ Self-motivated with the ability to work independently. Requires little supervision.
■ Ability to manage/handle stress while under pressure from many involved parties.
■ Ability to interface with a variety of professionals including members of the Board of 
Directors, medical staff and senior leadership, attorneys, accountants, actuaries, 
brokers, and the like.
■ Knowledge of alternate risk fi nancing/insurance programs.
■ Demonstrated skills in strategic planning, implementing and evaluating programs.
■ Knowledge of clinical and non-clinical loss control and claims administration.
■ Ability to prioritize tasks and see the big picture.
■ Ability to delegate and know when to ask for assistance.
■ Demonstrated ability to offer creative, innovative solutions to prevent/reduce diffi -
cult risk issues.
■ Ability to manage information in a confi dential manner.
■ Reputation and ethical conduct must be of the highest standard and beyond 
reproach.
POSITION RELATIONSHIPS
Member of a comprehensive healthcare team, including other healthcare providers, the 
patient, the patient’s family and signifi cant others. Position has managerial responsibilities within the Enterprise Risk Management Unit. The chief risk offi cer, if not directly 
responsible for the following areas, must interface with them to minimize the potential 
for loss:
■ Emergency Management
■ Process/Quality Improvement
■ Medical Staff Credentialing
■ Infection Control
■ Workersí Compensation/Employee Health
■ Environmental Health 
■ Patient Safety 
■ Risk Financing
■ Claims and Litigation Management
■ Risk Control (clinical and non-clinical) 
■ Internal Audit
■ Human Resources
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 65
(Continued)
c02.indd 65 3/2/09 12:00:58 PM
66 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.5. (Continued)
COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITY
The Chief Risk Offi cer will actively participate on the enterprise risk management committee and be a permanent member on the following committees:
■ Quality/Performance Improvement
■ Patient Safety
■ Emergency Management
■ Customer Relations
The Chief Risk Offi cer should periodically attend or review the meeting materials/minutes of other committees such as: 
■ Pharmacy and Therapeutics 
■ Blood Utilization
■ Utilization Review/Case Review
■ Morbidity & Mortality
■ Medical Products/Purchasing
■ Credentialing Committee 
■ Infection Control Committee
■ Surgical Case Review 
■ Nursing Executive Committee
■ Medical Staff Departmental meetings
■ Marketing and Strategy 
■ Human Resource 
COMMUNICATION STANDARDS
Frequent contact is made with members of the senior leadership team, board of directors, medical staff leadership, and a variety of outside professionals. Position requires the 
ability to articulately communicate a wide variety of legal, medical, and business subjects 
as they relate to enterprise risk management. Promote and provide courteous and effective communication with internal and external customers. May be spokesperson for the 
organization in time of a crisis/disaster. 
c02.indd 66 3/2/09 12:00:59 PM
WORKING CONDITIONS
Working conditions are almost exclusively indoors in a warm, well-lit environment.
■ Motor coordination and manual dexterity are frequently necessary for the coordination 
of eye-hand and motor function in computer and telephone use.
■ Occasional inter-offi ce or inter-campus traveling with frequent sitting.
■ Requirement for periodic on-call coverage.
■ Scheduling fl exibility is necessary to meet early morning and evening schedules.
■ Ability to handle multiple projects simultaneously, some with tight deadlines and 
minimal staff. 
Source: Aon Healthcare. Reprinted with permission.
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 67
 Integrated Delivery Systems 
 An integrated delivery system is an organization that encompasses many different 
types of providers under one corporate structure. An IDS often includes acute care 
facilities, physician group practices, multispecialty clinics, post – acute care facilities, 
and home care services. Providers may be employees or independent contractors, or 
they may be loosely affi liated with the organization. IDSs often cover broad geographical areas and can be very large and complex organizations in terms of corporate structure. In many cases, an IDS comprises facilities across several states. For all of these 
reasons, IDSs are particularly challenging for risk management professionals who 
seek to develop coordinated and consistent risk management plans and strategies. 
 Within the IDS, there is usually a corporate risk management professional who 
assumes responsibility for the IDS ’ s overall risk management program. The corporate 
risk management professional is responsible for risk fi nancing activities and has oversight responsibilities for claims management. This position is typically responsible for 
risk management activities only and does not assume other related responsibilities. 
Risk prevention and reduction activities are carried out by risk management staff at the 
facility level who may report to the corporate risk management professional or to 
the facility administrator. In many instances, the risk management function is assumed 
by a clinician or other facility staff member with no formal risk management training. 
This requires that the corporate risk management professional be an effective teacher 
and mentor. 
 The degree of integration and standardization of risk management practices and of 
clinical practice across the IDS is often quite variable and produces signifi cant risk 
that must be managed. The corporate risk management professional establishes broad 
c02.indd 67 3/2/09 12:00:59 PM
68 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
goals and objectives for the risk management program, thus providing the framework 
for the individual facilities to follow. These general guidelines allow individual facilities to adopt policies and practices that address issues unique to their setting. It might 
take time before all elements of the IDS can be successfully incorporated into a coordinated risk management program within the IDS. Very often individual facilities are 
permitted to remain in existing risk fi nancing arrangements because standardization 
and change across the IDS is too diffi cult to manage. Thus the corporate risk management professional may be required to manage and oversee a complex program with 
many different and varied components. 
 In addition to the risks noted, IDSs are particularly vulnerable to the risks associated 
with merger and acquisition activity. Thus the corporate risk management professional ’ s 
role in premerger due diligence takes on added signifi cance within the IDS. Establishing 
strong relationships and being perceived as a valuable resource are essential to infl uence 
decisions and eliminate or mitigate risk before these organizational changes. 
 Risk identifi cation can be accomplished in several ways in the IDS. Health plan 
utilization decisions that limit or deny services require a consistent approach based on 
currently accepted medical practices and on insuring agreements. Close study of contracts, credentialing practices, marketing and sales initiatives, capitation agreements, 
health benefi t claims and denials, and member and patient satisfaction data are other 
mechanisms for identifying potential risks. 
 The risk management professional may oversee or be directly responsible for 
claims administration, including investigating, analyzing, reporting, and establishing 
reserves. 
 The corporate risk management professional in an IDS must be well versed in all 
aspects of risk fi nancing and must have excellent skills in contract management. This 
individual must work well with other people to achieve corporate objectives, although 
the risk management professional exercises no control over these individuals. The 
level three risk management professional job description in Exhibit 2.4 most closely 
corresponds to this role in an IDS. The chief risk offi cer job description in Exhibit 2.5 
also might fi t this type of organization. 
 Multifacility Health Care Systems 
 Health care systems are composed of multiple facilities providing similar services 
owned by a single corporation or parent organization. In many ways, health care system 
risk management programs are similar to IDS programs. They both manage risks across 
discrete organizations that may have entirely different cultures and identities. However, 
systems do not face the same challenges that IDSs face, in that their practices and 
 procedures tend to be standardized across the system. Thus the corporate risk 
 management professional in a system is unlikely to be faced with a broad array of risk 
fi nancing arrangements or facility - based practices within the system because the risk 
management program in a system is usually well coordinated and fairly standardized 
across the system. 
c02.indd 68 3/2/09 12:01:00 PM
 The risk management professional in a health care system most often functions as 
a senior executive in the organization. Risk prevention and reduction activities are usually carried out at the facility level under the direction of the corporate offi ce. As in the 
IDS, the corporate risk management professional in a system will likely be responsible 
for risk fi nancing activities while using alternative risk fi nancing strategies to control 
costs. Claims management activities are often centralized and handled internally by 
dedicated claims staff. 
 System risk managers usually work collaboratively with others in the organization 
in regulatory and accreditation compliance and bioethics and are likely to serve in a 
consultative capacity, or the responsibility may be delegated within the department. 
 The level three risk management professional or the chief risk offi cer job description most closely approximates the duties of the health care system risk management 
professional. The position requires signifi cant risk management knowledge and experience and the ability to stay ahead of the complexities involved in a changing health 
care environment. 
 Ambulatory Care Organizations 
Ambulatory care organizations (ACOs) include multispecialty clinics, freestanding 
surgical centers, urgent care or walk - in medical clinics, and community health or public health facilities. Physician practices may also be considered in the ACO. The organizational structure of outpatient care can be as varied as the facility itself. Some 
 organizations may have an offi ce manager whose job responsibilities include risk 
management. It is not unusual to have a physician functioning as the senior administrator to whom the offi ce manager or risk management professional reports. Larger 
facilities more often have a governing body to guide the organization. As in a small 
hospital setting, the individual responsible for the risk management function may be 
responsible for several functions. 
 ACOs pose unique risks because of the large number of patient encounters, which 
increases the risk of exposure to loss. In addition, because patients generally control 
the progress of their health care in the ACO setting, there is a greater chance that care 
may be fragmented or prolonged, and a provider might not recognize changes or deterioration in a patient ’ s condition. Finally, ACOs often do not have access, as hospitals 
do, to other departments that support critical risk management functions, such as 
safety, infection control, and biomedical engineering. 
 Risks in ACOs vary with the type of setting. In most ambulatory settings, the risk 
of “ failure to follow up, ” either from the patient ’ s perspective or the provider ’ s perspective, can be a risk management concern. Also, the use and maintenance of equipment pose risk management concerns, as do concerns regarding adherence to safety 
standards, universal precautions, and regulatory compliance. 
 Outpatient surgery centers have risk issues related to appropriate discharge criteria for their patients and in maintaining practice parameters and standards of care for 
the many different procedures performed. Emerging risks include the performance of 
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 69
c02.indd 69 3/2/09 12:01:00 PM
70 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
an expanding number and complexity of procedures, including surgery, in outpatient 
and offi ce settings. Credentialing is of particular concern because of the lack of formal 
procedures in this area. 
 Incident reports and occurrence screening often provide the mechanisms for risk 
identifi cation. Patient complaints also provide excellent sources of information about 
potential risks. 
 Risk fi nancing strategies used by ACOs may vary, but rarely will an ACO be 
involved in a self - managed alternative risk fi nancing arrangement. Most ACOs are commercially insured or are part of the risk fi nancing program of a larger organization, 
often an IDS or system. In that case, the parent organization assumes most of the responsibility, and the ACO risk management professional plays a minor role in risk fi nancing, 
usually limited to coordinating exposure data and renewals. The administrator or offi ce 
manager for the stand - alone physician practice is typically more involved with risk 
fi nance decisions, claims management, quality improvement, and patient safety issues. 
 Most ACOs do not manage liability claims internally. Instead, this function is handled by the insurance carrier or a third - party administrator employed by the parent 
organization. The ACO may be called on to assist in the coordination of investigation 
and defense of claims but will usually not have any direct responsibility for claims 
management. 
 Risk management professionals and offi ce managers in some ACOs do not have signifi cant responsibilities for regulatory or accreditation issues, whereas others have complete responsibility, depending on the resources available to the organization. 
 The level one risk management professional job description in Exhibit 2.2 most 
closely corresponds to this scope of responsibility. 
 Physician Practices and Groups 
 The physician risk management professional has emerged as organizations with 
employed physicians, hospital - owned physician practices, and private physician 
groups and clinics recognize the need for a person to take responsibility for the risk 
management functions. Managing physician risks, similar to ACOs, include loss prevention and patient safety, claims management, and risk fi nancing as core job functions. Among the loss exposures for physician practices are high patient visit numbers, 
unexpected patient outcomes, patient privacy, practice standards, federal and state regulatory requirements, and patient safety issues. The physician risk management 
 professional, like the level one position, may have multiple responsibilities for the 
practice, such as being charged with handling of human resource issues, contract 
review, education for staff, and management of the offi ce fi nances. The risk management professional is usually located in the offi ce of the practice for stand - alone physician groups or may be located in the corporate risk management offi ce of the health 
care organization for employed physician practices. 
 Loss prevention activities in this setting include implementing and coordinating 
continuing education for the staff, coordinating insurer risk assessments, or performing 
c02.indd 70 3/2/09 12:01:01 PM
risk surveys for the practice. The risk management professional establishes systems 
for risk identifi cation, investigation, and reductions and provides analysis of data for 
management review. 
 The risk management professional is often responsible for the development of 
operating standards and procedures to promote quality of care, establishing clinical 
workfl ow, procedures, quality improvement initiatives, ongoing evaluation and monitoring of clinical staff credentials, and handling patient complaints. Responsibility for 
claims management includes reporting claims to the insurers, to the parent organization ’ s risk management offi ce, or to a third - party administrator. This position supports 
the internal investigation of incidents and claims and may interact with legal counsel. 
 Risk fi nancing responsibilities may include the coordination of medical professional liability coverage in concert with the governing board of the practice. Contract 
review may include negotiation of managed care contracts, employment contracts, and 
vendor contracts. Exhibit 2.6 provides an example of a job description for a physician 
risk management professional. 
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 71
EXHIBIT 2.6. Physician Risk Manager Job Description
Position Summary
The Physician Risk Manager leads the risk management/quality programs for the practice. The core job functions include operations/compliance, loss prevention, claims 
management, and risk fi nancing. This position develops and administers various programs that include, but are not limited to, risk management, quality improvement, 
patient safety, loss-prevention, and regulatory requirements. The PRM employed in a 
smaller physician practice may also serve as the administrative director and will often 
assume additional responsibilities, such as human resources, vendor relationships and 
managed care contracts.
Loss prevention activities include identifi cation of risks, practice issues, quality of 
care and the development and implementation of employee educational programs to 
reduce the exposures to loss. The PRM may spend a signifi cant amount of time developing and implementing policies and procedures/guidelines to meet regulatory and 
compliance issues. This position typically provides educational programs to the staff and 
physicians.
The risk manager ensures the reporting of incidents and claims from the staff by 
developing systems for gathering and tracking data. Analysis of this data is reported to 
upper management with recommendations for correcting or improving services. 
(Continued)
c02.indd 71 3/2/09 12:01:01 PM
72 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.6. (Continued)
The PRM is also responsible for the management/investigation of claims and risk 
fi nancing. This position investigates claims and may be the initial contact for patient 
complaints while also serving as the liaison to attorneys, third-party administrators (TPAs), 
or departments who may be supervising the investigation. Claims handling may be delegated to a TPA. The PRM working with larger physician groups may be signifi cantly 
involved with risk fi nancing issues. Responsibilities include coordination with a broker to 
obtain insurance coverage for medical professional liability, general liability, director´s 
and offi cer´s liability, and property insurance. Assigned projects may include research on 
cost effective programs to minimize asset liability. The experienced PRM may participate 
in the development of major strategic initiatives such as a self-administered professional 
liability program that may encompass the integration of multiple practices/clinics.
Reports to: Executive Practice Director or Administration
Major Responsibilities
OPERATIONS/COMPLIANCE
■ Maintains strictest confi dentiality in all responsibilities and accountabilities.
■ Establishes clinical work fl ow, procedures, and improvements for the practices.
■ Facilitates communications with clinical staff.
■ Manages projects, either self-initiated or assigned by upper administration. Develops 
and maintains RM Intranet site content.
■ Supportive of and insures compliance with applicable organizational medical group 
policies.
■ Interpretations and communicates current and future regulatory requirements to 
achieve accreditation by organizations such as OSHA, CLIA, NCQA, JCAHO, HIPPA, 
and other regulatory bodies.
■ Presents a professional role model, exhibiting a team attitude, utilizing a positive 
problem solving approach with patients, physicians, and staff. Works to develop and 
maintain positive morale of staff.
LOSS PREVENTION
■ Communicates with administration and/or Executive Practice Director to inform 
them of practice issues.
■ Identify system concerns and make recommendations for reducing loss exposure.
■ Development of operating standards and procedures to promote the quality of care, 
achieve licensure or accreditation with such agencies, as required, and operate 
within the cost constraints of the organizational budget.
c02.indd 72 3/2/09 12:01:01 PM
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 73
■ Development and implementation of required's employee-training programs required to 
maintain compliance with regulatory or credentialing organizations; i.e., OSHA annual 
in-services, ABN education, Clinical Assistant training, etc.
■ Ongoing evaluation and monitoring of clinical staff credentials and skills to assure 
utilization of appropriate staff.
■ Participation in care model development.
■ Serve as a resource regarding appropriateness of services being rendered by clinical 
support staff to patients.
■ Provides risk management training to physicians and staff.
■ Maintains meaningful risk management data.
CLAIMS 
■ Investigates and manages professional and general liability incidents and minor 
claims in consultation with legal counsel.
■ Responsible for all aspects of claims management, including communication with 
patients.
■ Initiates settlements within authority level and reports to Board upon conclusion.
■ Using data from claims annually identifi es key areas of exposure and works with Risk 
Management committee to develop action plans regarding Loss Control and seeks 
to incorporate meaningful benchmarks where available.
■ Within a hospital - based practice, may coordinate interface with organizational Risk 
Management by setting policy, establishing pathways for report investigation, authorizing payment subject to limit determined by the organization.
RISK FINANCING
■ Participate in the budgeting process and expense management of the practice.
■ Works with broker to obtain medical professional liability insurance or with organizational risk manager to ensure appropriate coverage is provided for the practice 
and/or the healthcare system.
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS & ABILITIES
■ Maintains current profi ciency with Risk Management best practices. 
■ Strong communication and interpersonal skills to deal effectively with physicians, 
patients, and employees.
■ Ability to manage and motivate employees within the environment.
(Continued)
c02.indd 73 3/2/09 12:01:02 PM
74 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
EXHIBIT 2.6. (Continued)
■ Strong clinical background, and understanding of medical records.
■ Able to inspire confi dence in physicians.
■ Knowledge of risk management functions, including claims management, investigation, and resolution.
■ Knowledge of management practices to direct assigned staff.
■ Knowledge of Clinic´s strategic business objectives and employee performance 
objectives.
■ Skilled in exercising initiative, judgment, discretion, and decision-making to 
achieve organizational objectives.
■ Skilled in establishing and maintaining effective working relationships with Clinic 
leadership, medical staffs, and support staff.
■ Skilled in identifying and resolving problems. Ability to delegate responsibility and 
authority to staff. Ability to work creatively with management and department 
staff to achieve objectives.
■ Ability to analyze problems and consistently follow through on solution or delegation.
■ Strong analytical skills and interest in interpretation of regulatory requirements.
■ Ability to generate quality management reports and documents which clearly and 
concisely communicates information to management. 
■ Detailed knowledge of regulatory requirements for clinical support staff.
SUGGESTED PARAMETERS FOR POSITION
■ Bachelor’s degree in a related area; MBA, MHA, JD preferred.
■ Nursing degree may be preferred for smaller stand-alone practices.
■ Certifi cations may include ARM, CPHRM, and FASHRM.
■ Ten years experience as risk manager with signifi cant management responsibility.
■ One to three years practice management experience with clinical background 
preferred.
■ Position titles may include practice administrator, risk manager, director risk management, or a combined job title with quality/peer review or patient safety.
■ Organizational size may range from one physician practice, to multiple clinics/offi ces 
or may include a number of employed physicians of a healthcare organization.
Source: Everett Clinic, Everett, Wash. July 2005; Carilion Health System, Carilion Medical 
Group, Roanoke, Va., July 2005. Used with permission.
c02.indd 74 3/2/09 12:01:02 PM
Health Care Risk Management Across a Spectrum of Settings 75
 Long - Term Care Facilities 
 The organizational structure for a long - term care (LTC) facility may be as simple as 
a stand - alone privately owned facility or as complex as a multifacility, multistate system. Some hospital - affi liated LTC units may be housed within the acute care hospital, 
and others may be located separately from the hospital. LTC centers located in the 
hospital usually use the hospital risk management professional to manage the risk for 
this area, just as they would other patient care units. Some LTC facilities are independent from the affi liated organizations ’ management and operations and will have a 
separate risk management function. Risk fi nancing most often occurs through the 
health care facility ’ s insurance program. Single, privately held LTC organizations use 
the facility administrator to develop and oversee the risk management functions and 
sometimes have some owner involvement in claims management. Within the smaller 
setting, the quality and risk responsibilities may be combined and performed by a clinical person with direct oversight by the facility administrator. 
 A more complex LTC organization with multiple facilities in several states most 
often employs a corporate position responsible for the development of a systemwide 
risk management program. As in the multihospital system, the challenge is to develop 
standard policies and procedures and to maintain consistency in the management of 
claims. Loss prevention and reduction activities are usually carried out at the facility 
level under the direction of the system risk management professional. 
 LTC facilities pose unique risks because of the length of patient stays at the facility. The nature of allegations most often identifi ed are administrative (for example, 
employee - related), clinical (for example, patient care - related), environmental (for 
example, emergency - related), provider (for example, vendor - related), and regulatory 
(for example, related to the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act). Proactive risk 
 management and quality improvement are essential to the reduction of risk exposures to the LTC facility. Facilities specializing in the care of patients with Alzheimer ’ s 
disease have specifi c risk exposures for wandering and elopement of residents. 
Employee education and training is a signifi cant part of the risk management professional ’ s job and is an effective loss prevention strategy for employee turnover in the 
LTC setting. 
 Risk fi nancing strategies may include a commercially insured or self - insured 
alternative risk fi nancing arrangement. In larger systems, the responsibility for 
 insurance placement falls to the corporate risk management professional or senior 
management at the parent organization. The LTC risk management professional at 
each facility in the system plays a minor role in risk fi nancing, often limited to coordinating exposure data. In a single facility, the responsibility for risk fi nancing is most 
often assumed by the LTC administrator and may include the owner in this process. 
Currently, LTC facilities have been faced with a limited number of markets for professional liability coverage, which has placed much more emphasis on risk fi nancing 
alternatives at the corporate level. 
c02.indd 75 3/2/09 12:01:03 PM
76 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
 Risk identifi cation occurs through incident reporting, occurrence screening, and 
on - site visits of licensing organizations at the state and federal levels. Patient and 
 family complaints are often a source of information regarding potential risk exposures 
and claims. 
 Like the ACO, smaller LTC facilities do not manage their own liability claims. 
This function may be handled by the insurer or a third - party administrator. Larger LTC 
systems with self - managed programs may choose to self - administer their claims. 
 Bioethics issues include end - of - life decisions, such as advance directives and 
DNR orders. Coordinating the patient ’ s desires and keeping the family involved are 
challenges in this long - term care environment and can become more complicated if 
the patient is taken to the acute care setting. Patient records and documents from the 
LTC facility are signifi cant to the decision - making process for the patient during an 
unexpected hospitalization. 
 The level one and level two risk management professional job descriptions in 
Exhibits 2.2 and 2.3 are most consistent with the functions of the corporate risk management professional for a multifacility LTC system. 
 REQUIRED SKILLS FOR THE SUCCESSFUL HEALTH CARE 
RISK MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL 
 To be successful, health care risk management professionals must develop a variety of 
skills necessary for performing a diffi cult job in a complex environment. They are 
called on to interact with all levels of authority within the organization and with 
patients and other customers. They often act as the organization ’ s “ offi cial ” representative in very sensitive circumstances. This means that they must have communication 
skills necessary to interact effectively with many different individuals and personalities and must do so under stressful circumstances. Of primary importance is effective 
communication, which includes writing, listening, and speaking. Health care risk 
management professionals are often called on to conduct educational sessions for 
other health care workers, including professional and nonprofessional providers and 
employees. They must also frequently deliver formal presentations to management, 
board members, or trustees. For this reason, excellent verbal communication skills and 
a thorough understanding and application of effective presentation styles are of critical 
importance. 
 In addition to verbal communication, successful health care risk management professionals also must be able to communicate well in writing. They must often prepare 
detailed reports of individual cases, write reports of trends and patterns, and develop 
policies, procedures, and other guidance documents that will be used by others at all 
levels of the organization. For this reason, the health care risk management professional 
must have the ability to communicate clearly, accurately, and succinctly in writing. 
 Finally, the ability to listen well is an essential communication skill, especially 
when conducting fact - gathering following a serious event and interviewing the parties 
c02.indd 76 3/2/09 12:01:03 PM
involved, carefully listening to their stories, and reconstructing the events that occurred. 
The health care risk management professional must also be able to glean information 
about risks and exposures from several sources, including committee reports and informal discussions. The successful health care risk management professional must be 
able to listen carefully to all information without passing judgment and to process 
information carefully and objectively and communicate it clearly to others. Thus the 
ability to listen well is a complex and indispensable skill. 
 Another important skill is the ability to negotiate. The health care risk management professional often serves as negotiator in different situations, such as the resolution of claims or patient complaints, securing broker services or insurance coverage, or 
drafting indemnifi cation agreements or contracts. Negotiation skills are desirable and 
may be developed through education. 
 Another critical skill is the ability to remain objective despite being in an emotionally charged situation: The risk management professional is often called on to provide 
support and direction to individuals most closely associated with these events and 
must also assume responsibility for discovering the facts and determining the best 
course of action. To do this effectively, the health care risk management professional 
must have the ability to maintain objectivity and professional detachment, even in 
emotionally diffi cult situations, and to pursue the best course of action for the organization regardless of personal feelings. 
 Finally, a critically important skill for the health care risk management professional is the ability to maintain confi dentiality. Because of the nature of their work, 
health care risk management professionals often encounter situations and fact patterns 
that might seriously harm the organization and the individuals who work there. The 
health care risk management professional must be able to perform the activities necessary to protect the organization and individuals while also refraining from sharing 
information unnecessarily, regardless of how tempting or trying the situation might be. 
Maintaining confi dentiality is crucial not only to protect those involved in an adverse 
event or potentially damaging circumstance but also to gain and maintain the trust of 
those who might provide important information in the future. 
 RISK MANAGEMENT ETHICS 
 One hallmark of a true profession is a code of ethical conduct to which its practitioners 
must adhere. This is a familiar concept in health care, as medicine ’ s own code of ethics 
dates back to the Hippocratic Oath. Nursing, law, and other disciplines related to health 
care risk management likewise have codes of ethical behavior that guide practitioners 
in those fi elds. 
 ASHRM ’ s Code of Professional Ethics and Conduct articulates the standards of 
conduct to which its members must adhere. This code is presented in Appendix B . It 
provides a useful road map for health care risk management professionals who wish to 
maintain the highest level of professional conduct. 
Risk Management Ethics 77
c02.indd 77 3/2/09 12:01:04 PM
78 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
 A PROFILE OF THE HEALTH CARE RISK MANAGEMENT 
 PROFESSIONAL 
 Because of the way in which the health care risk management profession has evolved, 
health care risk management professionals come from many professional and educational backgrounds, including nursing, law, administration, quality assurance, and 
insurance. According to the results of ASHRM ’ s 2005 member survey, presented in 
Table 2.2 , fully 82 percent of respondents were identifi ed as having a minimum of a 
bachelor ’ s degree, and of those, 49 percent had an advanced degree. 
 Health care risk management professionals hold several professional designations. 
According to the ASHRM 2004 compensation survey, three of the top four most common professional designations were certifi ed professional in health care risk management (CPHRM), at 26.6 percent; associate in risk management, at 20.6 percent; and 
 certifi ed professional in health care quality (CPHQ), at 11.9 percent. 4
 Those whose 
highest educational level was a bachelor ’ s degree stood at 35.1 percent, while those 
with an advanced degree totaled 44.1 percent. These results approximate the subsequent ASHRM member survey in 2005. Table 2.3 presents the results of the survey ’ s 
fi ndings regarding highest educational level held by health care risk management 
professionals. 
 Table 2.4 identifi es the job titles as related to the job function of respondents to the 
ASHRM 2005 member survey. The survey classifi es the respondent ’ s job functions 
from senior - level to entry - level positions and includes roles dedicated to fi nancial and 
claims management, compliance, legal, nursing, physician or medical director, and 
patient safety offi cer. The majority of the responses centered on some variations of the 
risk management professional job title. 
 EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL RECOGNITION PROGRAMS 
 An important characteristic that distinguishes a true professional is the desire to further 
develop and refi ne mastery of the chosen profession. One of the ways professionals 
pursue growth and development is by continuing their education through both formal 
and informal means. The profession in turn recognizes the efforts of these professionals by bestowing designations extolling their achievements. Thus continuing education 
and professional recognition of achievement are important components of a continuously evolving profession and important milestones for the health care risk management professional. 
 Academic Training 
 A growing number of colleges and universities either currently offer or are developing 
programs leading to a baccalaureate or master ’ s degree in health care risk management. (Information about such programs is available at http://www.ashrm.org .) 
This trend signifi es the increasing recognition of health care risk management as a 
c02.indd 78 3/2/09 12:01:04 PM
Education and Professional Recognition Programs 79
TABLE 2.2. Level of Education
Education Percentage of Total
High School Graduate 1
Associate’s Degree 7
Nursing Diploma 4
Bachelor’s Degree 33
Master’s Degree 35
Doctoral Degree 2
JD 11
MD 1
Other 6
Base: 911 respondents.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, ASHRM Membership Survey, 2005. Reprinted with 
permission.
discipline worthy of academic attention. As the profession continues to evolve, more 
entrants into the fi eld will come equipped with formal academic training rather than 
experiential training, as has been the case in the past. If the trend continues, it is possible that formal academic training in health care risk management will be a requirement for entry into the fi eld. This requirement would also help provide a steady stream 
of new and qualifi ed candidates for health care risk management positions; however, 
such programs are not yet widely available. 
 Continuing Professional Education 
 Although academic programs fulfi ll an important role for the profession, they might 
not meet the needs of practitioners who already hold academic degrees but seek further professional education in the fi eld of health care risk management. Thus it is 
important that other means exist for health care professionals to obtain continuing 
c02.indd 79 3/2/09 12:01:05 PM
80 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
TABLE 2.3. Highest Level of Educational Training.
Designation Percentage of Total
Bachelor’s Degree 35.1
Master’s Degree 25.5
MBA 7.4
JD 9.9
Associate’s Degree 7.9
Doctorate 1.3
Other 10.7
None of the above 2.2
Base: 944 respondents.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, 2004 Compensation 
Survey of Healthcare Risk Management Professionals. Reprinted with permission.
TABLE 2.4. Job Functions and Titles.
Job Functions and Titles Percentage of Total
Top Risk Management Offi cer 19
Senior Risk Manager 3
Risk Manager 16
Middle Manager Risk Management 12
Entry-Level Risk Manager 2
Top Finance/Claims Management 1
c02.indd 80 3/2/09 12:01:05 PM
Education and Professional Recognition Programs 81
Middle Finance/Claims Management 1
Top Patient Safety Offi cer 2
Middle Manager Patient Safety >1
Compliance Offi cer 1
Legal/Regulatory 2
Nurse Executive 1
Physician/Medical Director >1
Third-Party Administrator 1
Consultant 6
Insurance Broker 1
Other 14
No Response 18
Base: 911 respondents.
Source: American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, ASHRM Membership Survey 
2005. Reprinted with permission.
education in their chosen fi eld. Fortunately, in addition to academic programs, several 
other avenues exist for health care risk management professionals to further their education and professional development. 
 The major source of professional education programs for health care risk management professionals is the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, which 
has developed several educational programs that are available to both members and 
nonmembers. The Barton Certifi cate in Healthcare Risk Management program, which 
covers key aspects of risk management, is designed with three modules for the risk 
management professional. The program includes the “ Essentials ” module, which provides the educational foundation for new management professionals, the “ Application ” 
module, with relevant topics for those with one to fi ve years in health care risk management, and the “ Advanced Forum, ” for more experienced risk management individuals 
c02.indd 81 3/2/09 12:01:06 PM
82 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
facing special challenges. Upon completion of all three modules, attendees are issued 
a certifi cate of completion by ASHRM. Participants may also earn undergraduate and 
graduate college credits and receive credit toward the ASHRM risk management certifi cation program. 
 ASHRM also presents programs on more advanced topics, such as risk fi nancing, 
regulatory developments, and other critical issues, throughout the year. At its annual 
conference, ASHRM presents programs on a wide variety of topics in the fi eld of 
health care risk management and more broadly in health care. As with other offerings, 
attendees earn continuing education credits. 
 In addition to ASHRM, major health care liability insurance carriers and brokers 
also offer educational programs specifi cally designed for health care risk management 
professionals. Although these programs are often limited to clients or insureds, they 
often cover timely topics and feature nationally known speakers. 
 Certifi cation 
 Certifi cation provides evidence of mastery of a defi ned body of knowledge by requiring certifi cants to pass an objective test, such as a written examination. It helps set professional standards by identifying a minimum level of knowledge that all certifi cants 
must possess. It also helps ensure continued growth and development of the profession 
and of individuals practicing the profession by requiring recertifi cation at predetermined intervals. 
 Currently, there is only one certifi cation program specifi cally for health care risk 
management professionals in the United States. This program, administered by the 
American Hospital Association Certifi cation Center (AHACC), in cooperation with 
ASHRM, offers the designation of certifi ed professional in health care risk management. An individual who meets eligibility criteria and passes a qualifying examination 
becomes certifi ed. Eligibility standards include prior work experience in addition to 
certain educational requirements. The CPHRM examination tests the applicant ’ s 
knowledge in each of the six domain areas identifi ed by ASHRM ’ s role delineation 
study: loss prevention and reduction, claims management, risk fi nancing, regulatory 
and accreditation compliance, operations, and bioethics. Certifi cants are required to 
become recertifi ed every three years. 
 The Insurance Institute of America (IIA) also offers risk management education in 
the form of its associate in risk management (ARM) program. 5
 This is a designation 
program consisting of three courses and accompanying examinations that focus on risk 
assessment (designated as ARM 54), risk control (ARM 55), and risk fi nancing (ARM 
56). Upon successful completion of the examinations, the student earns the designation 
associate in risk management, which is recognized throughout the health care and 
insurance industry. Although the ARM program does not focus specifi cally on health 
care risk management, it offers signifi cant educational benefi ts to the individual interested in furthering education beyond the borders of health care. 
 Other designation programs are also offered through the Insurance Institute of 
America and the American Institute for Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriters, 
c02.indd 82 3/2/09 12:01:06 PM
such as the associate in claims (AIC) and chartered property and casualty underwriter 
(CPCU). Many equate a CPCU designation to a graduate degree in insurance. 6
 Licensure 
 Health care risk management professionals should know and understand the specifi c 
state statutes and regulations that govern their work environment and under which 
their position as risk manager may be managed and controlled. For example, by Florida 
statute, every licensed hospital, ambulatory surgical center, nursing home, and HMO 
must establish an internal risk management program as part of its administrative function. 7
 Every hospital, ambulatory surgical center, and HMO must hire a licensed risk 
manager for implementation and oversight of the facility ’ s internal risk management 
program. 8
 In the Florida nursing home environment, the internal risk management and 
quality assurance program is the responsibility of the facility administrator. The hiring 
of licensed risk managers is not required. 
 Professional Recognition Programs 
 Professional recognition programs serve a valuable function for a profession and the 
individuals practicing the profession by encouraging continued growth and development of individuals, in turn elevating standards in the profession. Such programs are 
typically administered by professional societies and membership organizations. 
 ASHRM offers the highest achievement designations for Distinguished Fellow
(DFASHRM), which is awarded for superior achievement in the profession. The designation of Fellow (FASHRM) is awarded for outstanding achievement. Criteria for both 
designations include a combination of education, leadership, and publication experience 
and achievement, and designations are awarded to members who meet the criteria. 
 ASHRM ’ s highest award, the Distinguished Service Award (DSA), recognizes a 
health care risk management professional whose efforts have advanced the profession 
and practice of risk management and who has made an outstanding contribution to 
ASHRM. 
 Other organizations sometimes also offer awards in recognition of superior 
achievement. Business Insurance, a nationally recognized insurance publication, offers 
recognition to the Risk Manager of the Year and to members of the Risk Management 
Honor Roll. These awards are given to winners from all industries, and health care risk 
management professionals have been so honored. 
 SUMMARY 
 The growth and evolution of the health care risk management profession has mirrored 
that of the health care industry as a whole, although its basic components and processes have not changed. The goal of an effective health care risk management program 
continues to be to maintain a safe and effective health care environment for patients, 
visitors, and employees, thereby preventing or reducing losses to the organization. 
Education and Professional Recognition Programs 83
c02.indd 83 3/2/09 12:01:06 PM
84 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
Risk management continues to compose an important part of the delivery of health 
care, and it has become even more important because of the greater emphasis on 
patient safety. 
 The role of the health care risk management professional continues to evolve. 
Loss prevention and reduction, claims management, risk fi nancing, regulatory and 
accreditation compliance, risk management operations, and bioethics are the major 
functional areas that together compose the job description of the health care risk management professional, the chief risk offi cer, and the patient safety offi cer. The depth 
and breadth of these functions and their vital importance to an organization ’ s survival 
have been amply demonstrated by this study. 
 Health care risk management professionals, chief risk offi cers, physician risk 
management professionals, and patient safety offi cers are a diverse group of professionals from a variety of backgrounds. Most are highly educated. They value continuing education and professional achievement as demonstrated by the demographic data 
obtained in the ASHRM studies. 
 Successful health care risk management professionals must possess certain critical skills. The ability to communicate well, negotiate effectively, remain objective, 
and maintain confi dentiality is especially important to success. 
 Opportunities for health care risk management professionals to enhance their professional growth and development abound. Academic training programs in health care 
risk management are increasingly common, and continuing education opportunities 
have always been plentiful. An opportunity to enhance professional development and 
recognition comes with the health care risk management certifi cation program developed by ASHRM, in conjunction with the American Hospital Association. 
 The continuing challenge for health care risk management professionals will be to 
stay abreast of developments in health care that lead to new exposures and to develop 
new risk fi nancing and loss control techniques to manage those exposures. Enterprise 
risk management provides the tools for embedding the discussion of risk into the way 
an organization does business. The risk management professional who adds value to 
the organization by aligning risk management strategies in support of business success 
will not just survive but thrive in this constantly changing environment. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Academic medical center 
 Acute care hospital 
 Ambulatory care organization 
 Associate in claims 
 Bioethics 
 Claims management 
 Enterprise risk management 
 Integrated delivery system 
 The Joint Commission 
 Loss prevention 
 Loss reduction 
 Risk fi nancing 
 Risk management ethics 
c02.indd 84 3/2/09 12:01:07 PM
 ACRONYMS 
 ACO 
 ADA 
 AHACC 
 AIC 
 ARM 
 ARM 54 
 ARM 55 
 ARM 56 
 ASHRM 
 CPCU 
 CPHQ 
Notes 85
NOTES 
 1. Kloman, F. H. Risk Management Milestones, 1900 – 1999. International Risk 
Management Institute (IRMI), March 2001, available at http://www.irmi.com 
 2. “ ASHRM Healthcare Risk Management National Role Delineation Study, ” 1999, 
conducted by Applied Measurement Professionals, Inc., Lenexa, Kans. 
 3. “ ASHRM Membership Survey 2005, ” analysis provided by Organizational 
Research Forum, Inc., Vernon Hills, Ill. 
 4. “ 2004 Compensation Survey of Healthcare Risk Management Professionals, ” 
American Society for Healthcare Risk Management, Chicago. 
 5. See American Institute for CPCU and Insurance Institute of America, Malvern, 
Pa., at http://www.aicpcu.org/ 
 6. The CPCU program consists of eleven courses. You must pass eight courses to 
earn the CPCU designation. All candidates must complete the fi ve foundation 
courses. In addition, you select either the commercial or personal insurance concentration and complete the three courses in the concentration of your choosing. 
You may not combine courses from both concentrations. 
 7. Per Florida Statutes § 395.0197, § 400.147, and § 631.55. 
 8. Only organizations that have an annual premium volume of $ 10 million or more 
and that directly provide health care in a building owned or leased by the 
 organization must hire a risk manager certifi ed under § 395.10971. Extensive qualifi cations for licensed risk managers are set forth in § 395.10974 .
 CPHRM 
 CRO 
 DFASHRM 
 DNR 
 EMTALA 
 ERM 
 FASHRM 
 FMEA 
 HCQIA 
 HIPAA 
 HMO 
 IDS 
 IIA 
 IOM 
 LTC 
 OSHA 
 PSDA 
 PSO 
 SMDA 
 TPA 
c02.indd 85 3/2/09 12:01:07 PM
86 The Health Care Risk Management Professional 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 American Hospital Association . Mapping Your Risk Management Course in Ambulatory 
Care. Chicago : American Hospital Publishing , 1995 . 
 American Hospital Association . Mapping Your Risk Management Course in Integrated 
Delivery Networks. Chicago : American Hospital Publishing , 1995 . 
 American Hospital Association . Mapping Your Risk Management Course in Stand -
 Alone Hospitals. Chicago : American Hospital Publishing , 1995 . 
 American Hospital Association . Pearls for Skilled Nursing/Long - Term Care Facilities.
 Chicago : American Hospital Publishing , 2002 . 
 American Society for Healthcare Risk Management . The Growing Role of the Patient 
Safety Offi cer: Implications for Risk Managers. Chicago : ASHRM , June 2004 . 
 Berkowitz , S. L. “ Enterprise Risk Management and the Healthcare Risk Manager . ” 
Journal of Healthcare Risk Management, Winter 2001 . 
 Economist Intelligence Unit . The Evolving Role of the CRO. New York : Economist , 
May 2005 . 
 Youngberg , B. J. The Risk Manager ’ s Desk Reference. Rockville, Md. : Aspen , 1994 . 
c02.indd 86 3/2/09 12:01:08 PM
87
CHAPTER
 3 
PATIENT SAFETY AND 
THE RISK MANAGEMENT 
PROFESSIONAL 
New Challenges and 
Opportunities 
 DENISE M. MURPHY , KATRINA SHANNON , GINA PUGLIESE 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify two models of accident causation from other industries 
that health care professionals are using to help them address medical error 
■ To be able to identify three steps that must be taken by any organization 
implementing a just culture 
■ To be able to identify two strategies to promote communication among 
health care providers 
■ To be able to defi ne the role of human factors engineering and ergonomics 
in medical error reduction 
■ To be able to identify a major issue associated with the reporting of errors 
and describe a strategy to address this issue 
c03.indd 87 3/2/09 12:05:04 PM
88 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 Risk management has been practiced in business for more than a century, beginning 
with the fi elds of engineering and economics. In the 1960s, risk management became 
associated with insurance strategies aimed at minimizing or fi nancing predictable 
business losses. 1
 Philosophically, risk management aims to bring order from chaos and 
to facilitate certainty in an environment of uncertainty. 
 The fi eld of health care risk management grew out of the insurance crisis of the 
1970s, when professional liability premiums skyrocketed in part from the dissolution 
of the doctrine of charitable immunity, which once shielded a hospital ’ s assets from 
malpractice lawsuits. 2
 The Joint Commission (until 2007, known as the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, or JCAHO) defi nes risk management as “ clinical 
and administrative activities undertaken to identify, evaluate, and reduce the risk of 
injury to patients, staff, and visitors, and the risk of loss to the organization itself. ” 3
Thus health care risk management is committed to reducing loss associated with patient 
safety – related events in health care settings. 
 Like the malpractice crisis of the 1970s, the patient safety movement today is 
forcing a great deal of change in health care risk management. One of the greatest 
 catalysts has been the Institute of Medicine ’ s 1999 report, To Err Is Human: Building 
a Safer Health System, known as the IOM Report, 4
 which shed light on the growing 
problem of medical errors. 
 The problems exposed by the IOM Report have since given rise to mounting regulations and government scrutiny. However, despite the signifi cant challenges, the 
health care industry has responded to the crisis in many innovative ways. 
 Most important, risk managers today must assist health care professionals in meeting an unprecedented high standard of care. Providers must prove that they acted as 
any other reasonably prudent provider would have acted in defending themselves in 
malpractice lawsuits. The evidence determining “ reasonableness ” now includes highly 
prescriptive Joint Commission standards, such as the requirement that every procedure 
be preceded by a “ time - out. ” Even more challenging, to help providers implement new 
approaches, the risk management professional must work with other managers to 
transform a traditionally hierarchical health care environment into a “ culture of patient 
safety. ” Risk management professionals today have additional responsibilities to help 
their employers satisfy patient safety reporting requirements and to stay abreast of 
new patient safety - related legislation such as the recent Patient Safety and Quality 
Improvement Act. 5
 The recent evolution fueled by the patient safety movement has also created tremendous opportunities for risk management professionals. Not only are they gaining a 
broader understanding of the dynamics of error from patient safety theory, but they are 
also learning from new tools, such as electronic incident reporting, designed to capture 
relevant information, help providers learn from these errors, and implement processes 
to prevent them in the future. Armed with additional information on the frequency and 
nature of errors, risk managers are in a better position to receive resources and support 
from organizational leaders to enhance safety programs. Health care executives also 
c03.indd 88 3/2/09 12:05:05 PM
better understand why keeping patients safe from harm protects market share, 
 reimbursement levels, organizational reputation, and accreditation status. Safety has 
become a top priority today in every health care organization. Most important, through 
patient safety efforts, the risk management professional participates in efforts that can 
help restore social trust in a health care system whose safety track record is being 
closely scrutinized by decision makers, legislators, payers, and consumers. 
 This chapter will discuss the scope of medical errors in health care, provide an 
overview of patient safety theory and related safety guidelines, and highlight strategies to leverage patient safety concepts to reduce loss and improve care. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ The “Swiss cheese model” of accident causation postulates that it may be possible to overcome one system failure. However, it is the alignment of many small 
system failures, as in a stack of Swiss cheese slices, that allows error to occur.
■ All professionals make errors; openness about error is highly valued; reckless behavior will not be tolerated. Team members must be encouraged to question care 
with which they are uncomfortable.
■ Human factors engineering addresses device safety through modifi cation. 
Human factors analysis assesses the relationship between humans and devices 
and thus supports human factors engineering.
■ A major issue associated with error reporting is failure to report errors due to fear 
of consequences.
 THE SCOPE OF MEDICAL ERRORS 
 In the IOM Report, an adverse event is defi ned as an injury caused by medical management rather than by the underlying disease or condition of the patient. Some but 
not all adverse events are the result of medical errors. The IOM Report also defi nes 
medical error as the failure of a planned action to be completed as intended or the use 
of a wrong plan to achieve an aim. Two studies of large samples of hospital admissions, one in New York known as the Harvard Medical Practice Study, which uses 
1984 data, and another in Colorado and Utah using 1992 data, found that adverse 
events occurred in 2.9 and 3.7 percent of hospitalizations, respectively. 6
 Data from 
these two studies were extrapolated in the IOM Report to the more than 33.6 million 
admissions to U.S. hospitals in 1997. They imply that at least 44,000 to 98,000 patients 
The Scope of Medical Errors 89
c03.indd 89 3/2/09 12:05:05 PM
90 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
in U.S. hospitals die each year as a result of medical errors. Figure 3.1 provides details 
on the types of adverse events found in the Harvard Medical Practice Study among 
30,000 randomly selected discharges from fi fty - one randomly selected hospitals in 
New York. 
 The accuracy of the IOM ’ s nearly 100,000 death estimate was challenged at 
the time it was published, but subsequent data indicate that even more deaths may be 
attributable to medical errors. 7
 Estimates of the fi nancial impact of medical errors are 
no less alarming. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) estimates 
that medical errors cost a typical large hospital about $ 5 million per year; all told, 
medical errors cost the U.S. health care system between $ 17 billion and $ 29 billion per 
year. These costs include follow - up and additional medical treatment of any adverse 
outcomes and any expenses related to lost income and household productivity and 
potential long - term or permanent disability. Virtually none of these costs can later be 
recouped for proactive health initiatives. 
 Viewed in the larger context of medical errors, medication errors have become an 
increasing area of concern for risk managers. According to the IOM Report, medication errors alone, either in or outside of the hospital, have been estimated to account 
for over seven thousand deaths a year. Moreover, a study referenced by the IOM concluded that about two out of every one hundred admissions experience a preventable 
adverse drug event, resulting in average excess hospital costs of $ 4,700 per admission 
or about $ 2.8 million in additional costs for a typical 700 - bed teaching hospital. 8
 If 
these fi ndings are generalizable, the IOM Report points out, the increased hospital 
costs alone of preventable adverse drug events affecting inpatients are $ 2 billion for 
the nation as whole. 9
FIGURE 3.1. Most Frequent Adverse Events in Hospitalized Patients.
25% Non-surgical
Drugrelated
Wound
infect.
Tech.
comp.
Late
comp.
Diag.
mishap
Therap.
mishap
Nontech.
comp.
Proc.
related
Surgical
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
c03.indd 90 3/2/09 12:05:06 PM
 The IOM Report enumerates and expands on the categorization of the types of 
medical errors that were reported by Leape and colleagues in 1993. 10 These categories 
are diagnostic, therapeutic, preventive, or related to failures of communication, 
 equipment, or other systems. Diagnostic errors are further defi ned as those related to 
error or delay in diagnosis, failure to perform indicated tests, use of outmoded tests or 
therapy, or failure to act on results of monitoring or testing. 
 Treatment - related errors are defi ned as those that occur in performance of an operation, procedure, or test; in administering treatment; or in the dose or method of using 
a drug and can be the result of an avoidable delay in treatment or in responding to an 
abnormal test result or inappropriate (not indicated) care. 
 Preventive errors were found to include failure to provide prophylactic treatment 
or inadequate monitoring or follow - up of treatment. 
 According to the AHRQ, the most common adverse events that patients experience while receiving health care services include medication and transfusion errors, 
infections, complications of surgery (including wrong - site surgery), suicide, restraint -
 related injuries, falls, burns, pressure ulcers, misidentifi cation, delays, and wrong 
diagnosis or treatment. 
 Health care - associated infections are an important patient safety issue. The Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that two million patients a year 
are infected in U.S. hospitals, and approximately ninety thousand die as a result of 
those infections. Health care – associated infections cost the U.S. health care system an 
estimated $ 6.7 billion annually (based on 2002 data). 11 In New York hospitals alone, 
for example, surgical site infections were found to be the second most common adverse 
event, according to the Harvard Medical Practice Study. 12 Recent studies have shown 
that up to 350,000 hospitalized patients acquire bloodstream infections each year at a 
minimum cost of about $ 38,703 per episode 13 and with a mean attributable mortality 
of 15 to 20 percent. 14
 Studies have shown that most medical errors occur among women and infants in 
hospital intensive care units, operating rooms, and emergency departments. 
 The health care system bears the additional costs for treatment related to medical 
errors. Nowhere is this more evident than in rising insurance rates and malpractice 
premiums. Clinicians in many parts of the country have been forced to abandon their 
medical practices because of increasing malpractice premiums. 
 Finally, two of the most overlooked effects of medical errors are the unquantifi -
able expense of psychological damage to patients, families, and providers and the erosion of public trust in our health care system. 
 SEEKING SOLUTIONS: WHAT ARE THE CAUSES 
OF MEDICAL ERRORS? 
 The fi nancial and social implications of medical errors reveal only part of the overall 
problem for the health care industry. The contributing or underlying causes of medical 
errors must be identifi ed if they are to be adequately addressed. 
 Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 91
c03.indd 91 3/2/09 12:05:06 PM
92 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 Of equal concern for risk management professionals today is an understanding of 
the underlying causes of medical errors. According to the AHRQ, medical errors are 
caused by the following: 15
■ Communication problems 
■ Inadequate information fl ow 
■ Human - related problems 
■ Patient - related issues 
■ Organizational transfer of knowledge 
■ Staffi ng patterns and workfl ow 
■ Technical failures 
■ Inadequate policies and procedures 
 Theories on Accident Causation 
 Health care professionals are reaching out to other industries to understand and address 
the causes of medical errors. Although there may not be total agreement on how to 
apply non - health care industry strategies, everyone understands that health care, like 
aviation, is a complex environment in which people may suffer as a result of systems 
failure. 
 Following are some of the leading theories about systems failure and how they 
can be applied to medical errors in a health care setting. 
 “ Swiss Cheese Model ” Two commonly used models of accident causation in the 
patient safety literature are found in the work of James Reason, David D. Woods, and 
Richard Cook. Reason ’ s “ Swiss cheese model ” 16 makes it easy to visualize how 
complex systems fail because of the combination and timing of multiple small failures. Reason contends that any one failure or situation alone would be insuffi cient to 
cause an accident, but the combination and timing of small failures look much like 
the alignment of holes in a piece of Swiss cheese that has been sliced (see Figure 
 3.2 ). A practical example of this model is an ICU nurse who was “ fl oated ” to an 
oncology unit due to short staffi ng and administered a wrong dose of chemotherapy. 
In a subsequent review of the circumstances, it is learned that the ICU nurse failed to 
follow the standard protocol of having an experienced oncology nurse double - check 
the physician ’ s order against the prepared medication before administering it to the 
patient. The experienced oncology nurse, who was anticipating being asked to assist 
with the double - check, was unexpectedly involved in a crisis and forgot to check in 
with the fl oat nurse before the incident occurred. The holes in the Swiss cheese lined 
up, and the patient was harmed. 
c03.indd 92 3/2/09 12:05:06 PM
Active Versus Latent Failures Following the same example, the active failure was 
that the nurse did not comply with the medication administration policy and therefore 
administered the wrong dose of a chemotherapeutic agent to the patient. Other second -
 layer failures, or holes in the Swiss cheese, are considered latent or hidden. For example, 
it is not immediately apparent in the circumstances of this error that the recent budget 
cut that led to the staffi ng shortage was responsible for the fl oat situation in the fi rst 
place. The inability of administrative staffi ng mechanisms to compensate for the budget 
cut is a good example of latent failure. 
 “ Blunt End/Sharp End Model ” Both David Woods and Richard Cook have written 
extensively about a second model of accident causation called the “ blunt end/sharp 
end ” model. 17 This model assumes that health care workers at the sharp end, where 
patient care is delivered, are affected by decisions, policies, and regulations made at 
the blunt end, or hospital administration side, of the system. This administrative end 
generates resources but also constraints and confl icts that shape the environment in 
which the technical work takes place and may thereby produce latent failures (see 
Figure 3.3 ). At the sharp end, constraints place stresses on providers, who respond 
with appropriate coping mechanisms, such as letting senior management know about 
their perception or unsafe shortcuts that increase the risk of medication error, like storing medications in their pockets as a time - saving strategy. 
Source: Adapted from J. Reason, Human Error (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). 
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.
FIGURE 3.2. The Swiss Cheese Model of Accident Causation.
Some holes due
to active failures
Harm Other holes due to 
latent system factors
Successive layers of defenses,
barriers, & safeguards
Hazards
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 93
c03.indd 93 3/2/09 12:05:07 PM
94 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
Hindsight Bias Richard Cook, an anesthesiologist who has extensively studied causes 
of, and reaction to, accidents in health care, notes that investigations into accidents frequently stop with identifying the human error and designating the practitioners as the 
 “ cause ” of the event. Often this determination is made without any evaluation of systems or processes that might have contributed to the error. According to Cook, this 
limited type of investigation can lead to solutions characterized by a phenomenon he 
calls “ hindsight bias. ” 18 Such bias occurs when the investigators work backward from 
their knowledge of the outcome of the event. This linear analysis makes the path to 
failure look as though it should have been foreseeable or predictable, although this is 
not the case. 
 These theories and models raise our awareness of the complexity of the system in 
which patients receive care and in which providers work. They make clear that organizational leaders must become “ systems thinkers ” who demand in - depth analyses of 
safety concerns. Health care leaders must also advocate a culture of safety that replaces 
punitive reactions to mistakes with an open environment that encourages staff to bring 
errors to light so that the errors can be dissected and addressed. Only when staff members are confi dent that their leaders will proactively address any risks that they divulge 
will there be an opportunity to build safer health care organizations. 
Source: R. I. Cook, How Complex Systems Fail (Chicago: Cognitive Technologies Laboratory, 
2000). Adapted from Woods, 1991.
FIGURE 3.3. The Blunt End/Sharp End Model of Accident Causation.
Sharp end
Blunt end
Resources and 
constraints
Direct
caregivers
Policies, procedures, 
regulations, systems
ACCIDENT
c03.indd 94 3/2/09 12:05:08 PM
 Creating a Just Culture of Safety 
 To envision a culture of safety, it is important to understand the concept of “ organizational culture. ” Organizational culture can be described as the set of values, 
guiding beliefs, or ways of thinking that are shared among members of an organization. It is the feel of an organization that is quickly picked up by new members. 
Culture is “ the way we do things around here. ” Culture is powerful, and is likely to 
become particularly visible when an organization tries to implement new strategies 
that are not in step with the status quo. It is human nature for people to resist changing 
the way they do things. Similarly, it is human nature for people to change the culture 
in which they live or work. 
 So what is the defi nition of a culture of safety? Tom Hellmich, a physician 
member of the Patient Safety Council at Children ’ s Hospital and Clinics in 
Minneapolis, described it this way: “ The medical culture that silently taught the 
ABCs as Accuse, Blame, and Criticize is fading. Rising in its place is a safety culture emphasizing blameless reporting, successful systems, knowledge, respect, confi dentiality, and trust. ” 19 
 In schools of medicine, nursing, and allied health, providers have traditionally 
been taught, through incident reporting procedures and behavior of other staff members, that when things go wrong, they should fi nd out “ who did it. ” The focus has been 
on individual failures. On the other hand, a safety culture asks, “ What happened? ” A 
safety culture looks at the system, the environment, the knowledge, the workfl ow, the 
tools, and other stressors that may have affected provider behavior. 
 When the patient safety movement began in the United States, a nonpunitive culture was seen as a solution to medical errors. This raised concerns that people who 
acted recklessly would not be held accountable. Lucien Leape, the Harvard surgeon 
who is sometimes referred to as the father of the patient safety movement, introduced 
the term “ just culture ” and noted that having a safety culture “ doesn ’ t mean there is no 
role for punishment. Punishment is indicated for willful misconduct, reckless behavior, and unjustifi ed, deliberate violation of rules . . . but not for human error. ” 20
 David Marx, an attorney who specializes in human resources and organizational 
development, also differentiates between a nonpunitive and a just response to error by 
describing a just culture of safety in terms of a set of beliefs and a set of duties. 
According to Marx, providers in a just culture must recognize that professionals make 
mistakes, acknowledge that even professionals will use shortcuts, and support zero tolerance for reckless behaviors. Marx adds that staff members in this culture must openly 
admit “ I have made a mistake, ” call out when they see risk, and participate in a learning culture, where information about mistakes and near misses is shared with others 
so they can prevent similar situations. 21
 Participants in a just safety culture are sensitive to risk, as they try to identify 
where and how the next mistake might occur and then work to prevent it from happening. Staff members share information about mistakes and errors to prevent them from 
recurring somewhere else or to someone else, and they are constantly seeking best 
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 95
c03.indd 95 3/2/09 12:05:10 PM
96 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
practices. These behaviors are characteristic of a learning organization. This type of 
organization also values reciprocal accountability. In other words, everyone holds 
everyone else accountable for patient safety. Leadership can expect staff members to 
call out or “ stop the line ” when they see risk, and the staff can expect leadership to listen and act, even if that means dealing with problem professionals who display intentionally reckless behaviors. Patients and family members are respected partners and 
understand their own responsibility to keep themselves safe while in a health care 
organization. Examples of patient responsibilities include keeping written records of 
medications and allergies and reminding busy health care workers to perform hand 
hygiene. 
 The National Patient Safety Foundation outlines several attributes of a safety culture that all health care organizations should strive to operationalize through the implementation of strong safety management systems. 22 These include a culture that does 
the following: 
■ Encourages all workers (including frontline staff, physicians, and administrators) 
to accept responsibility for the safety of themselves, their coworkers, patients, and 
visitors 
■ Prioritizes safety above fi nancial and operational goals 
■ Encourages and rewards the identifi cation, reporting, and resolution of safety 
issues 
■ Provides for organizational learning from accidents 
■ Allocates appropriate resources, structure, and accountability to maintain effective safety systems 
■ Absolutely avoids reckless behaviors 
 In a just safety culture, top - down communication must be replaced by two - way 
communication that fl ows to the front line from leadership and back to leadership 
from those providing patient care on the front line. Similarly, silence about harmful 
events must be replaced with open, honest disclosure about serious patient safety 
events. 
 Communication and Teamwork 
 We know that the failure to communicate effectively is the root cause for many avoidable accidents. Dr. Peter Angood, vice president and chief patient safety offi cer at the 
Joint Commission and co - director for the Joint Commission International Center for 
Patient Safety told participants on a June 21, 2007 telephone conference call that 
while communication issues for wrong - site surgery remain high (and for the fi rst 10 
years of data tracking most of the problems were strictly related to communication), 
what was seen in 2006 was procedural compliance — not following the Universal 
c03.indd 96 3/2/09 12:05:10 PM
Protocol — as the main cause of these wrong site surgeries. The three components of 
the Universal Protocol are: pre - operative verifi cation process, marking the surgical 
site, and the time out just before the performance of the procedure. Clearly, not following the Universal Protocol has a communication component as well. Many factors contribute to communication - related patient safety issues. The following are a 
few of the most important, accompanied by associated patient safety strategies. 
Traditionally Complex Hierarchical Approach When nurses perceive that a physician or other senior clinician is using an unsafe clinical approach, they traditionally access the chain of command to resolve the question. In many health care 
organizations, the chain of command is cumbersome, and it requires the nurse to 
contact two or three people at minimum, based on existing reporting relationships 
and formal interfaces between the nursing and medical staff. 
 If patient safety is at stake, the most knowledgeable resolution must be achievable 
in a short time, and there is no time for the traditional chain of command. Many successful malpractice suits have involved circumstances in which a question about care, 
or need for expert intervention, was not addressed promptly. 
 Analogously, the aviation industry recognized that hierarchy - associated communication failures were at the root of 70 to 80 percent of all the jet transport accidents 
over a twenty - year period. The industry made signifi cant improvements in its poor 
safety record through a strategy called crew resource management (CRM) training. 
One important tenet of this strategy is that every team member has a responsibility to 
point out a perceived risk. This places the pilot and crew on equal footing when the 
safety of the craft or passengers is in question. 
 Empirical proof of the value of such team training in health care has been demonstrated only in small sample studies to date, but evidence from emergency department 
operations and obstetric settings is proving that it reduces risk. 23 Still another strategy 
from outside the health care industry comes from manufacturing assembly lines. Some 
health care organizations have “ stop the line ” policies that empower everyone to 
respectfully call out and stop any risky process or procedure until all preventable risks 
are removed. 24
 Simplifying the hierarchy is a key patient safety strategy to resolving patient 
safety - related communication issues. Empowering charge nurses to facilitate rapid 
resolution of care questions is one approach that some organizations are 
developing. 
Personal Style of Providers Hierarchy has one additional undesirable ramifi cation; it 
may legitimize intimidating behavior. One Joint Commission surveyor observed, for 
example, that intimidation is a signifi cant factor in wrong - site surgery. (For more 
information, see the discussion of the Institute of Safe Medical Practice study on 
intimidation in Chapter Seven .) 
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 97
c03.indd 97 3/2/09 12:05:11 PM
98 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 Solutions to address an intimidating personal style range from simple training to 
disciplinary action within the parameters of appropriate human resource protocols and 
medical staff bylaws. Long - term resolution often requires the strong support of senior 
administrative and clinical leaders. 
 At the other end of the spectrum is lack of assertiveness by frontline staff. This 
timidity is sometimes a response to another provider ’ s intimidating behavior. 
This unassertive personal style may be equally dangerous because important issues are 
simply never raised. When the nurse calls a physician in the middle of the night but 
does not clearly explain the reason for the call, the nurse may not get the response that 
is needed to address the urgent clinical issue at hand. 
Situational Briefi ng Model: SBAR One means of facilitating clear communication 
between providers in crisis is a standardized situational briefi ng model. For example, 
the SBAR (for situation, background, assessment, and recommendation) Communication 
model is an approach used increasingly in health care settings to facilitate effective 
communication of issues in an impending crisis by support staff to physicians. 25 
 A summary of key steps in the SBAR model follows. 
 1. Before using SBAR Communication and calling a physician, it is important to do 
the following: 
 ■ Assess the patient. 
 ■ Review the chart to determine the appropriate physician to call. 
 ■ Know the admitting diagnosis. 
■ Read most recent progress notes and assessments from clinicians on prior 
shifts. 
■ Have available when speaking with the physician the medical record, patient 
allergies, medications, IV fl uids, and laboratory and other diagnostic test results. 
 The following are the essential components of SBAR Communication: 
 2. Situation 
 ■ State your name, position, and unit. 
 ■ Say, “ I am calling about. . . ” (patient name and room number). 
■ Say, “ The problem I am calling about is … ” 
 3. Background 
■ State the admission diagnosis and date of admission. 
■ State the pertinent medical history. 
■ Give a brief synopsis of the treatment to date. 
 4. Assessment: Begin by outlining any changes from prior assessments. Include 
changes in the following: 
c03.indd 98 3/2/09 12:05:11 PM
 ■ Mental status 
■ Pain 
 ■ Respiratory rate or quality; retractions or use of accessory muscles 
■ Pulse and blood pressure rate and quality; rhythm changes 
■ Skin color; wound drainage 
■ Neurological changes 
■ Gastrointestinal, genitourinary, or bowel changes (nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, increased or decreased output) 
■ Musculoskeletal weakness, joint deformity 
 5. Recommendation: State clearly what you think the patient needs urgently. 
Examples might include the following: 
■ Transfer the patient to ICU or PICU. 
■ Come to see the patient immediately. 
■ Talk to the patient or family about the code status. 
■ Ask for a consultant to see the patient now. 
■ Suggest tests or laboratory studies needed (for example, chest X - ray, arterial 
blood gases, EKG). 
 If a change in treatment is ordered, ask how often vital signs should be checked 
and when the physician would like to be contacted again. Document any changes in 
patient status, what intervention was completed, and whether or not the intervention 
was effective. Also document any contact you have had with the physician. 
Lack of Common Language Barriers to communication might stem from language, 
ethnic, cultural, age, and gender differences. Even among providers with similar backgrounds, there might be a lack of familiarity with terminology, including jargon and 
abbreviations. (See the discussion of issues surrounding unclear medication orders in 
Chapter Seven .) One example of a solution to standardizing communication among 
providers is the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development ’ s adoption of common defi nitions for fetal monitor interpretation. 
 The Joint Commission has built several strategies to improve provider communication into its National Patient Safety Goals (see Exhibit 3.1 ). These include read -
 backs on verbal orders and critical lab values; identifi cation of patients using two 
sources; site marking using the word yes on operative or procedure sites; checklists to 
verify correct patient, site, and procedure; and calling a time - out before procedures 
and operations begin to ensure that all health care team members are comfortable that 
safety preparations for the procedure are complete. 
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 99
c03.indd 99 3/2/09 12:05:12 PM
100 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
EXHIBIT 3.1. The 2009 National Patient Safety Goals 
The 2009 National Patient Safety Goals contain improvements emanating from the Standards Improvement Initiative (SSI), including a new numbering system and minor language 
changes for consistency. The new numbering format was designed to enable electronic 
sorting (for the new electronic editions of the manual) and to accommodate the addition 
of new requirements. Under the new numbering system, each requirement is assigned a 
six-digit number that designates its place in the chapter.
 The 2009 National Patient Safety Goals can be accessed online at http://www.joint
commission.org/NR/rdonlyres/31666E86-E7F4-423E-9BE8-F05BD1CB0AA8/0/09_NPSG_
HAP.pdf.
Chapter: National Patient Safety Goals (NPSG) 2009
Program: Hospital
Goal 1: Improve the accuracy of patient identifi cation.
A. Use of two patient identifi ers (revised NPSG.01.01.01)
B. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.01.02.01)
C. Eliminate transfusion errors (revised NPSG.01.03.01)
Goal 2: Improve the effectiveness of communication among caregivers.
 A. Read back verbal orders (revised NPSG.02.01.01)
 B. Create a list of abbreviations not to use (revised NPSG.02.02.01)
 C. Timely report critical tests and critical results (revised NPSG.02.03.01)
 D. Not applicable
 E. Manage hand-off communications (revised NPSG.02.05.01)
Goal 3: Improve the safety of using medications.
 A. Not applicable
 B. Not applicable
 C. Manage look-alike, sound-alike medications (revised NPSG.03.03.01)
 D. Label medications (revised NPSG.03.04.01)
 E. Reduce harm from anticoagulation therapy (revised NPSG.03.05.01)
Goal 4: Not applicable
Goal 5: Not applicable
c03.indd 100 3/2/09 12:05:12 PM
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 101
Goal 6: Not applicable
Goal 7: Reduce the risk of health care-associated infections.
 A. Meet hand hygiene guidelines (revised NPSG.07.01.01)
 B. Manage deaths or major loss of function resulting from infection as sentinel events 
(revised NPSG.07.02.01)
 C. Prevent multi-drug resistant organism infections (revised NPSG.07.03.01)
 D. Prevent central-line associated bloodstream infections (revisedNPSG.07.04.01)
 E. Prevent surgical site infections (revised NPSG.07.05.01)
Goal 8: Accurately and completely reconcile medications across the continuum of care.
 A. Compare current and newly ordered medications (revised NPSG.08.01.01)
 B. Communicate medications to the next provider (revised NPSG.08.02.01)
 C. Provide a reconciled medication list to the patient (revised NPSG.08.03.01)
 D. Applies to settings in which medications are minimally used (revised NPSG. 08.04.01)
Goal 9: Reduce the risk of patient harm resulting from falls.
 A. Implement a fall reduction program (revised NPSG.09.02.01)
Goal 10: Reduce the risk of infl uenza and pneumococcal disease in institutionalized older 
adults.
 A. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.10.01.01)
 B. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.10.02.01)
 C. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.10.03.01)
Goal 11: Reduce the risk of surgical fi res.
 A. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.11.01.01)
Goal 12: Not applicable
Goal 13: Encourage patients’ active involvement in their own care as a patient safety 
strategy.
 A. Educate patient and family on reporting of safety concerns (revised NPSG.13.01.01)
Goal 14: Prevent health care associated pressure ulcers (decubitus ulcers).
 A. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.14.01.01)
(Continued)
c03.indd 101 3/2/09 12:05:12 PM
102 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
Goal 15: Identify safety risks inherent in the organization’s patient population.
 A. Identify individuals at risk for suicide (revised NPSG.15.01.01)
 B. Not applicable to hospital (revised NPSG.15.02.01)
Goal 16: Improve recognition and response to changes in a patient’s condition.
 A. Request assistance for a patient with a worsening condition 
(revisedNPSG.16.01.01)
Source: ©The Joint Commission 2008. Reprinted with permission. 
 Other principles that can help providers avoid communication breakdowns include 
the following: 
■ The fact that one person said and understands something doesn ’ t mean that 
others did. 
■ Communication is not accomplished unless both parties are on the same page. 
■ A standard method of communication gives the right amount and type of useful 
information that is critical to patient safety. 
■ Assertiveness is necessary if you have concerns about safety, because patients are 
counting on you. 
■ It is necessary to ask clarifying questions if you don ’ t understand. 
■ Information about problems and mistakes must be shared appropriately to help 
improve systems and prevent recurrence of medical errors. 
 Human Factors and Patient Safety 
 Mistakes made by humans are reportedly responsible for most serious accidents in 
non - health care industries. For example, they are responsible for 80 percent of industrial and airline accidents and 50 to 70 percent of nuclear power accidents. 26
 Human factors engineering, human factors analysis, and ergonomics are among 
the disciplines developed to address risk in non - health care industries. These fi elds of 
study have much to offer patient safety initiatives. 
 The goal of human factors engineering (HFE) is the design of tools, machines, 
and systems that take into account human capabilities and limitations. To support this 
goal, human factors engineers research psychological, social, physical, and biological 
characteristics. The risk management professional and others addressing patient safety 
can use HFE principles to analyze the relationship between human beings and 
EXHIBIT 3.1. (Continued )
c03.indd 102 3/2/09 12:05:13 PM
machines, the breakdown of which often plays a part in medical errors. Among patient 
safety - oriented approaches based on HFE principles are strategies that eliminate the 
use of dangerous shortcuts that lead to medical errors. 27 For example, staff must follow 
manufacturers ’ directions in testing defi brillators. Human factors analysis is the systematic study of the human - machine interface, with the intent of improving working 
conditions or operations. See Figure 3.4 for an illustration. 
 Ergonomics professionals study people at work and then design tasks, jobs, 
information, tools, equipment, facilities, and the working environment to be safe, 
effective, productive, and comfortable. In health care, understanding how humans 
interface with highly complex technology and the surrounding environment is crucial to preventing errors. For example, medication stations must have suffi cient space 
around them for nurses to work without getting in each other ’ s way at times that 
many medications are due, and there must be suffi cient light for them to see what 
they are doing. 
Source: McCormick, E. J., and Sanders, M. S. Human Factors in Engineering and Design, 15th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982), p. 14.
FIGURE 3.4. Human-Machine Interface.
Work environment
Information
processing
Human being
Machine
Sensing Controlling
Controls
Operation
Displays
Input Output
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 103
c03.indd 103 3/2/09 12:05:13 PM
104 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 To evaluate the safety of a work environment and applying human factors and 
ergonomics principles, it is recommended that the following questions be asked: 28
■ What are the characteristics of the individual performing the work? Does the individual have the musculoskeletal, sensory, and cognitive abilities to do the required 
tasks? If not, can any of these gaps in ability be accommodated in the design of 
the task? 
■ What tasks are being performed, and what characteristics of those tasks might 
contribute to unsafe patient care? What in the nature of the tasks allows the individual to perform them safely or assume risks in the process? 
■ What tools and technology are being used to perform the tasks, and do they 
increase or decrease the likelihood of untoward events? 
■ Which aspects of the physical environment can be sources of error, and which 
promote safety? What in the environment ensures safe behavior or allows unsafe 
behavior to occur? 
 Human factors assessment should also include the following: 
■ Evaluating the work — what is the work - to - rest ratio? 
■ Evaluating the workers — what are their physical and mental capabilities? 
■ Evaluating the environment — are noise levels, lighting, and workfl ow potential 
barriers or facilitators to successful task completion? (See Figure 3.5 .) 
Source: Potter, P., and others. “Mapping the Nursing Process: A New Approach for Understanding the Work of Nursing.” Journal of Nursing Administration, 2004, 34, 101–109. Reprinted with 
permission.
FIGURE 3.5. Components of Human Factors Assessment.
WORKER:
Physical
capabilities
ENVIRONMENT:
Noise, lighting,
workflow
TASK:
Work/rest
ratio
c03.indd 104 3/2/09 12:05:13 PM
 Another illustration of the importance of evaluating the “ human machine ” is a 
recent study of the working memory of a nurse, which found that a nurse is thinking of 
an average of ten things simultaneously during a work shift. 29 It is not hard to imagine 
errors of omission when the typical human working memory becomes taxed if asked 
to hold more than a seven - digit telephone number. 
 The mental capabilities of health care workers should be evaluated, as should 
physical characteristics, such as these: 
■ Physical size (anthropometry) 
■ Endurance and fatigue (physiology) 
■ Force (biomechanics) 
■ Hand and arm coordination (kinesiology) 
■ Sensory characteristics (hearing, vision, touch) 
 Environmental issues that affect safe care delivery include the following: 
■ Noise, light (glare), vibration, temperature, force 
■ Work space or supplies layout 
■ Equipment - environment compatibility issues 
 The safety - related implications of the interface between humans and their physical environment are starkly illustrated by the potential for desensitization of the intensive care staff to the signifi cance of one alarm in an environment in which numerous 
alarms are sounding all the time. This issue is clearly exacerbated by other employee -
 related safety issues such as fatigue. Biomedical and human factors engineers should 
seek solutions in each individual environment. 
 A simpler but equally important example of the unsafe effect that comes from ignoring human factors and ergonomics principles is the poorly designed paper towel dispenser 
found in many hospital bathrooms. The mechanism that holds clean towels is connected 
to the dirty paper towel disposal unit. This design makes it easy for freshly washed hands to 
be contaminated by dirty towels overfl owing from the dispenser (see Photo 3.1 ). 
 Human factors and ergonomics principles can help prevent equipment - related 
medical errors. Proactively, these disciplines can also “ mistake - proof ” the environment so that providers will fi nd it hard to do the wrong thing. 
 Systems Thinking 
 Another industrial concept useful to patient safety experts is the notion of “ systems thinking. ” A system may be defi ned as a combination of elements organized in a structure to 
achieve goals and objectives. Systems can be seen as the interaction of many factors: 
■ Elements (personnel, equipment, procedures) 
■ Environment (physical, social, organizational) 
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 105
c03.indd 105 3/2/09 12:05:14 PM
106 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
■ Inputs and outputs 
■ Structure 
■ Purpose and goals 
 The objectives of system evaluation must include reliability of the system and the 
human using it. System reliability depends on the reliability of each individual component. Components can be in series, parallel, or a combination of the two. Parallel 
systems are redundant and can increase reliability. Parallel redundancy is often helpful to human functions because the human component in a system is the least 
reliable. 
 The best way to assess the likelihood of human error is through a failure modes 
and effects analysis (FMEA). In FMEA, a team analyzes a process in detail to determine possible system failures and brainstorm solutions before the process goes into 
effect. 30
 Reporting 
 It is impossible to reduce medical errors and adverse outcomes by focusing only on 
any one aspect of the health care system. As Dr. Richard Cook ’ s adaptation of David 
Reprinted with permission. BJC Corporate Health Services, St. Louis, MO.
PHOTO 3.1. Poorly Designed Paper Towel Dispenser and 
 Disposal Unit.
c03.indd 106 3/2/09 12:05:14 PM
Woods ’ s “ blunt end/sharp end ” model of accident causation implies, patient safety 
must be analyzed from the national level, where health policy and legislation are created, down to the front line of patient care delivery. 
 The aviation industry illustrates the positive effect of reporting on safety. In the 
thirty - some years since its inception in 1976 through December 2006, the Aviation 
Safety Reporting System (ASRS) has logged 723,427 confi dential “ incident reports, 
issued over 4,000 safety alert message and performed 60 major research studies on 
aviation safety. The reporting has increased 89 percent since 1988 and for calendar 
year 2006 the total report intake was almost 40,000 (39,964). Modeled off ASRS, the 
Patient Safety Reporting System was developed for the Veterans Affairs (VA) as an 
extension of their commitment to quality and safety. 31
 The AHRQ defi nes near miss as an event or situation that did not produce patient 
injury, but only because of chance.
32 ” The effectiveness of a patient safety program 
can, to some degree, be measured by increased near - miss reporting because the data 
provide important insight into problems that need to be addressed. 
 The 2005 Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act is a major step toward creation of a national voluntary system of incident reporting and medical error information. Key among the provisions of the act is the creation of patient safety organizations. 
These are responsible for developing a network of patient safety databases, which will 
collect and analyze voluntarily reported medical errors to use for identifying patient 
safety improvement strategies. The law ensures that what is reported cannot be used 
against the provider in court or in disciplinary proceedings. This provision is intended 
to encourage providers to identify and correct medical errors. 
 Event Reporting Systems 
 In addition to providing information about individual events, event reporting systems 
enable the organization to prioritize resources through analysis of trends. The greatest 
challenge has always been the fear of punishment. This single factor is often the cause 
of lost valuable information that could help address system problems. 
 It is important for the risk management professional to be aware of common 
myths or unspoken rules that staff members might use to justify not reporting. Some 
examples of unspoken rules include the following: 33
 “ If I can make it right, it is not an error. ” If a dose was omitted, a nurse changes 
the subsequently scheduled drug administration scheduled to get back on track. 
 “ If it ’ s not my fault, it is not an error. ” Late administration or an omission 
occurred when the prescribed drug was not available on the unit. 
 “ If another patient ’ s needs are more urgent than accurate medication or treatment, it is not an error. ” Delayed or omitted medication delivery was caused by 
dealing with urgent situations arising with another patient. 
 “ A clerical error is not a real medical error. ” A nurse on a previous shift failed to 
document drug administration or documented in the wrong section of the record. 
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 107
c03.indd 107 3/2/09 12:05:17 PM
108 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 “ If my actions prevent something worse, it is not an error. ” Nurses know that they 
will be busy later due to planned admissions, discharges, and so on, and administer medication early rather than risk omitting doses. 
 “ If everyone knows (or does it), it is not an error. ” Nurses sometimes give medications early or withhold medications at night so that patients suffering from 
sleep deprivation can rest uninterrupted for longer periods of time. 
 The most common barriers to reporting include lack of knowledge about what to 
report or how to report, lack of trust, extra work, skepticism about the likelihood that 
things will change, desire to forget the event, and fear of reprisal or punishment. 34
 The most important resource to counter obstacles to reporting is a just culture of 
safety. If providers feel confi dent that their senior managers will support them, they 
will point out risk and report medical errors. Other strategies to facilitate reporting 
include the following: 
■ New online reporting options that include telephone hotlines or that enable staff 
members to input medical error data more easily and facilitate analysis 
■ Paper reports (if they are used) that are readily accessible by all members of the 
health care team 
■ Highly effective reporting programs that keep the identity of the reporter confi dential 
 Any risk - trending analysis must assess types of errors, people, systems, and processes involved, place and time of occurrence, and risk factors identifi ed. This information should be shared with key stakeholders and used to drive improvements that 
reduce risk of harm to patients (and employees). 
 Joint Commission, State, and Federal Medical Error 
Reporting Requirements 
 After an adverse event occurs, the risk management professional and leadership must 
determine whether the event must be reported externally. The Centers for Medicaid 
and Medicare Services (CMS) has designated Patient Safety Indicators (for example, 
third - degree lacerations during a vaginal birth) as incidents that must be reported by 
licensed organizations receiving Medicare and Medicaid. Furthermore, organizations 
that are accredited by The Joint Commission must evaluate a sentinel event and determine whether to report it because sentinel event reporting to The Joint Commission 
is voluntary. The following are occurrences that are subject to review by the Joint 
Commission under the Sentinel Event Policy: 35
■ The event has resulted in an unanticipated death or major permanent loss of 
 function, not related to the natural course of the patient ’ s illness or underlying 
condition or 
c03.indd 108 3/2/09 12:05:17 PM
■ The event is one of the following (even if the outcome was not death or major permanent loss of function unrelated to the natural course of the patient ’ s illness or 
underlying condition): 
■ Suicide of any patient receiving care, treatment, and services in a staffed around -
 the - clock care setting or within 72 hours of discharge 
■ Unanticipated death of a full - term infant 
■ Abduction of any patient receiving care, treatment, and services 
■ Discharge of an infant to the wrong family 
■ Rape 
■ Hemolytic transfusion reaction involving administration of blood or blood products 
having major blood group incompatibilities 
■ Surgery on the wrong patient or wrong body part 
■ Unintended retention of a foreign object in a patient after surgery or other 
procedure 
■ Severe neonatal hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin > 30 milligrams/deciliter) 
■ Prolonged fl uoroscopy with cumulative dose > 1500 rads to a single fi eld or any 
delivery of radiotherapy to the wrong body region or > 25% above the planned 
radiotherapy dose 36
 In contrast, the following are examples of nonreviewable sentinel events under 
the Joint Commission ’ s Sentinel Event Policy : 
■ Any “ near miss ” event 
■ Full or expected return of limb or bodily function to the same level as prior to the 
adverse event by discharge or within two weeks of the initial loss of said 
function 
■ Any sentinel event that has not affected an individual 
■ Medication errors that do not result in death or major permanent loss of function 
■ Suicide other than in an around - the - clock care setting or following elopement 
from such a setting 
■ A death or loss of function following a discharge against medical advice (AMA) 
■ Unsuccessful suicide attempts 
■ Minor degrees of hemolysis not caused by a major blood group incompatibility 
and with no clinical sequelae 
Seeking Solutions: What Are the Causes of Medical Errors? 109
c03.indd 109 3/2/09 12:05:18 PM
110 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 Most health care organizations have established committees responsible for peer 
review that can be used if an event involves questionable practice or behavior of a 
licensed professional. These committees may consist of peers from medicine, nursing, 
pharmacy, or other allied health professions that review a case and determine the 
appropriateness of the provider ’ s activities related to that case. The risk management 
professional should be formally accountable for referring an event to the organization ’ s peer review committee as necessary. 
 State Requirements 
 Twenty - seven individual states have adverse event reporting programs, twenty - six of 
which are mandatory and one voluntary. Risk management professionals must stay 
current with the requirements of these programs and must facilitate staff members ’ 
understanding of their implications. Similarly, they must be aware of requirements and 
must facilitate federal reporting requirements such as those associated with the Safe 
Medical Devices Act (SMDA). 
 SUMMARY 
 The patient safety movement has brought numerous challenges and opportunities to 
risk management professionals. By collaborating with other members of the management team, risk management professionals can use these new strategies to solve the 
ongoing challenge of medical errors. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Active failure 
 Chain of command 
 Crew resource management 
 Ergonomics 
 Event reporting 
 Hospital - acquired infection 
 Human factors 
 Human factors engineering 
 Infection preventionist 
 Latent failure 
 National Patient Safety Goals 
 Near miss 
 Organizational culture 
 Sentinel event 
 Sentinel event reporting 
 ACRONYMS 
 AHRQ 
 AMA 
 CDC 
 CMS 
 CRM 
 FMEA 
 HFE 
 IOM 
 RCA 
 SBAR 
c03.indd 110 3/2/09 12:05:18 PM
 NOTES 
 1. Orlikoff, J., W. Fifer, and H. Greeley, Malpractice Prevention and Loss Control 
for Hospitals. Chicago: American Hospital Association, 1981. 
 2. Darling v. Charleston Community Memorial Hospital, 33 Ill.2d 326, 211 N.E.2d 
253 (1965), cert. denied, 383 U.S. 946 (1966). 
 3. Joint Commission Sentinel Event Glossary of Terms, 2005, http://www.joint
commission.org/sentinalevents/se_glossary.htm (accessed November 11, 2008) .
 4. Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, J. M., and Donaldson, M. S. (eds.). To Err Is Human: Building 
a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 2000. 
 5. P.L. 109 - 41 (2005). 
 6. Leape, L. L., and others. “ The Nature of Adverse Events in Hospitalized Patients: 
Results of the Harvard Medical Practice Study II. ” New England Journal of 
Medicine, 1991, 324, 377 – 384; Thomas, E. J., Studdert, D. M., and Newhouse, 
J. P. “ Costs of Medical Injuries in Utah and Colorado. ” Inquiry, 1999; 36, 255 – 264. 
 7. Leape, L. L. “ Institute of Medicine Error Figures Are Not Exaggerated. ” Journal 
of the American Medical Association, 2000; 284, 95 – 97. 
 8. Bates, D. W., and others. “ The Cost of Adverse Drug Events in Hospitalized 
Patients. ” Journal of the American Medical Association, 1997; 277, 307 – 311. 
 9. Ibid. 
 10. Leape, L. L., and others. “ Preventing Medical Injury. ” Quality Review Bulletin,
1993, 19, 144 – 149. 
 11. Graves, N. “ Economics and Preventing Hospital - Acquired Infection. ” Emerging 
Infectious Diseases [serial online], Apr. 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/
vol10no4/02 - 0754.htm 
 12. Brennan, T. A., and others. “ Harvard Medical Practice Study I. ” Quality and Safety 
in Health Care, 2004, 13, 151 – 152. 
 13. Stone, P. W., Larson, E., and Kawar, L. N. “ A Systematic Audit of Economic 
Evidence Linking Nosocomial Infections and Infection Control Interventions, 
1990 – 2000. ” American Journal of Infection Control, 2002, 30, 145 – 152. 
 14. Wenzel, R. P., and Edmond, M. B. “ The Impact of Hospital - Acquired Bloodstream 
Infections. ” Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2001, 7 , http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/
eid/vol7no2/wenzel.htm 
 15. Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research. Patient Safety Initiative: Building 
Foundations, Reducing Risk, http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/pscongrpt/psini2.htm#
RootCauses 
 Notes 111
c03.indd 111 3/2/09 12:05:19 PM
112 Patient Safety and the Risk Management Professional
 16. Reason, J. “ Human Error: Models and Management. ” British Medical Journal,
2000, 320, 768 – 770. 
 17. Cook, R. I., and Woods, D. D. “ Operating at the Sharp End: The Complexity of Human 
Error. ” In M. S. Bogner (ed.), Human Error in Medicine. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum, 
1994, pp 255 – 310, http://www.ctlab.org/documents/operatingatthesharp.pdf 
 18. Ibid. 
 19. Morath, J. Presentation at BJC Healthcare, Patient Safety Forum, Saint Louis, 
Mo., 2003. 
 20. Leape, L. L. Presentation at Missouri Hospital Association, Patient Safety Seminar, 
Saint Louis, Mo., 2002. 
 21. Marx, D. Patient Safety and the “ Just Culture ” : A Primer for Healthcare 
Executives. New York: Columbia University, 2001, http://www.mers - tm.net/
support/Marx_Primer.pdf 
 22. National Patient Safety Foundation. Safety Culture, http://search.freefi nd.com/
find.html?id=28648537 & t=s & nsb= & pageid=r & mode=ALL & s=definitions & 
query=Safety+Culture 
 23. Baker, D. P., Gustafson, S., Beaubien, J. M., Salas, E., and Barach, P. “ Medical 
Team Training Programs in Health Care. ” In 2005 Advances in Patient Safety: 
From Research to Implementation (Vol. 4, p. 260). Rockville, Md.: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, 2005, http://www.aptima.com/ publications/
2005_Baker_Gustafson_Beaubien_Salas_Barach.pdf 
 24. Ibid. 
 25. Kaiser Permanente ’ s SBAR Communication model has been adapted with permission from copyrighted material of Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc., 
California Regions. 
 26. Potter, P., and others. “ Mapping the Nursing Process: A New Approach for 
Understanding the Work of Nursing. ” Journal of Nursing Administration, 2004, 
34, 101 – 109. 
 27. Gosbee, J. “ Human Factors Engineering and Patient Safety. ” Quality and 
Safety in Health Care, 2002; 11, 352 – 354, http://qhc.bmjjournals.com/cgi/ 
content/full/11/4/353 
 28. Carayon, P., Alvarado, C., and Hundt, A. “ Reducing Workload and Increasing 
Patient Safety Through Work and Workspace Design. ” Paper commissioned by the 
Institute for Medicine Commission on the Work Environment for Nurses and Patient 
Safety, 2003. The IOM Commission on the Work Environment for Nurses and 
Patient Safety, commissioned 9 separate working papers as background for the book 
 “ In Keeping Patients Safe: Transforming the Work Environment for Nurses.” 
c03.indd 112 3/2/09 12:05:19 PM
 29. Ibid. 
 30. Wolf, L. BJC HealthCare, Patient Safety Curriculum: Human Factors Module. 
2004. 
 31. ASRS Reporting Brief. Aviation Safety Reporting System. Available at: http://
asrs.arc.nasa.gov/overview/summary (accessed November 11, 2008). 
 32. AHRQ PS Net Patient Safety Network Glossary available at: F:\AHRQ\AHRQ 
Patient Safety Network Glossary.htm (accessed November 11, 2008). 
 33. Caleca, B. BJC HealthCare Patient Safety Curriculum: Importance of Reporting 
Module. 2004. 
 34. Leonard, M. Director of Patient Safety, Kaiser Permanente. Presentation. BJC 
HealthCare, Patient Safety Forum, Saint Louis, Mo. September 2002. 
 35. The Joint Commission. “ Sentinel Event Policy, 2007, ” [ http://www.jointcommis
sion.org/NR/rdonlyres/F84F9DC6 - A5DA - 490F - A91F - A9FCE26347C4/0/
SE_chapter_july07.pdf]
36. Ibid. 
 SUGGESTED READINGS 
 Cook, Richard, How Complex Systems Fail . Cognitive Technologies Laboratory, 
University of Chicago, Revision D. Copyright © 1998, 1999, 2000 by R. I. Cook, 
MD, for CtL. 
 Cook, Richard; Woods, David; and Miller, Charlotte, A Tale of Two Stories: Contrasting 
Views of Patient Safety . Chicago: National Patient Safety Foundation, 1998. 
 Cook, Richard and Woods, David, “ Operating at the Sharp End: The Complexity of 
Human Error, ” in Human Error in Medicine , ed., Marilyn Sue Bogner, Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1994. 
 Cook, Richard; Render, Marta; and Woods, David (2000). “ Gaps in the continuity of 
care and progress on patient safety. ” British Medical Journal 320: 791 – 4. 
 Cook, Richard (1999). A Brief Look at the New Look in error, safety, and failure of 
complex systems . (Chicago: CtL). 
 Woods, David and Cook, Richard (1999). “ Perspectives on Human Error: Hindsight 
Biases and Local Rationality. ” In Durso, Nickerson, et al., eds., Handbook of 
Applied Cognition . (New York: Wiley) pp. 141 – 171. 
Suggested readings 113
c03.indd 113 3/2/09 12:05:19 PM
c03.indd 114 3/2/09 12:05:20 PM
115
CHAPTER
4
HEALTH CARE LEGAL 
CONCEPTS 
 PETER HOFFMAN 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to describe the four basic elements of negligence 
■ To be able to identify the elements of attorney - client privilege and circumstances when it does not apply 
■ To be able to list the elements that are necessary for a consent to be 
 “ informed ” 
■ To be able to identify two theories under which an acute care hospital can be 
held liable 
c04.indd 115 3/3/09 3:13:03 PM
116 Health Care Legal Concepts
 Every person who works in the modern world of health care is likely to encounter a 
variety of legal concepts during his or her professional life. These might include general 
and professional negligence issues, contract and employment considerations, privacy 
concerns, and crucial questions such as when life - sustaining treatment may be withheld. The specifi c issues each person will face depend on his or her role in the health 
care fi eld and also on the type of facility in which he or she works. Some issues that 
arise on a regular basis in an acute care hospital might be less or possibly more common 
in the context of an ambulance service, nursing home, or integrated delivery system. 
Given the plethora of legal concepts that routinely affect participants in the fi eld of 
health care, it is useful to have at least some general knowledge of these concepts. 
 This chapter provides basic information about several legal concepts and describes 
specifi c issues that occur frequently in particular settings. You are encouraged to read 
other chapters for more detailed information about the concepts touched on here. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Negligence is the primary cause of civil action that health care providers face. 
■ Communication between a physician and that physician ’ s patients are private and 
confi dential. 
■ A physician ’ s standard of care is measured by the degree of care and skill possessed 
by other physicians in the same or similar circumstances. 
■ A physician must obtain full, knowing, and voluntary general and informed consent from the patient concerning any nonemergency surgical procedure. Failure to 
obtain adequate informed consent can give rise to a claim, even if the procedure is 
performed appropriately. 
■ There are generally four different types of HMOs, categorized on the basis of their 
relationship with the medical providers. An HMO ’ s exposure to liability depends 
largely on its organizational structure. 
 LEGAL ISSUES COMMON TO ALL HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS 
 There are many types of liability that affect the health care industry. We will discuss 
several of them here. 
 Negligence 
Negligence is the primary civil cause of action that health care providers face. A negligence action can involve a claim of general liability or one of professional liability. 
c04.indd 116 3/3/09 3:13:04 PM
In either circumstance, there are four basic elements in any cause of action that alleges 
negligence. 
 1. Duty: One person must be under a duty to another person (or to society) before 
negligence becomes an issue. In the context of professional liability, duty usually 
applies when the provider undertakes to care for the patient. 
 2. Breach of duty: The person under the duty must breach the duty in some way 
(such as allowing a hazard to exist or failing to meet the required standard of 
care) to allow negligence to attach. 
 3. Cause of injury: The plaintiff must suffer an injury as a result of the defendant ’ s 
breach of duty. If the injury did not arise out of the breach of the duty or the 
plaintiff cannot prove causation, the cause of action fails. 
 4. Damages: The plaintiff must be able to show legally cognizable damages as 
a result of the injury sustained. Damages typically include pain and suffering 
(sometimes capped by tort reform efforts), medical expenses, lost wages, emotional distress, and loss of consortium or companionship. 
General Liability General liability issues for health care providers typically include 
claims that allege negligence for hazards in the environment and nonprofessional 
judgments and actions. 1
 General liability primarily involves premises liability, as many 
claims entail injuries arising out of the maintenance of premises, including slips and 
falls, but it can also involve causes of action alleging defamation, employment issues, 
and slander, to name a few. Claimants asserting general liability causes of action may 
include patients, physicians and other providers, family members, visitors, or even 
trespassers. 
 All four basic elements apply in any claim for negligence. The only real difference 
between medical professional and general liability (negligence) is in the manner of 
proof. A claim for general negligence does not normally require that an expert witness 
testify as to the duty that a reasonably prudent person owes to another person or to 
show that a breach in that duty occurred (unless the matter is unduly technical). 
Medical Professional Liability Also referred to as malpractice liability, medical 
 professional liability involves claims that allege professional negligence for patient 
care activities. Typically, these causes of action involve allegations of negligent acts or 
omissions of health care providers or employees that result in injury to the patient. 
Patients, or their legal representatives, may allege separate theories of negligence 
against treating physicians, health care entities, nurses, and other employees. 
 To state a successful cause of action for medical negligence, a plaintiff must demonstrate all four elements of negligence. In the context of professional negligence, the 
duty is often referred to as the standard of care. Most arguments during litigation surround the proper standard of care and whether the standard was breached. Another 
focus is often whether the alleged substandard care was the cause of the plaintiff ’ s 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 117
c04.indd 117 3/3/09 3:13:04 PM
118 Health Care Legal Concepts
injuries. Expert testimony is required to show the appropriate standard of care, to 
establish whether it was breached, and to show that the plaintiff ’ s injuries were caused 
by the breach of the standard of care. 
Concept of Standard of Care A physician owes a duty of care to his or her patients to 
conform to certain standards of reasonable medical care. 2
 Generally, a physician ’ s 
standard of care is measured by the degree of care and skill possessed by other physicians in the same or similar circumstances. 3
 The standard of care requires, among 
other things, that a physician remain up - to - date regarding medical developments and 
advancements, secure a careful history, perform a comprehensive examination, arrive 
at an appropriate diagnosis, recommend and implement appropriate therapies, and 
refer for consultation when indicated. 4
 Historically, the standard for the adequate level of care rendered by a physician 
was determined by the prevailing standard of care practiced by physicians in the physician ’ s community. 5
 This is known as the “ locality rule. ” 6
 Because physicians were 
reluctant to give expert testimony against a fellow physician in the same community, 
many states have modifi ed this rule. 7
 As a result, some states have implemented either 
the “ similar locality ” standard or the “ national ” standard. 8
 Note that physicians who 
specialize in a particular area of medicine and who hold themselves out as specialists 
have been required to possess a greater level of skill in that specialty than a general 
practitioner would. 9
 To prevail in a medical negligence action, a plaintiff must affi rmatively prove the 
relevant recognized standard of medical care exercised by other physicians and that 
the defendant physician departed from that standard when treating the plaintiff, causing the plaintiff to sustain injury or damage. Generally, it is necessary for the plaintiff 
to have expert witness testimony concerning the standard of care applicable to the 
defendant. 
Expert Testimony Some states require specifi c qualifi cations and credentials before a 
party can testify as an expert witness in medical malpractice cases. Generally, a person 
shall not give expert medical testimony unless licensed as a health professional. To 
determine if a witness is qualifi ed to be an expert, the court will typically consider the 
witness ’ s education and professional training, the witness ’ s area of specialization, and 
the length of time the witness has been engaged in the active clinical practice or 
instruction of the health profession or specialty. In addition, there are two general standards, or tests, that the court will apply to consider whether an expert witness ’ s 
 testimony will be admissible in court: the Daubert standard and the Frye standard. In 
federal and many state cases, Daubert defi nes the standard for admitting expert scientifi c testimony. According to Daubert, the proposed testimony must be supported by 
appropriate validation. 10 In other states, Frye is the standard that applies. Under the 
Frye test, an expert ’ s opinion is admissible if the principle or method underlying that 
opinion is generally accepted by scientists active in the relevant fi eld. 11 State laws 
c04.indd 118 3/3/09 3:13:05 PM
should be reviewed to determine the applicable qualifi cations and standard applied in 
the specifi c jurisdiction. 
 In any medical negligence case, physician experts must testify that their expert 
opinions are based on a reasonable degree of medical certainty. Expert testimony fails 
to meet this reasonable certainty requirement when the plaintiff ’ s expert testifi es that 
the alleged negligence “ possibly ” caused or “ could have ” caused the plaintiff ’ s injury, 
that such negligence “ could very properly account for the injury, ” or even that it is 
 “ very highly probable ” that the defendant ’ s negligence caused the poor result. 12
Negligence Per Se The court may adopt a statute as defi ning the standard of care in a 
negligence action if the court determines that the purpose of the statute was to protect 
the class of persons to which the plaintiff belongs from the type of risk that has 
ensued. 13 The violation of a statute can be treated as negligence per se if it is unexcused. 14 This allows the plaintiff to handily prove the existence of a duty and the breach 
of the duty, but the plaintiff must still prove injury and damages. 
 Privity Generally, privity refers to a derivative interest founded on a contract or connection between two parties. It can also be thought of as a mutuality of interest. In the 
context of potential liability of a health care provider stemming from the care of a 
patient, the concept of privity usually applies when a party other than that patient — or 
that patient ’ s spouse or parent (of a minor patient) — claims that the health care provider also caused that other party injury and seeks to recover for this claimed injury. 
Duty of Health Care Providers to Third Parties (Nonpatients) To sustain a professional negligence cause of action against a physician, the plaintiff must normally be a 
patient. A patient is defi ned as a natural person who receives, or should have received, 
health care from a licensed health care provider under a contract, express or implied. 15
Most states have implemented the general rule that a physician does not owe a professional duty to a nonpatient or a third party. Several jurisdictions have held that a hospital does not owe a duty to protect a nonpatient who is present in the emergency room 
from fainting 16 and that a physician does not owe a duty to a third - party nonpatient for 
injuries arising from the use of prescription medication by the physician ’ s patient. 17
Some states have limited this “ no duty ” rule by recognizing a duty to nonpatient 
bystanders when the patient poses a danger of harm to an identifi able third party; 18
when the patient ’ s behavior must be controlled to prevent a danger to a third party; 19 or 
when the bystander becomes a participant in the treatment of a patient — for example, 
being used by the medical staff to hold the patient down. 20
 In contrast, a limited number of states have held that medical professionals have a 
duty to third parties in two circumstances: when doctors exert control over a patient 
and when a doctor is aware of threats against specifi c, identifi able third parties. Many 
courts have even concluded that physicians owe a duty to injured third parties and the 
general public to warn their patients about side effects of prescription medication (such 
as drowsiness). 21
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 119
c04.indd 119 3/3/09 3:13:05 PM
120 Health Care Legal Concepts
 Due to the different approaches taken by various states, it is important to review 
state laws to determine the approach followed by the specifi c jurisdiction. 
Contractual Liability of Doctor to Patient An agreement to provide medical care to 
a patient can be expressed or implied. When a patient seeks the assistance and treatment of a physician and the physician accepts the patient, they enter into an implied 
contract that the physician will treat the patient. Such a contract can only be terminated by the physician when the physician gives proper notice to the patient. The 
patient, of course, may terminate the agreement at any time. When an implied contract 
is formed, the physician does not guarantee the success of treatment or that benefi cial 
results will occur but only that the physician possesses, and will carefully apply, professional skills that are ordinarily possessed by general practitioners in the physician ’ s 
locality. 22 General reassurances by the physician to the patient are considered to be an 
expression of opinion or hope and do not amount to an expressed contract. 23 These 
reassurances are considered therapeutic and do not constitute a basis for an express 
contract. 
 To be enforceable, an explicit contract must be expressed and must be supported 
by consideration. Physicians and patients can enter into express written contracts 
regarding the care provided. Such contracts are not usual but can include various treatment plans, the likelihood of success, and even the physician ’ s promise to cure. 
Traditionally, courts have respected a physician ’ s freedom to contract as the physician 
chooses. 24 However, once a contract is formed, a plaintiff might have a cause of action 
for breach of contract, in addition to other potential claims (such as medical malpractice), if the outcome of the treatment is not what was promised. 
Informed Consent The physician - patient relationship is a consensual one. For more 
than a century, courts have required the patient ’ s consent prior to any touching, examination, or medical procedure. Consent is traditionally defi ned as a person ’ s voluntary 
agreement to do something proposed by another person. There are two kinds of consent: general consent (to allow touching, examination, and noninvasive procedures) 
and informed consent (to allow the performance of an invasive procedure). If the procedure is an invasive procedure that carries a material risk of harm, the patient ’ s 
informed consent will probably be required. If the touching is without consent at all, 
the provider might be liable for battery. Generally, if the patient appropriately consents 
to a procedure, the patient cannot hold the physician liable unless the physician fails to 
perform the surgery according to the applicable medical standards (malpractice). 
Therefore, a physician must obtain full, knowing, and voluntary general and informed 
consent from the patient concerning any nonemergency surgical procedure. 
 Informed consent requires more from a physician than simply having the patient 
sign a form. Health care providers must ensure that patients are aware of the diagnosis, 
the benefi ts of the proposed treatment, the material risks of the treatment, alternative 
options to the proposed treatment, and possible consequences of declining the treatment. This information must be communicated to the patient so that the patient clearly 
c04.indd 120 3/3/09 3:13:06 PM
understands it. 25 Once properly informed, the patient can make an intelligent decision 
regarding the course of treatment, regardless of whether the patient chooses rationally. 
 Failure to obtain adequate informed consent can give rise to a claim, even if the 
procedure is performed appropriately. 26 In most states, a patient ’ s legal cause of action 
in a lack - of - consent case is premised on the plaintiff ’ s ability to prove that the defendant failed to reveal a signifi cant risk that materialized and caused the plaintiff to suffer adverse consequences 27 and that had the potential risk been disclosed, a reasonable 
person would not have consented to the treatment or procedure. 28 Although a physician does not generally have a duty to disclose remote risks, 29 a duty may arise if the 
plaintiff expressly requests that all known complications be revealed. 30
 There are three generally accepted exceptions to the rule that informed consent is 
required. First, health care providers may assume that informed consent would be 
obtained in emergency situations if the emergency did not exist. 31 This, of course, does 
not give the provider the right to assume consent in the face of a prior refusal. Also, 
traditionally, it is the treating physician, not the hospital, who has the duty to obtain 
informed consent. 32 However, courts have held that a hospital may be held liable when 
members of its staff neglect to inform the physician that the patient has withdrawn 
consent prior to treatment. 33 Furthermore, hospitals that sponsor or permit experimental procedures may be liable when they fail to ensure that informed consent according 
to the research protocol is obtained. 34
 Some parties are unable to consent. As a general rule, minors are deemed incapable of providing effective consent to medical treatment. Accordingly, the physician 
must obtain consent from the parent or guardian before proceeding with any examination or treatment of the minor. There are exceptions to the requirements of consent by 
a parent or guardian. In certain emergency situations, no consent is required prior to 
treatment of the minor. Medical, dental, and health services may be rendered to minors 
of any age without the consent of the parent or legal guardian when, in the physician ’ s 
judgment, an attempt to secure consent would result in a delay of treatment that would 
increase the risk to the minor ’ s life or health or when the minor is emancipated. Minors 
may consent to the examination or treatment of their minor children in most states. 
 Contractual Negotiation and Approval 
 Entering into a successful contract requires both parties to think about what the transaction is really about. It involves addressing many details beyond the price of a product or service. The particulars in any specifi c instance or facility will differ, but the 
material described here gives a general picture of the negotiation and approval process. As a starting point, it is helpful to ask several questions, such as these: 
■ Who will provide the goods or services, and who will provide payment? 
■ What exactly is each party required to do? 
■ When will each party be providing the goods or services, and when will payment 
be made? 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 121
c04.indd 121 3/3/09 3:13:06 PM
122 Health Care Legal Concepts
■ Where will the services be performed, or where will the goods be delivered? 
■ Why is each party performing these obligations, and why is the deal important to 
each party? 
■ How will satisfactory performance or delivery be measured? 
 As you begin to determine the terms of the proposed arrangement, it is often helpful to consult with your corporate counsel. Generally, most corporate counsels have 
developed several standard contracts that can help expedite the negotiating process 
while ensuring that the health care facilities ’ interests are effectively protected. 
 Typically, each party will have a starting position and an idea about what it wants to get 
out of the agreement. Certain points might be very important to one party and less important to the other. It is essential to negotiate a contract that clearly defi nes the relationship 
between the parties; characterizes each party ’ s expectations, rights, and responsibilities 
(including payments terms, warranties, limitations on advertising, and confi dentiality); and 
describes what should happen if something were to go wrong (for example, termination for 
breach, indemnifi cation clause, insurance). These clear designations allow both parties to 
have an adequate understanding regarding each party ’ s intentions, thereby allowing the 
parties to predict what to anticipate. This is an important element regardless of whether 
the contract is performed over the course of a few hours or a few years. 
 Health care providers and administrators should work together with corporate 
counsel and professional staff to draft and negotiate the agreement. Negotiating a successful contract often involves discussions within the health care facility and consultation with other departments and committees. It is essential for every member of the 
health care facility who negotiates a proposed contract to consider the relationship of 
the product to the overall strategic goal of the facility. In drafting or negotiating a contract, corporate counsel should work with management to ensure that the contractual 
obligations are consistent with the legal obligations of the health care facility and that 
the risk of liability and other legal consequences are fully understood by the key players and ultimate decision makers. In the contracting process, it is important that the 
anticipated benefi ts of the contractual relationship outweigh both the fi nancial and 
legal risks to the health care facility. 
 All health care facilities should have an approval process, which must be followed 
when entering into any contractual agreement. For major contracts (in which the dollar 
amount is greater than $ 100,000), both corporate counsel and the fi nancial department 
should be contacted before negotiations begin to guarantee a coordinated and prompt 
approach to contract review and approval. 
 For all purchasing contracts and agreements, the health care facility ’ s purchasing 
department should be contacted before the acquisition process begins to ensure that 
subsequent negotiations conform with the competitive bid process and do not confl ict 
with any new or existing agreements, contracts, or understandings. The purchasing 
department will also ensure that the process is consistent with the facility ’ s commitment to group purchasing memberships and the facility ’ s strategy. 
c04.indd 122 3/3/09 3:13:07 PM
 The purpose of legal review is to provide advice and counsel concerning the proposed contract, both to ensure that the proposed terms and conditions comply with the 
applicable law and to identify and minimize signifi cant legal risks. 
 The legal department should help negotiate and draft the contract and should identify legal issues so that the business decision makers can evaluate the risks or benefi ts 
of the arrangement to fi nalize the contract. Approval of a contract should be withheld 
only if there is a signifi cant issue as to whether the terms and conditions of agreement 
comply with the law. 
 Most proposed contracts should also be reviewed by the health care facility ’ s 
fi nance and administrative departments so that they can evaluate issues relating to 
fi nancial liability, cash fl ow, and operational matters; whether the contract makes good 
business sense; and whether it is consistent with the facility ’ s objectives and policies. 
 The fi nance department would generally withhold approval of the contract only if 
there were a signifi cant concern about its fi nancial liability. The purpose of an administrative review is to ensure that contracts make good business sense and are consistent 
with the health care facility ’ s objectives and policies. 
 Once a contract has been reviewed by the appropriate departments and offi ces and 
all necessary changes and revisions have been made based on that review, the contract 
is ready for fi nal approval and execution. Each of the departments and offi ces required 
to review and approve the contract should indicate fi nal approval of the contract by 
signing the contract approval form. All copies of the contract should be signed and 
dated by the authorized health care facility representative. 
 Once the copies have been signed by all parties, copies of the contract should be 
forwarded by the originator to the appropriate authorized health care facility representatives for signature. Note that if any party makes additional changes, the contract 
must be reviewed again by everyone who previously had signed off. In certain cases, it 
may be preferable that the copies of the contract fi rst be executed by the authorized 
health care facility representative and then executed by the other parties. 
 Once a contract has been fully executed, a copy should be forwarded by the originator to other appropriate parties, the health care facility ’ s contract originator (or that 
person ’ s department), the offi ce of legal affairs or contract administrator (if applicable), the fi nance department, and the purchasing department. Fully executed contracts 
need to be safeguarded and maintained in accordance with the state ’ s or the facility ’ s 
records retention requirements. 
 When a contract comes up for renewal, the originator should contact the administrator and the purchasing department (where appropriate) at least ninety days before the 
expiration date, particularly if any automatic renewal rights or options are involved. In 
all cases, the specifi c contract language for renewal or termination should be reviewed to 
ensure compliance. All amendments, modifi cations, or renewals of the contract should 
go through the same approval process that was followed for the original contract. 
 If serious performance problems arise at any time during the contract term, the 
health care facility employees involved should immediately communicate their concerns 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 123
c04.indd 123 3/3/09 3:13:07 PM
124 Health Care Legal Concepts
regarding performance or termination to the contract administrator or the legal department. All performance problems and efforts to resolve these problems should be carefully documented by the health care facility employees. 
 Information Release: Privilege and Privacy Issues 
 There are several levels of information release that need to be carefully examined. 
Peer Review Information Many state legislatures have agreed, at least to some extent, 
with the view that because the practice of medicine requires a level of expertise that 
can be reviewed only by other medical professionals, the medical profession should 
police its own activities through peer review organizations. Peer review involves the 
evaluation of physicians ’ performances by other physicians in terms of quality of care 
and appropriateness of decision making. Review committees are established by hospitals and used to investigate candidates for clinical privileges and to monitor the existing medical staff. 
 Many states have enacted statutes designed to protect the peer review process and 
the individuals on the peer review committee. The legislature has recognized that 
patients need protection from physicians who deviate from an appropriate professional 
standard of care. Simultaneously, the legislature has acknowledged that health care 
providers want limited involvement with peer review committees due to concerns that 
they will be held liable for the ultimate decision rendered by the board. As a result, 
many states have implemented peer review protections that grant immunity to members of the peer review committee and protective status to documents prepared during 
the peer review process. This type of legislation ensures that members of peer review 
organizations are at liberty to speak without restraint about controversial matters such 
as quality assurance, medical staff credentials, and qualifi cations. Review your state 
laws to determine the content of the statute and the extent of its protections in your 
specifi c jurisdiction. 
 Typically, individuals who supply information to peer review committees are protected from criminal and civil liability. This immunity, however, is not absolute. An 
individual will not be granted immunity if the information reported is unrelated or 
irrelevant to the peer review committee ’ s purpose and scope. The individual is also not 
protected if the information reported was false and the individual knew or had reason 
to believe it was false or if the individual ’ s appearance before the peer review board 
was motivated by malice. 
 Documents used and information recorded by peer review committees are not 
subject to discovery or admissible as evidence in a civil action against the health care 
provider if the civil action stems from a matter that is the subject of the committee ’ s 
review. This protection also is not absolute. Peer review protection does not apply and 
the document may be disclosed in accordance with applicable law if the document 
used by the peer review committee can be obtained from its original source. 
 In addition, those testifying before a peer review committee cannot be compelled 
to testify at civil hearings regarding evidence that was produced or relied on at the 
c04.indd 124 3/3/09 3:13:08 PM
proceedings; conversations, opinions, or evaluations discussed during the proceedings; 
or testimony before a peer review protection committee or opinions formed as a result 
of committee hearings. However, a person in attendance is not immune from testifying 
at other civil proceedings as to personal knowledge and information learned outside 
the peer review proceeding, 
 Generally, peer review protection is granted to the following licensed health care 
providers: physicians, dentists, podiatrists, chiropractors, optometrists, physiologists, 
pharmacists, registered nurses, practical nurses, and physical therapists. Health care 
facility administrators, corporations, or organizations acting as health care facilities and 
committees evaluating the quality of health care and credentialing are also covered. 
Patient Confi dentiality Communications between a physician and his or her patients 
are private and confi dential. Individuals in need of medical attention greatly benefi t 
from being able to discuss their medical situation with health care professionals without the concern that such information might be disclosed to others. A patient ’ s disclosure of information pertaining to that patient ’ s illness will help the physician provide 
appropriate medical treatment. Due to this benefi t, most states have implemented legislation that provides protections for confi dential medical information obtained by the 
physician. 35 This protection generally takes the form of the physician - patient privilege. 
This privilege creates a confi dential atmosphere intended to prevent the embarrassment 
that patients might face upon the disclosure of their illnesses and encourages patients 
to disclose all possible information pertaining to their illnesses, thereby enabling the 
physician to render effective diagnoses and treatments for their patients. 36
 The improper disclosure of information by physicians violates state confi dentiality statutes, which generally provide criminal or civil penalties or civil causes of action 
for the inappropriate release of a patient ’ s confi dential information. In addition, for 
hospitals and physicians, the improper disclosure of medical information may subject 
them to civil liability, including breach of contract, invasion of privacy, intentional 
infl iction of emotional distress, breach of confi dential relationship, defamation, and 
negligence. 37
 Under federal law, wrongful disclosure of protected health information is a federal 
crime. Any person who knowingly and in violation of federal law uses or causes to be 
used a unique health identifi er, obtains individually identifi able health information 
relating to an individual, or discloses individually identifi able health information to 
another person shall be punished depending on the nature and the scope of the offense. 
Individually identifi able information includes any information created or received by a 
health care provider that relates to an individual ’ s physical or mental health, health 
care, or payment for health care, and identifi es or could reasonably be used to identify 
the individual. The penalties begin with an initial penalty of a $ 50,000 fi ne and imprisonment of not more than one year, or both. If the offense is committed under false pretenses, the fi ne is increased to $ 100,000 and imprisonment is increased to fi ve years. If 
the offense is committed with the intent to sell or transfer or use the individually identifi able health information for commercial advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm, 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 125
c04.indd 125 3/3/09 3:13:10 PM
126 Health Care Legal Concepts
then the fi ne is increased to not more than $ 250,000 and imprisonment of not more 
than ten years. 38
 It should be noted that exceptions to the physician - patient relationship arise in 
personal injury cases and criminal cases. Where the patient is the plaintiff in a personal injury case, defense counsel is entitled to obtain the plaintiff patient ’ s medical 
records and depose the patient ’ s physicians. In criminal matters, no physician - patient 
privilege exists. 
 AIDS - and HIV - Related Issues 
 The testing and confi dentiality issues related to AIDS (acquired immunodefi ciency 
syndrome) and HIV (human immunodefi ciency virus) are numerous. Strict adherence 
is necessary for patient safety and to decrease an organization ’ s exposure to liability. 
HIVTesting Generally, an HIV test cannot be performed without the patient ’ s informed 
written consent. Before consent can be given, a health care provider must explain the 
nature of the test, including its purpose, potential uses, limitations, and meaning of the 
results. Pretest counseling must be made available regarding HIV prevention, exposure, and transmission. 
 Once results have been obtained, the physician or physician ’ s designee must 
make a good faith effort to inform the patient of the test results. Medical standards 
may require that positive test results be confi rmed before they are revealed to the 
patient. Upon receiving the results, the patient must be afforded the opportunity for 
immediate, individual, face - to - face counseling regarding the signifi cance of the test 
results and measures for preventing HIV transmission. Counseling should also include 
the benefi ts of locating and counseling individuals who might have exposed the 
patient to HIV. 
 Partial waivers of the voluntary HIV testing requirements are granted in limited 
circumstances. In medical emergencies, when the patient is unable to grant consent, or 
if the patient withholds consent and the HIV - related test result is medically necessary 
to provide appropriate emergency care, the patient must be provided only with notice 
of the test results and posttest counseling. In addition, individuals who donate organs, 
body parts, tissues, or semen for use in medical research, therapy, transfusion, or 
transplantation and test negative for HIV do not need to receive notice of their test 
results or be given posttest counseling. However, the donor must give written consent 
to the test and have the opportunity to receive pretest counseling. Notice of a negative 
test result must also be given to any individual who asks to be provided with such 
results. 
 To protect the welfare of health care providers and those who have rendered assistance to an HIV - positive patient, various exceptions to voluntary HIV testing have been 
implemented. A patient ’ s existing blood sample can be subjected to involuntary HIV -
 related testing to protect the welfare of health care providers and emergency medical 
personnel. However, health care providers who rendered care must obtain certifi cation 
c04.indd 126 3/3/09 3:13:11 PM
from a physician, other than from themselves or their employers, that they have had a 
signifi cant exposure to HIV. A signifi cant exposure is defi ned as the direct contact with 
blood or bodily fl uids in a manner that according to the most current guidelines of the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is capable of transmitting HIV. This certifi -
cation must be obtained within seventy - two hours of the exposure. The certifying 
 physician must also provide the health care provider with an opportunity to undergo 
voluntary HIV - related testing as outlined previously. 
 A copy of the written certifi cation must be provided to the physician of the individual whose HIV test is sought or to the institutional health care provider in possession of the individual ’ s available blood. The physician or institutional health care 
 provider must make a good faith effort to notify the individual, or that individual ’ s 
substituted decision maker, of the certifi cation and must request consent to an HIV test 
within twenty - four hours of the request for HIV testing. If the individual agrees to the 
test, written consent must be obtained and the individual must be afforded the opportunity for pretest counseling. If the individual does not agree to an HIV test or cannot be 
located, an entry must be made on the individual ’ s medical records to that effect. If the 
individual ’ s blood has already been obtained, that blood may be tested, provided that 
the person was given the opportunity to consent or refuse to consent to the HIV test. 
Involuntary HIV testing will not proceed unless the health care provider requests testing and submits to baseline testing. 
 The patient must be given notice of the test result and the same opportunity for 
appropriate posttest counseling as afforded in voluntary HIV - related testing. The 
health care provider may be notifi ed of the patient ’ s test results only if the provider ’ s 
own baseline HIV test is negative. 
Confi dentiality of HIV - Related Information 
 Medical records and other tests that reveal whether an individual has contracted AIDS 
or HIV have been the basis of considerable litigation and legislation. Many of the confi dentiality issues discussed previously have arisen in the context of AIDS. Generally, 
physicians, their employees, and agents are required to maintain the confi dentiality of 
all HIV - related information. This rule applies whether the information is disclosed voluntarily, involuntarily, or pursuant to a court order. Patients whose HIV or AIDS status 
has been improperly disclosed by health care providers have causes of action under the 
common law theories of breach of contract, invasion of privacy, intentional infl iction of 
emotional distress, breach of confi dential relationship, defamation, and negligence. 39
 Generally, this duty of confi dentiality protects only the patient and not the treating 
physician. The right of privacy regarding HIV status has not been extended to treating physicians who are HIV - positive. Courts have permitted hospitals to notify patients who participated in invasive procedures that the physician involved in their care was HIV - positive. 40
This disclosure, however, is limited, as the hospital is not permitted to release the physician ’ s name to the patients. The hospital is, however, entitled to release the physician ’ s 
name and HIV status to certain colleagues with whom the infected physician might have 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 127
c04.indd 127 3/3/09 3:13:11 PM
128 Health Care Legal Concepts
performed surgery and to those who were in that physician ’ s training program. It should be 
noted that physicians who are patients are protected by the duty of confi dentiality. Courts 
have concluded that hospitals owe a duty of confi dentiality to physicians who are patients, 
so hospitals must take reasonable precautions with physicians ’ medical records when they 
are being treated in the hospital. Physicians who are being treated for AIDS have an expectation of privacy that their AIDS diagnoses will not become a matter of public knowledge. 
This changes, however, once the physician becomes a treating physician and is performing 
invasive procedures on a patient. 41 
 States approach confi dentiality as it relates to AIDS in different ways. Some states 
have strict confi dentiality laws to protect the privacy of HIV - infected individuals. HIV 
status is a private matter, and there are enforceable civil penalties for disclosure of 
another individual ’ s HIV status. 42 Other states take a less rigid approach regarding 
confi dentiality. Some require reporting of HIV status to public health authorities. This 
reporting includes the revelation of all new HIV diagnoses, including diagnoses involving the status of physicians. 43 Review your state laws to determine the approach taken 
in your jurisdiction.
 Attorney - Client Privilege 
 This privilege is an essential component of our legal system. It promotes full communication between an attorney and a client. This assures clients that conversations with 
their attorneys will not be disclosed to others. The privilege belongs to the client, and 
the attorney must hold client communications in the strictest of confi dence. 
 The attorney - client privilege has the following characteristics: 
■ The party seeking the protection of the privilege must be an actual or prospective 
client. 
■ The communication must be between a client and an attorney acting as counsel 
for the client. 
■ The communication must be made in confi dence, outside the presence of third 
parties. 
■ The purpose of the communication must be to secure or provide an opinion of law 
or legal assistance. 
■ The privilege must be asserted by one holding the privilege. The privilege does 
not automatically attach. 
■ The privilege is easily lost or “ waived ” by improper disclosures to third parties. 
 The privilege does not attach to communications in furtherance of an ongoing or 
prospective illegal activity. In addition, the privilege does apply when attorneys defend 
themselves against charges of wrongful misconduct brought by clients. 
c04.indd 128 3/3/09 3:13:12 PM
 Health care providers should be mindful of maintaining the attorney - client privilege in varying circumstances, including the following: 
■ In anticipation of potential litigation 
■ During the investigation of past conduct that may raise legal concerns 
■ Seeking advice on structuring new ventures (for example, a proposed merger) 
■ Peer review and risk management (such as quality improvement or malpractice 
defense) 
■ Any other sensitive issue where legal input might be helpful and confi dentiality is 
critical 
 For the attorney - client privilege to protect oral communications, it is best to have 
an attorney participate directly in the discussion. Therefore, counsel should be present 
when the purpose of any meeting is to obtain or discuss legal advice or to gather information needed to obtain legal advice or assistance. Only employees who have a “ need 
to know ” should attend such meetings, and nonclient third parties should not attend. 
Be careful not to divulge privileged communications in meeting minutes or other 
memoranda. Do not discuss attorney - client information on mobile telephones or in 
public places (such as elevators) where you might be overheard. 
 The attorney - client privilege may be invoked in memoranda, correspondence, and 
other written communications by adhering to the following guidelines: 
■ Identify and assert the privilege on the document — that is, mark the document 
 “ attorney - client - privileged communication. ” 
■ Send the document to or from your attorney, and limit distribution to a need - to -
 know basis. Identify all recipients on the document, with no blind copies. 
■ Avoid the attachment of unprivileged material or written notes on the document. 
■ Treat the document in a confi dential manner, and store it in a secure place. 
■ Information contained on computer disks, hard drives, and backup systems may 
also be protected by the attorney - client privilege. 
 Executives may communicate legal advice received from counsel to other executives or employees who have a need to know without destroying the privilege by identifying the communication as legal advice, limiting communication to counsel ’ s advice, 
not including underlying facts, and segregating legal discussions from other topics. 
 When there are disclosures, take immediate action by consulting counsel, telling 
the recipient that disclosure was inadvertent, requesting return of any written materials, and confi rming these steps in writing, if appropriate. 
 The attorney - client privilege can and should be invoked to safeguard the health 
care provider ’ s interest whenever legal questions arise. Contact an attorney with any 
questions regarding the attorney - client privilege. 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 129
c04.indd 129 3/3/09 3:13:12 PM
130 Health Care Legal Concepts
 Employment Issues 
 A domain or area representing signifi cant risks is identifi ed as “ human capital. ” Human 
capital risks are those associated with people and their employment (perceived and 
real) and include harassment, discrimination, practicing impaired physicians, and credentialing, to name just a few. 
Respondeat Superior Liability In Latin, respondeat superior means “ let the master 
answer. ” In the context of an acute care facility or hospital, it is a legal doctrine under 
which an employer may be liable for wrongful acts of an employee that are done 
within the scope of that employee ’ s job. Under this theory, the hospital is vicariously 
liable for the actions of its employees, whom the hospital had a duty to supervise. 
Essentially, to bring an action under this theory, the plaintiff must establish both that 
the health care provider was a servant or agent of the hospital and that the act or omission of the health care provider occurred in the scope of employment. If, however, the 
health care provider is an independent contractor, the theory of respondeat superior is 
not applicable. 44
Nondiscrimination Laws 
 Laws at the federal, state, and local levels prohibit discrimination against employees 
on the basis of race, sex, age, disability, sexual orientation, national origin, and religion. The ultimate goal of these laws is to prevent discrimination by providing equal 
opportunities in all facets of employment relationships. These nondiscrimination laws 
require that employers do not take any actions that might infringe on an employee ’ s 
terms of employment based on that person ’ s status as a member of a protected class. 
 Federal laws have been implemented in an attempt to rectify past discrimination 
and prevent future discrimination. These laws include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), and the Americans 
with Disabilities Act (ADA). All health care facilities are bound by the terms of these 
federal laws. 
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 is the heart of antidiscrimination 
 legislation. It prohibits harassment and discrimination of an employee based on that 
employee ’ s race, gender, and national origin. Prohibitions against sexual harassment 
also fall under this act. Title VII applies to employers, employment agencies, and labor 
organizations that have fi fteen or more employees during twenty or more calendar 
weeks in either the current or previous calendar year. It should be noted that in limited 
situations, Title VII allows employers to make employment decisions that are based on 
religion, sex, and national origin when there is a legitimate work - related requirement 
that is reasonably necessary for the operation of that specifi c industry (for example, 
hiring only women for the position of women ’ s bathroom attendant). 45
 To assert a Title VII claim, plaintiffs must show that they are members of a protected class and were treated differently than similarly situated people from another 
class. The burden then shifts to the employer to convey a justifi able, nondiscriminatory 
basis for the decision that has been viewed as discriminatory. If the employer is able to 
c04.indd 130 3/3/09 3:13:12 PM
articulate such grounds, the burden shifts back to the employees to establish that the 
employer ’ s discriminatory reason was the primary basis for the decision made. In cases 
where plaintiffs assert that a particular employer engaged in the practice of discrimination against members of a protected class, the plaintiffs must prove that they were 
deterred from applying for a job or were not hired for a job because of the employer ’ s 
discriminatory practices. Most federal courts have determined that supervisors may 
not be held individually liable under Title VII. 46 However, individual liability for supervisors is allowed under many states ’ discrimination laws. Review state laws to determine the liability laws applicable to supervisors in the specifi c jurisdiction. 
 It is an employer ’ s legal obligation to take prompt and appropriate action in 
response to a complaint alleging a violation of Title VII. Managers confronted with a 
complaint based on race, gender, or national origin discrimination should contact 
human resource departments for assistance. The complaint should be investigated in a 
timely and thorough fashion. Every health care facility has implemented various policies regarding nondiscrimination. All individuals should familiarize themselves with 
the reporting and investigatory structures set forth in each policy. 
 The Age Discrimination in Employment Act forbids the discrimination of employees in hiring, discharging, and denying employment on the basis of an individual ’ s 
age. 47 The act provides that employers who retain twenty or more employees for 
twenty or more workweeks are prohibited from discrimination against employees who 
are forty years of age or older. 
 Employees, applicants, and former employees may fi le a charge of age discrimination with one of several administrative agencies that investigate and attempt to mediate these claims. After the relevant commission has been given an opportunity to 
investigate the claim, the claimants may initiate legal action in either state or federal 
court. An employer may not defend a discrimination claim by asserting that it hired 
another individual in the protected age category. 
 Those concerned about issues of age discrimination due to the discipline or termination of an employee should contact the human resource department during the decision -
 making process. In addition, complaints received regarding discriminatory conduct from 
an employee or applicant should also be referred to the human resource department. 
 The Americans with Disabilities Act prohibits employment discrimination against 
qualifi ed individuals on the basis of disability. 48 It requires that employers provide reasonable accommodations to qualifi ed individuals with disabilities to help them perform the essential functions of their jobs. Although most states have laws that forbid 
discriminating against people with disabilities, the ADA provides uniform national 
protection. 
 Many state and local laws extend employment discrimination protection to people 
outside federally protected categories. Employers should consult specifi c state and 
local laws to ensure compliance. Moreover, many employers have voluntarily chosen 
to extend protection to certain employee groups and have added marital status and sexual orientation to their antidiscrimination policies. To be effective, any equal employment program must have support from top management and supervisors. Such policies 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 131
c04.indd 131 3/3/09 3:13:13 PM
132 Health Care Legal Concepts
should be put in writing and distributed to all employees and should be clearly understood and implemented by supervisors. 
Sexual Harassment 
 Sexual harassment is prohibited by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Sexual 
harassment so severe or pervasive as to alter the conditions of the victim ’ s employment can create an abusive working environment. This violates Title VII. 49 To be 
actionable under the statute, a sexually objectionable environment must be one that a 
reasonable person would fi nd to be hostile or abusive and that the victim did perceive 
to be hostile or abusive. 50 Sporadic use of abusive language, gender - related jokes, and 
occasional teasing are not considered severe enough to violate Title VII. 51
 Federal courts have acknowledged two types of sexual harassment claims based 
on two different legal theories: quid pro quo harassment and hostile environment 
harassment. Quid pro quo harassment occurs when a superior demands sexual favors 
from a subordinate in exchange for continued employment or job benefi ts. Hostile 
environment harassment is a situation in which an employee ’ s terms and conditions of 
employment are altered as a result of pervasive sexual conduct. This includes unwanted 
sexual advances, demands for sexual favors, and any conduct of a sexual nature that 
unreasonably interferes with an individual ’ s work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working environment. In both quid pro quo and hostile 
 environment harassment, employers can be held strictly liable for harassment by 
supervisors that results in tangible job actions, even if they have no knowledge of the 
conduct. Employees can even recover damages when no tangible job action occurs 
without showing that the employer was negligent or at fault for the supervisor ’ s conduct. 52 An employer may avoid liability where no tangible job action occurs by establishing an affi rmative defense showing that the employer exercised reasonable care to 
prevent and promptly correct sexual harassment and that the employee unreasonably 
failed to take advantage of any preventative or corrective opportunity provided by the 
employer. 53 For employers to limit potential exposure to sexual harassment claims, an 
employer must disseminate and enforce an effective sexual harassment policy that 
incorporates effective procedures for the reporting, investigation, and discipline of 
sexual harassment in the workplace. 54
 It is an employer ’ s legal obligation to take prompt and appropriate action in 
response to a complaint of sexual harassment. It is important for a manager confronted 
with a sexual harassment complaint to investigate the complaint in a timely and thorough fashion, with the assistance of human resources and according to facility policy. 
Every health care facility must implement anti – sexual harassment policies. All individuals should familiarize themselves with the reporting and investigatory structures 
set forth in each policy. 
Staff Credentialing Credentialing involves the careful selection, review, and evaluation of health care providers. It is a process whereby health care entities select, review, 
and periodically evaluate the competency of the physicians and other licensed health 
c04.indd 132 3/3/09 3:13:13 PM
care practitioners in their facility. Courts have held health care institutions vicariously 
liable for the negligent acts of independent physicians through the doctrine of apparent 
agency or ostensible agency and, as noted, have imposed liability on health care entities through respondeat superior, for the acts of employees committed within the scope 
of employment. 
 The Joint Commission accredits and sets standards for hospitals, health systems, 
and home care programs to follow regarding the selection of its medical staff. The 
Joint Commission recommends, at a minimum, that a hospital require its medical staff 
to do all of the following: 
■ Adopt bylaws and rules and regulations, subject to approval by the governing 
body, that establish a framework for the conduct of the medical staff 
■ Make recommendations to the governing body regarding the structure of the medical staff 
■ Organize to accomplish their required function 
■ Describe and implement a process for appointment and reappointment to the medical staff 
■ Describe and implement a process for delineating clinical privileges and determining the appropriate qualifi cations required to perform these privileges 
■ Monitor and evaluate the quality and appropriateness of patient care 
■ Require members of the medical staff to participate in continuing education 
 Individual hospitals should be queried as to their specifi c requirements for their 
medical staff. 
Impaired Professionals The American Medical Association (AMA) defi nes the 
impaired physician as one who is unable to practice medicine with reasonable skill 
and safety to patients because of physical or mental illness, including deterioration 
through the aging process or loss of motor skills or excessive use or abuse of drugs or 
alcohol. An institution ’ s primary responsibility is to provide quality medical care to its 
patients. An impaired physician signifi cantly deviates from this responsibility. 
Therefore, once the hospital becomes aware of, or has reason to be aware of, an 
impaired physician, it has a duty to investigate immediately and take appropriate measures in an effort to protect its patients. Efforts to rehabilitate impaired providers must 
be structured in such a manner that does not compromise the hospital ’ s primary 
obligation. 
 Every institution should establish a written policy regarding how impaired physicians should be handled, and it should be properly enforced. This benefi ts patients by 
ensuring high - quality care, identifying the physician who requires assistance, and ultimately protecting the hospital from potential liability. Although hospitals implement 
different policies, typically a health care facility ’ s guidelines will require that impairment 
Legal Issues Common to All Health Care Providers 133
c04.indd 133 3/3/09 3:13:14 PM
134 Health Care Legal Concepts
be reported to the institution ’ s in - house impairment program or to an external impaired 
physicians program. This report is intended to get needed help to the physician. If these 
reports do not help the impaired physician enter an impairment program, state law 
requires that the health care facility, a hospital peer, or a colleague must report the physician to the medical board. Depending on the specifi cs of applicable state law, a facility, peer, or colleague that fails to report an impaired physician to the medical board in 
such a circumstance could be fi ned. Upon recording suspected impairment, the medical 
board will assess the situation and conduct its own investigation as deemed appropriate. 
Any person who makes a report in good faith is immune from liability. Furthermore, 
some states have mandatory reporting statutes. Therefore, individual state requirements 
should be built into the institution ’ s policies. 
 Generally, an impaired physician who has satisfactorily undergone treatment may 
return to practice. Certain types of accommodations might be required to help the physician return to work, as impairments may constitute a disability under the Americans with 
Disabilities Act. In addition, hospital administration and medical staff members involved 
in the credentialing process should be aware of the impaired practitioner ’ s problem so that 
they can impose controls designed to prevent injury to patients that are consistent 
with the ADA and applicable state laws. There may be specifi c state - imposed requirements that affect when and under what circumstances the physician can return to 
 practice. Generally, it is suggested that before affected practitioners are permitted to 
return to work, they should be required to produce satisfactory evidence of completion 
of a rehabilitation program; required to continue in an organized program of ongoing 
monitoring for a period of two to four years; agree to arrange with other physicians 
who will assume responsibility for the care of the affected physician ’ s patients should 
the need arise; agree to submit to random substance abuse screening tests at the request 
of the hospital or medical staff leadership; and agree to abstain from addictive substances as a condition of continued medical staff membership and clinical privileges. 
These precautions are highly recommended measures designed to protect patients and 
reduce hospital liability. Those aware that a medical professional is impaired should 
follow the health care institution ’ s guidelines and should contact the internal risk management department or legal department. Precautions should be taken by all parties to 
guarantee confi dentiality concerning the practitioner ’ s condition. 
 LEGAL ISSUES RELATED TO SPECIFIC HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS 
 The number of actors involved in providing health care and the intricate relationship among 
those actors and patients create a maze of liability for specifi c health care providers. 
 Acute - Care Hospitals 
 Over a lifetime, a patient may deal with different types of specifi c health care providers in various settings, including but not limited to acute or hospital care, long - term 
care, hospice care, mental and behavioral health care, and integrated delivery systems. 
It is important to appreciate the relationships among these providers, as several health 
c04.indd 134 3/3/09 3:13:14 PM
care providers might be subject to suit under varying negligence theories when a 
patient sustains injury during the course of care or treatment. 
Ostensible or Apparent Agency As noted previously, a hospital can be held vicariously liable for the actions of its employees under the theory of respondeat superior, as 
can any employer. A hospital may also be held vicariously liable for the acts or omissions of independent contractors who are not its employees under the theory of ostensible or apparent agency. Under this theory, a hospital may be subjected to liability 
if the patient looked to the institution rather than the individual physician for care, and 
the hospital ’ s actions led the patient to reasonably believe that the physician was one 
of the hospital ’ s employees. This theory is often used to hold the hospital liable for the 
acts of nonemployed physicians and other health care providers with hospital - based 
practices. The origin of this theory is set forth in the Restatement (Second) of Torts as 
follows: 
One who employs an independent contractor to perform services for another which 
are accepted under reasonable belief that the services are being rendered by the 
employer or by his servants, is subject to liability for physical harm caused by the negligence of the contractor in supplying such services, to the same extent as though the 
employer was supplying them himself or by his servants. 55
 This theory of liability is most often applied when a patient is admitted to the emergency department of a hospital and the hospital assigns a physician to the patient. If the 
patient subsequently alleges that the assigned physician provided negligent care or 
treatment, under the theory of ostensible agency, the patient can assert that the hospital 
is liable for the alleged negligent conduct. Courts have also applied ostensible agency 
where the conduct of hospital - based health care providers other than emergency department physicians, such as pathologists, anesthesiologists, and radiologists, is at issue. 56
Some states have even permitted an ostensible agency cause of action to be asserted 
against an HMO. 57 To minimize the possibility of any misconceptions that patients 
might have related to the legal status of independent health care providers providing 
care and treatment within a particular facility, many hospitals have implemented procedures to inform patients and clearly identify individuals as independent from the hospital. For example, some hospitals began noting on all literature, including admission 
forms, letterheads, advertisements, and billing statements, that the physicians within 
the facility were independent from the hospital itself. Furthermore, if the hospital provided uniforms or hospital clothing for the independent contractors, the name of the 
hospital did not appear on these garments. Further, upon presentation to the emergency 
department, all patients were given the opportunity to select their own physician or be 
informed that the emergency department was staffed with independent contractors. 58 
Corporate Negligence Under the theory of corporate negligence, a hospital has a nondelegable duty to the patient to ensure the patient ’ s safety and well - being while the 
patient is in the hospital. The hospital is not vicariously liable for the health care 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 135
c04.indd 135 3/3/09 3:13:14 PM
136 Health Care Legal Concepts
provider ’ s negligent act; rather, the hospital is liable for its own negligence in failing to 
ensure that a proper standard of care is upheld. To prevail under this theory, the plaintiff 
must prove that the hospital knew or had reason to know of a defect in its procedures 
and that the defect was a substantial factor in bringing about injury to the patient. 59
 Long - Term Care Liability 
 The aging of the baby boom generation, in the next few years, will make senior citizens the 
largest - growing segment in our society. It is projected that by the year 2030, there will be 
approximately ten million Americans eighty - fi ve years and older. 60 As the population ages, 
it is likely that many more people will be living in long - term care facilities. 
Types of Long - Term Care Facilities As the population ages, the services related to the 
senior population will expand. 
Continuing Care Retirement Community 
 Continuing care retirement communities (CCRCs) offer a long - term contract with residents to provide housing, food, and graduated services, including nursing care, for the 
remainder of the resident ’ s life. Usually, the CCRC campus consists of independent 
housing, personal home care services, and ultimately a nursing facility. Generally, as a 
resident ’ s needs increase, the need for care increases, and the appropriate level of care 
is provided. Liability issues as to standard of care may vary depending on the level of 
care that is provided, meaning whether it is independent, personal home care services, 
or skilled nursing services. 
Personal Care Homes 
 A licensed personal care home (PCH), commonly referred to as an assisted living 
facility (ALF), is a facility that provides food, shelter, personal assistance, and supervision for individuals who do not require the services of a licensed nursing facility but 
do require some assistance with activities of daily living. PCHs and ALFs are not medical facilities, although they may hire individuals with nursing backgrounds. They are 
often regulated by a state agency, but the level of regulation is usually far less than for 
a nursing home. Liability issues again depend on the level of care being administered 
to the patient. A common liability issue arises when the facility keeps residents who 
require a higher level of care than they can provide. 
Nursing Homes 
 Nursing homes are licensed nursing facilities that provide food, shelter, nursing care, 
and assistance to individuals who have special needs or need assistance with multiple 
activities of daily living. Nursing homes are medical facilities. They employ individuals with medical or nursing training. They are either for - profi t or not - for - profi t. There 
is no practical difference between the standard of care in a for - profi t and a not - for -
 profi t facility. However, many governmentally operated nursing facilities enjoy governmental immunity for common law negligence claims, for which immunity depends 
entirely on state law. 61
c04.indd 136 3/3/09 3:13:15 PM
 Regulations The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (OBRA) is the basis 
for the uniform regulations that govern the care and assessment of nursing home residents. 62 The statute established the requirements relating to the provision of care, such 
as assessing residents, training for nurse ’ s aides, physician supervision, and level of 
nursing care. Also included in the statute are provisions for various residents ’ rights, 
such as the right to be free from physical and chemical restraints, the right to choose 
one ’ s physician, and the right to confi dentiality and privacy. 
 Included in OBRA is the Federal Nursing Home Reform Act. This establishes the 
standards of care for facilities receiving Medicare and Medicaid payments. The vast 
majority of facilities seek reimbursement through Medicare or Medicaid and are therefore subject to these requirements. Facilities that fail to comply with the regulations 
are subject to sanctions, the withholding of payments, and in extreme cases, termination of participation in the Medicare and Medicaid system. This statute makes it the 
individual state ’ s responsibility to establish, monitor, and enforce the state ’ s requirements for licensing and for the federal regulations. 
 To participate in the Medicare and Medicaid program, a nursing home must go 
through a survey and certifi cation process every nine to fi fteen months. Standard surveys are designed to assess whether the nursing home is in compliance with federal 
and state regulations. They are typically conducted without any prior notice to the 
facility. They cover four factors: 
 1. Quality of care furnished (as measured by indicators of medical, nursing, and 
rehabilitative care), dietary and nutrition services, activities and social participation, sanitation, infection control, and the physical environment 
 2. Adequacy of written plans of care 
 3. Accuracy of the residents ’ assessments 
 4. Compliance with residents ’ rights 
 The survey typically consists of a team of investigators from a local fi eld offi ce that 
examines records, observes care provided by the staff, interviews the staff, and interviews residents or families. If a facility is found to be out of compliance, a statement of 
defi ciencies is fi led. After this fi ling, the facility must submit an acceptable plan of correction, which is then followed by a revisit to ensure that the plan of correction is 
implemented. 63 These regulations vary by state and should be reviewed accordingly. 
 Types of Liability The liability issues related to health care continue to expand. 
Vicarious Liability 
 Like hospitals and other health care providers, nursing homes and long - term care 
facilities can be held vicariously responsible for the actions or omissions of their 
employees. For example, in Bryant v. Hunt, the Court of Appeals of Michigan found 
that a nursing home has a responsibility to provide its residents with an “ accident - free 
environment. ” 64 In this case, the patient died of asphyxiation when she became wedged 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 137
c04.indd 137 3/3/09 3:13:15 PM
138 Health Care Legal Concepts
between the mattress and the bed rail due to the alleged negligence of the nursing 
home ’ s employees. The court found that this was an ordinary negligence claim for 
which the defendant nursing home could be found to be vicariously liable. The case 
was remanded to the trial court to be tried on vicarious liability 
 An extension of vicarious liability was created through the theory of ostensible 
agency. This theory holds that a nursing home could be held vicariously liable for the acts 
of an independent physician if the patient looks to the institution rather than the individual physician for care and the nursing home “ holds out ” the physician as its employee. 65
The key is whether the facility acts or fails to act in some way, which might lead the 
patient to a reasonable belief that the facility or one of its employees is responsible for 
treatment. Although not particularly common, this issue can become relevant in the case 
of physicians employed by or under contract to the nursing home or outsourced contractors such as occupational or physical therapists. 
Corporate Liability 
 This theory holds that a defendant facility owes certain nondelegable duties to the resident, which, if breached, may subject it to liability for damages. In Aptekman v. City of 
Philadelphia, the District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania declined to dismiss the suit against the defendant nursing home on the theory of corporate liability. 66
The court reasoned that although corporate liability has not yet been extended to include 
nursing homes, it has been expanded to include HMOs, and given the right set of circumstances, a state court may extend corporate liability to include health care organizations other than hospitals, such as nursing homes and long - term care facilities. 
 Claims As in other medical malpractice and medical negligence cases, plaintiffs must 
present an expert report or an expert witness to establish their case. In Perdieu v. 
Blackstone Family Practice Center, Inc., the Supreme Court of Virginia determined 
that the issues surrounding treatment in a nursing home are beyond the ordinary scope 
of a jury ’ s understanding; therefore, expert testimony is required. 67 The court further 
stated that the experts employed must be engaged in the actual performance of the procedures at issue in the case. The court therefore excluded testimony of experts who 
had not treated nursing home patients for more than thirty years, did not have experience in the fi eld of nursing home care, or did not have an active clinical practice within 
a year of the alleged incident. 
 Claims against nursing homes include those for negligent hiring or fi ring and failure to enforce policies and procedures. 68 Statutory claims may also be brought against 
a nursing home or long - term care facility, such as a claim under the Unfair Trade 
Practices Act or Consumer Protection Law. 69 Claims for care issues can range from 
discrete events such as a fall or assault and battery to a course of treatment, such as 
wound care. 
Elder Abuse One issue that has been gaining attention recently is elder abuse. Nearly 
one out of every three nursing homes in the United States has been cited for an abuse 
c04.indd 138 3/3/09 3:13:16 PM
violation in the past few years. 70 To facilitate risk management in nursing homes, many 
have implemented procedures that require them to report instances of abuse to local 
authorities and state agencies quickly, to fully prosecute those involved if need be, and 
to establish safeguards to protect residents from further abuse. 71 Despite these efforts, 
the physical and sexual abuse of nursing home residents continues to be a rampant 
problem with large consequences. 72 In response, many states have adopted measures 
for reporting and dealing with allegations of abuse, including registries of employees 
who have been guilty of abusing residents. 
 For example, Pennsylvania law protects adults over the age of sixty who cannot perform tasks necessary for their physical or mental health. A majority of those who reside 
in nursing homes or long - term care facilities fall into this category. Reporting is mandatory in assisted living facilities such as nursing homes and long - term care facilities. In 
Delaney v. Baker, the Supreme Court of California affi rmed the judgment of a lower 
court that awarded the plaintiff with “ heightened attorney ’ s fees ” and pain and suffering 
damages. 73 The plaintiff sued the defendant nursing home and two administrators for 
damages under the theories of elder abuse, willful misconduct, negligence, neglect of an 
elder, and wrongful death, after the plaintiff ’ s mother died while a resident at the home. 
At the time of death, the plaintiff ’ s decedent had bedsores down to the bone. 
 Penalties for elder abuse are different in every state. Some states may even hold 
long - term care facilities and nursing homes criminally responsible for elder abuse. 
 Hospice Care 
 Hospice care differs from traditional health care treatment in its emphasis on palliative 
treatment for persons who are in the process of dying. In other words, unlike hospitals, 
where curative or restorative treatment is sought, a hospice focuses on pain management for patients facing impending death. Generally, hospice care addresses the physical, psychological, and spiritual needs of the patient. Because hospice patients are 
 suffering from a terminal illness or disease, health care providers operating within the 
context of a hospice routinely encounter issues related to the Patient Self - Determination 
Act of 1990, advance directives, and withholding and withdrawing life - sustaining 
treatment. 
Patient Self - Determination Act of 1990 It is imperative that all health care providers, including hospice providers, be knowledgeable regarding the statutory requirements of the Patient Self - Determination Act (PSDA) of 1990. 74 This federal statute 
prescribes that all providers subject to the act must provide each patient with written 
information on the patient ’ s right under state law to accept or refuse life - sustaining 
treatment and to formulate advance directives ( or living wills). The provider is also 
required to outline written policies regarding the implementation of a patient ’ s right to 
refuse such treatment. The provider is further required to document in each patient ’ s 
medical record whether the patient has executed an advance directive and to ensure 
compliance with the requirements of state law regarding advance directives. In addition, the provider is prohibited from basing the provision of care on whether or not the 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 139
c04.indd 139 3/3/09 3:13:16 PM
140 Health Care Legal Concepts
patient has executed an advance directive. Finally, the act requires the provider to educate its staff and the community on issues regarding advance directives. 
Advance Directives An advance directive is a legal document that communicates an 
individual ’ s medical wishes or appoints someone else to make decisions on that person ’ s behalf should the individual become incapacitated and either permanently 
unconscious or terminally ill. There are two basic kinds of advance directives. Living 
wills are effective to communicate the patient ’ s wishes within a period of time prior to 
the patient ’ s anticipated death. Durable powers of attorney, on the other hand, usually 
allow a surrogate to make decisions on the patient ’ s behalf whenever the patient is 
incapable of making such decisions, regardless of the imminence of death. To be effective, advance directives must comply with state statutes. State and federal governments are currently required to disseminate information about advance directives. In 
fact, states that fail to comply with the mandates of the 1990 PSDA risk losing Medicare 
and Medicaid funding. 
 Withholding and Withdrawing Life - Sustaining Treatment 
 In the absence of an advance directive, health care providers will likely encounter various legal, ethical, and moral issues related to the propriety of withholding or withdrawing life - sustaining treatment from a patient suffering from an incurable or irreversible 
medical condition that might lead to death. These issues can greatly complicate the 
decision as to whether treatment should be withheld or withdrawn, particularly when 
the patient can no longer communicate. 
 When a patient has an incurable and irreversible medical condition, the classes of 
treatment involved in sustaining life are typically surgery, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, antibiotic therapy, respiratory support, renal dialysis, and artifi cial nutrition and 
hydration. 
 Because the essence of the physician - patient relationship is consensual, continuing treatment of the type necessary to sustain life under these circumstances is nearly 
always invasive and would therefore constitute a battery (nonconsensual bodily invasion) if continued over the objection of a competent individual. The law is settled that 
such an individual has a legal right to refuse life - sustaining procedures even though 
refusal might shorten or terminate life. The patient ’ s right in these circumstances is 
founded on a common law right to self - determination and a constitutional right to privacy. In the case of a terminally ill patient, the courts have generally held that the 
patient ’ s right to self - determination and privacy outweigh the countervailing interest 
of the state in preserving life, preventing suicide, safeguarding the integrity of the 
medical profession, and protecting innocent third parties (such as minor dependents or 
unborn children of the patient). In general, courts considering the “ right to die ” issue 
have concluded that the state ’ s interest weakens and the individual ’ s right grows as the 
prognosis dims and the intrusiveness of the treatment increases. 
 The situation presented by the permanently unconscious or otherwise incompetent patient, however, is greatly complicated because the individual is not in a position 
c04.indd 140 3/3/09 3:13:17 PM
to consent to or refuse continued life - sustaining treatment, even if refusal might have 
been the patient ’ s preference. Under such circumstances, courts, attending physicians, 
and members of the patient ’ s family usually attempt to achieve the appropriate balance 
among the various interests involved. 
 As a practical matter, in the case of the incompetent patient receiving life -
 sustaining treatment, the attending physician who favors withdrawal of such treatment 
must balance the probable but often unstated wishes of the patient against the potential 
of civil liability for medical malpractice, criminal liability for homicide, and professional censure for unprofessional and unethical conduct. On the other hand, continuing such treatment over the objection of the next of kin might lead ultimately to a civil 
lawsuit on behalf of the patient or the estate for the tort of battery. Some courts have 
held that the surrogate decision maker who wishes to discontinue treatment when the 
patient is incapable of consenting or refusing treatment may be required to prove what 
the patient would wish if the patient were competent through clear and convincing evidence. 75 This decision is very diffi cult in the case of a patient in a persistent vegetative 
state and even more diffi cult in the case of a conscious but incompetent patient. The 
decision can be further complicated when a patient ’ s family members do not agree about 
what should be done. 
 The American Medical Association takes the position that in deciding whether 
potentially life - prolonging medical treatment is in the best interest of the incompetent 
patient, the physician and the surrogate decision maker should consider several factors, including the patient ’ s values about life and the way it should be lived; the 
patient ’ s attitudes toward sickness, medical procedures, and death; and the possibility 
for extending life under humane conditions. 
 The AMA maintains that it is not unethical to discontinue all means of life -
 prolonging treatment to a patient who is beyond doubt permanently unconscious. It is the 
AMA ’ s position that medication, artifi cially supplied respiration, nutrition, and hydration 
constitute life - prolonging medical treatment. Of course, not everyone agrees with this 
position, and it can be diffi cult to achieve consensus even within the medical community 
as to whether a particular patient is beyond doubt permanently unconscious. 
 Mental and Behavioral Health Care 
 The unique circumstances surrounding the relationships among mental and behavioral 
health care providers, their patients, and third parties requires the imposition of exceptional duties on providers while simultaneously affording them immunities. It is 
imperative that health care providers know the law in their respective states, as these 
duties and immunities vary by jurisdiction. 
Duty to Warn A psychiatrist or licensed psychologist cannot disclose information 
acquired while rendering professional services to a patient without the written consent 
of the patient. The protection against disclosure applies to both civil and criminal matters. However, individuals may waive this privilege by placing their psychiatric state at 
issue in a lawsuit. A court then has discretion to permit disclosure of the information. 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 141
c04.indd 141 3/3/09 3:13:17 PM
142 Health Care Legal Concepts
 Since the landmark case of Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, a 
majority of states have imposed some form of the duty to warn by statute or case law, 
thereby creating an exception to the physician - patient privilege. 76 In Tarasoff, the court 
held that “ a psychotherapist treating a mentally ill patient has a duty to use reasonable 
care to give threatened persons such warnings as are essential to avert foreseeable danger arising from his patient ’ s condition or treatment. ” 77 Signifi cantly, in Tarasoff, the 
psychotherapist ’ s efforts to contact law enforcement regarding his patient ’ s violent 
threats did not satisfy his duty to warn. 
 In most jurisdictions, when a psychotherapist determines that a patient presents a 
serious danger of violence to another individual, the psychotherapist has a “ duty to 
warn ” or an obligation to use reasonable care to protect the intended victim against 
such danger. The psychotherapist does not violate the psychotherapist - patient privilege when disclosing such patient communications. However, in most jurisdictions, 
for this duty to warn to come into play, there must be a specifi c, identifi able victim and 
a clear means of carrying out the threat to the intended victim. In preventing the threatened danger, the psychotherapist should act in a manner that best preserves the privacy 
of the patient. Notably, some states have expanded the duty to warn beyond psychotherapists. In fact, the law in some states has imposed a duty to warn of an actual threat 
of violence on a broad range of mental health providers, including professional counselors, licensed psychiatrists, marriage and family therapists, social workers, and 
 psychiatric and mental health nurse specialists. 78 Therefore, in an effort to avoid third -
 party liability, it is crucial to know the law of the state in which your particular health 
care facility is located. 
 Ambulance Services 
 An ambulance is defi ned as a vehicle that is specifi cally designed for transporting the 
sick or injured, contains certain specifi ed equipment, and is staffed by trained personnel. 79 Ambulances must be equipped with emergency warning lights, sirens, and telecommunication equipment, including at least one two - way radio or wireless telephone 
as prescribed by state and local law. Further, an ambulance must also contain standard 
patient care equipment, including a stretcher, clean linens, fi rst aid supplies, oxygen 
equipment, and such other safety and lifesaving equipment as is required by state and 
local authorities. 80 Generally, there are two types of ambulance vehicles, which are 
subject to different regulations. A basic ambulance is one that provides transportation, 
equipment, and staff needed for basic services, including controlling bleeding, splinting fractures, treating shock, delivering babies, and performing cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. 81 The ambulance crew of a basic life support (BLS) vehicle must consist 
of at least two members. One of these members must be legally authorized to operate 
all life - sustaining equipment and be certifi ed as an emergency medical technician 
(EMT) by the state or local authority. By contrast, an advanced life support (ALS) 
vehicle is equipped with complex specialized life - sustaining equipment and, ordinarily, equipment for radio - telephone contact with a physician or hospital. An ALS 
c04.indd 142 3/3/09 3:13:18 PM
 vehicle must contain two members, with at least one crew member certifi ed as a paramedic or an EMT by state and local authority. 82
 An understanding of the distinctions between these ambulance services is important for purposes of Medicare reimbursement. Medicare requires the ambulance supplier to provide documentation that the ambulance service provider is in compliance 
with emergency and staff licensure and certifi cation requirements. 83
 Integrated Delivery Systems 
 In recent decades, the spiraling cost of health care and health insurance premiums has 
contributed to the development of various types of health care delivery systems, otherwise known as integrated delivery systems (IDSs). The Clinton Health Care Reform 
Plan proposed in 1993 hastened this development and prompted many states to adopt 
their own health care reform plans. 
 Profi le of an IDS The perceived advantage of an IDS is its economic and administrative effi ciency. An IDS consolidates a variety of professional, laboratory, and technical 
services to control costs. For example, most IDSs contain the following cost containment features: 
■ Preadmission review (requires hospital admissions to be approved in advance) 
■ Discharge planning (establishes general guidelines for length of hospitalizations 
and postdischarge case management) 
■ Utilization review (controls the allocation of HMO resources) 
■ Individual case management 
■ Second opinions 
■ An appeal process (a mechanism to contest case management decisions) 
 Furthermore, an IDS may be set up to enter into “ capitation ” agreements with 
managed care organizations or employers. Capitation generally means that the physician or group receives a fi xed monthly or annual payment for each member enrolled in 
the plan. The pool of proceeds available to each physician or provider diminishes with 
each patient referral to a nonmember physician or provider. Virtually all theories of 
liability asserted against an IDS stem from the competing goals of containing health 
care costs while maximizing health benefi ts. 
 Several theories of liability may be asserted against a particular IDS: 
■ Vicarious liability: Liability imposed on an IDS by a patient subscriber for the 
negligent acts of its employees 
■ Direct liability: Liability brought by a subscriber directly against an IDS for negligently selecting health care providers or managing resources; most often arises in 
the case of a refusal to allow services 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 143
c04.indd 143 3/3/09 3:13:18 PM
144 Health Care Legal Concepts
■ Breach of contract or warranty: Failing to honor or fulfi ll terms of the patient subscriber or member - physician ’ s contract 
■ Intentional misrepresentation or fraud: Nondisclosure of material facts regarding 
the operation of the IDS 
 It is helpful to keep in mind the source of each type of liability when studying 
these theories. Allegations of vicarious and direct liability are vertically imposed theories that can be made only by a patient - subscriber (including parents of a minor or an 
estate), whereas breach - of - contract actions are horizontal and may be brought by the 
subscriber to the HMO or by the member - physician and provider. 
 It is also important to consider which type of IDS is involved, because application 
of these theories of liability depends largely on the particular type of IDS model present. The different IDS structures are discussed here. 
Structuring an IDS The structure of an IDS is particularly important, as each IDS provides different mechanisms for balancing the competing goals of health care cost containment and maximum health care service. Each IDS creates different incentives for 
providers and determines the treatment available to patients. 
The Health Maintenance Organization ( HMO ) An HMO is an IDS that provides for 
the fi nancing and delivery of comprehensive health care services to participants for a 
prepaid fee. This is in contrast to traditional health care insurance, which reimburses 
the policyholder or provider for the cost of services ( “ fee - for - service basis ” ). HMOs 
provide services to their members through a system of prepaid physician - providers. 
 Common to the HMO is the primary care physician who acts as a “ gatekeeper. ” 
Some critics have noted that under the traditional health care insurance model, the provider has an incentive to perform unnecessary services and thereby generate fees. The 
HMO model, by contrast, has no such incentive and theoretically should be more economical. However, because there is no fee for service, critics of managed care argue 
that there is also a disincentive to treat. 
 As established previously, many IDSs and HMOs have a system of capitation in 
which the participants ’ premiums are pooled. This pool is used to pay the health care 
providers. Typically, HMO participants are bound by the HMO to seek treatment from 
approved physicians. The HMO ’ s limitation on the member ’ s choice of physician, the 
right to see a specialist, and the system of capitation are the major criticisms of the HMO 
delivery system. 
 There are generally four different types of HMOs, categorized on the basis of their 
relationship with the medical providers. An HMO ’ s exposure to liability depends 
largely on its organization. 
Staff Model 
 The HMO directly employs staff physicians and other providers who render services 
only to members. This model is characterized by the employer - employee relationship 
c04.indd 144 3/3/09 3:13:18 PM
between the physician and the HMO. Staff models also occasionally own or lease their 
own health care facilities. 
Group Model 
 The HMO contracts with independent medical groups or physician corporations that 
provide medical care to the HMO members at the group ’ s own offi ces. Generally 
speaking, a group model pays its contract physicians a set fee per month, per covered 
individual. However, unlike staff model physicians, group model physicians are not 
restricted to treating only HMO participants. 
Network 
 The HMO contracts with different groups of physicians who are permitted to continue 
to treat non - HMO patients. 
 Individual Practice Associations 
 The HMO contracts on a capitation basis with independent practice associations 
(IPAs), which in turn contract with individual private practice physicians to provide 
medical care to HMO members in their own offi ces. IPA physicians, like network physicians, may treat non - HMO patients. 
The Preferred Provider Organization ( PPO ) A PPO consists of physicians, hospitals, 
and other medical providers who contract to provide medical care to a defi ned group 
of patients on a negotiated, discounted fee - for - service basis. 
 In contrast to the HMO, a PPO member may seek treatment from a nonapproved 
physician. Further, unlike an HMO member, the PPO member is usually not required 
to see a gatekeeper before seeking treatment from a specialist. 
Insurance Features A patient ’ s insurance coverage determines the amount of fl exibility in choosing health care coverage. Recently, there has been an increased effort to 
expand the patient ’ s choice in this area, even if it is at the expense of fewer covered 
benefi ts. 
Point of Service ( POS ) This is a plan that combines the basic features of an HMO and 
PPO. Under a POS plan, the covered person may obtain treatment from an out - of -
 network provider, at a reduced level of benefi ts. The primary care physician (gatekeeper) must approve specialty and hospital services. POS organizations have been set 
up because HMOs are under both legal and marketing attack because of the lack of 
freedom of choice in selecting providers. 
Exclusive Provider Organization ( EPO ) Similar to a PPO, an EPO consists of a group 
of participating providers with contractual arrangements to an insurer or other sponsoring group to provide services. Like an HMO, EPOs generally have a primary care 
gatekeeper, and the covered person must seek services exclusively from the participating EPO provider. 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 145
c04.indd 145 3/3/09 3:13:19 PM
146 Health Care Legal Concepts
 Physician - Hospital Linkages Traditional arrangements between hospitals and physicians, like those between physician and patient, are also rapidly changing throughout 
the country. This has produced a confusing variety of organizational alliances between 
physicians and hospitals. Whether this is being driven by hopes of economic survival 
for the hospitals, the physicians, insurance companies, or large employers is unclear. 
What is clear, however, is that the terrain is shifting and will continue to do so. 
Accordingly, it is important to understand the emerging relationships between hospitals, physicians, and insurers. 
 The most familiar and perhaps most interesting organization, the physician -
 hospital organization (PHO), is a venture between one or more hospitals and one or 
more groups of physicians, generally the hospitals ’ medical staff and other ancillary 
providers, who have streamlined their services to act as an integrated whole. The benefi ts of these systems are a reduction in administrative costs and greater bargaining 
power in the marketplace to negotiate contracts with an IDS employer or insurance 
company. There are four basic models. 
Traditional PHO 
 A traditional PHO is a joint venture between one or more hospitals and physicians. 
The physicians may participate in the joint venture as individuals or as an organization such as an IPA or a professional corporation. The advantage of a PHO is that it 
serves as the contracting agent for multiple HMOs and PPOs and for employers who 
fund their own benefi t plans. Thus the PHO can exert greater leverage in the marketplace with health care payers. In some situations, the PHO may actually own an 
HMO or a PPO (or vice versa). Within the PHO, the fi nancial and reimbursement 
interests of the hospital and physicians are aligned. As physicians and hospitals cooperate to achieve their common goals, they deliver care more effi ciently, generating 
greater profi tability. 
Management Services Organization ( MSO ) 
 An MSO is an organization that provides management services to one or more medical 
practices, such as a large group, physician practice, or hospital. MSOs may assume the 
fi nancial risk associated with health care management by purchasing the assets of a 
professional corporation and then leasing the assets back to the group. In return, they 
provide physicians with a full range of administrative services. The MSO can also 
serve to transfer hospital capital to physicians in exchange for assets, expanded clinical services, more affordable administrative systems, and comprehensive ambulatory 
and inpatient services. 
Foundation Model 
 A foundation is a corporation that is organized by a hospital, a group of hospitals, or a 
group of nonprofi t doctors with a common parent organization. The foundation provides the physical plant, administrative and marketing services, and nonmedical personnel and negotiates with managed care plans, insurers, and so on. For the most part, 
c04.indd 146 3/3/09 3:13:19 PM
physicians have little control in a foundation model. Foundations grew out of the strong 
prohibition on hospital employment of physicians in California and other states. 
Integrated Health Organization ( IHO ) 
 An IHO is an organization that requires a separate legal entity, such as a parent corporation, with at least two subsidiaries, such as a hospital and a management services 
organization, and often a third subsidiary, such as an educational or research foundation. The physicians are employed by the management services corporation, which 
provides coverage, the physical plant, and so on. An IHO generally sponsors its own 
managed care activities, such as an HMO or a PPO. 
 This is the most integrated of any of the PHO models. It is thought to embrace a 
comprehensive, community - based system of health care services, which would avoid 
duplication, minimize competition, and be more cost - effective. 
Liability Issues Essential features common to all integrated delivery systems include 
strong utilization review and case management procedures and the exercise of signifi -
cant control over the panel of providers. Many of the models also include some form 
of capitation. 
 As noted previously, capitation generally means that the physician or group 
receives a fi xed monthly or annual payment for each member. This payment goes to 
compensate the physician or group but can also pay for referrals to specialists or entities outside the group. The press is replete with horror stories of physicians or insurers 
who refused to allow such referrals, even when conventional wisdom supports their 
medical necessity. For this reason, the capitation issue has strong emotional appeal in 
claims against a health care provider or an IDS. 
 Under traditional theories of medical malpractice, liability for negligent treatment 
rests with the provider. An HMO or a PPO does not technically provide medical care 
directly to its members. In recent years, however, liability for medical malpractice has 
been extended to IDSs as a result of their restrictions on their members ’ choice of physician, right to receive certain types of medical care, and the perceived economic disincentive to treat created by capitation. 
 Thus while claimants continue to pursue garden - variety professional liability 
claims of negligent treatment by a participating IDS physician, they may also pursue claims against an IDS on the grounds that no medical negligence would have 
occurred if they had had the right to seek treatment from other providers, no medical negligence would have occurred if their right to seek treatment from other providers were not restricted, or the treatment they requested was arbitrarily denied or 
delayed, resulting in personal injury. 
 These new avenues of recovery expose IDSs to signifi cant operating risks. 
Respondeat Superior As previously discussed, respondeat superior is a doctrine by 
which an employer may be held vicariously liable for the negligent acts of its employee 
performed in the course and scope of employment. In the context of the IDS, the 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 147
c04.indd 147 3/3/09 3:13:20 PM
148 Health Care Legal Concepts
 master - servant or employer - employee relationship is most readily apparent in the staff 
model. In the staff model, an HMO ’ s physician ’ s negligence may be imputed to the 
physician ’ s employer, the HMO, if it is established that the HMO directly controlled 
the physician ’ s activities. Because staff model HMOs place tight restrictions on the 
scope of their physicians ’ practices and pay them directly, evidence of control suffi -
cient to impose respondeat superior liability is relatively easy to establish. 84 Liability 
imputed to an IDS is not limited to the staff model. In fact, courts have extended the 
respondeat superior theory of liability to group model HMOs and even to HMOs that 
hire nonmember physicians to provide independent consultations. 85 Nevertheless, not 
all jurisdictions are uniform in their approach, and many have held that where the 
HMO does not directly employ its own physicians, the master - servant relationship 
might not exist, and therefore, no liability may be assessed against the HMO under the 
doctrine of respondeat superior.
Ostensible Agency As noted, the theory of ostensible agency is an exception to the 
general rule of contract law that an employer cannot be held liable for the negligent 
acts of an independent contractor. Under the theory of ostensible agency, an HMO can 
be held vicariously liable for the medical malpractice of a contracting physician in 
which the patient looked to the institution (the HMO) rather than the individual physician for care and the HMO “ held out ” the physician as its employee, thereby creating 
a reasonable perception in the eyes of the patient that the physician was the apparent 
agent or employee of the HMO. Ostensible agency is applied almost exclusively to 
group and IPA model HMOs. However, recent developments in federal law, particularly in the interpretation of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) 
of 1994, have questioned its continued application. 86 Increasingly, federal courts have 
ruled that ERISA, a federal regulatory scheme devised by Congress to control disputes 
related to employee benefi ts, may preempt state law claims against HMOs on theories 
of vicarious liability. The ERISA preemption is addressed later in this chapter. 
 Courts often look to marketing materials to see if they contain statements that 
imply that despite the independent contractor status of the physician, the doctor was 
held out as competent by the HMO or IDS. For this reason, marketing directors of 
health maintenance organizations need to be aware that their statements may ultimately be used to support theories of liability against HMOs. Indeed, if these and 
other materials suggest that the HMO held out a physician as its employee and that 
subscribers relied on these representations to their detriment, courts may ignore the 
legal distinction of independent contractor and impose liability against the HMO. A 
subscriber may prove reliance on the representations of an IDS by producing marketing materials that hold out the physician or provider as an employee. 
 Advertisements by some IDSs describing a “ total care ” program that not only provides payment for medical services but also “ guarantees quality and service ” might 
come back to haunt an IDS in subsequent litigation. In many plans, the subscriber -
 plaintiff may not see a specialist or obtain a procedure or test without prior approval or 
referral from the gatekeeper. This too may create an inference that the patient looked 
to the IDS for care and not to a specifi c physician. 
c04.indd 148 3/3/09 3:13:20 PM
Direct Liability or Corporate Negligence In addition to being found liable on a vicarious liability basis for the negligent acts of a third - party physician, an IDS may also be 
directly liable to a patient - subscriber under theories of corporate negligence, breach of 
contract or of warranty, or intentional misrepresentation or fraud. As applied in the 
managed care context, courts have upheld theories of corporate negligence against an 
IDS on the grounds that the IDS negligently selected its member physicians or failed 
to properly allocate its available resources. 
 Credentialing by a managed care organization of the physicians who will provide 
care to its participants has become an area of increasing direct liability for an IDS. 
Because the patient ’ s freedom to choose a physician or specialist is generally limited 
by the IDS, individuals who are harmed by one of a plan ’ s physicians may plausibly 
argue that they never would have been subjected to the physician ’ s malpractice if the 
IDS had more carefully screened the health care providers for whose services it provides payment under the member ’ s benefi t plan. 
 One of the most hotly contested areas of managed care liability, responsible for 
producing some of the most extraordinary verdicts against health care organizations, is 
an IDS ’ s system of comprehensive utilization review. In accordance with this system, 
decisions are made regarding to whom and on what basis treatment will be given. 
Liability may attach if it is determined that an IDS arbitrarily denied coverage for a 
given procedure or that it delayed approving a procedure, resulting in personal injury 
to a patient - subscriber. 87
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ERISA was designed by 
Congress to serve as a comprehensive regulatory system for resolving employee benefi t disputes. To place ERISA in its proper context, it is helpful to understand the political climate that prompted its passage. 
 ERISA was passed in reaction to widespread concern regarding the integrity of 
nationwide employee benefi t or pension plans. Throughout the 1960s and early 1970s, 
as the United States fell into recession and became less competitive in the world market, manufacturing and industrial plants started closing. One of the reasons cited for 
their failure was the increasingly high cost of maintaining employee benefi t plans. 
 As a result of plant failures, senior “ vested ” employees, on the verge of retirement, discovered that many of their pension plans were underfunded or insolvent. 
Simultaneously, Congress began to question whether the Social Security system would 
be able to meet the demands of these future retirees. These public policy concerns 
prompted Congress to pass ERISA. In so doing, Congress intended to simplify the 
administration of pension plans by administering them under a single, cohesive federal 
body of law. Further, Congress sought to limit an employee ’ s right to sue a plan for 
mismanagement and thereby protect the fi nancial integrity of employee benefi t plans. 
 As set forth more fully here, by routing litigation to the federal courts, Congress 
effectively nullifi ed traditional causes of action under state law for negligence and 
breach of contract for mismanagement of employee benefi t plans and required litigants 
to pursue their claims under ERISA, which permits only the recovery of benefi ts, not 
monetary damages, and attorneys ’ fees. This is the essence of the ERISA preemption. 
Legal Issues Related to Specifi c Health Care Providers 149
c04.indd 149 3/3/09 3:13:20 PM
150 Health Care Legal Concepts
 Without a doubt, ERISA is the most effective tool in defending managed care liability cases. ERISA states, “ Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section [the 
savings clause], the provisions of this subchapter and subchapter 3 of this chapter shall 
supersede any and all state laws insofar as they may now or hereafter relate to any 
employee benefi t plan. ” 88 This is referred to as the ERISA “ preemption clause. ” 
 There are only three narrow exceptions to the general rule of ERISA preemption 
for claims “ relating to ” an employee benefi t plan: (1) any state law that “ regulates 
insurance, banking, or securities, ” 89 otherwise known as the “ savings clause ” ; (2) any 
state cause of action that relates only tangentially to an employee benefi t plan; and (3) 
 “ run - of - the - mill - type lawsuits, ” such as collection fee cases for unpaid rent or attorneys ’ fees, libel, and slander. 90
 Federal court decisions regarding the scope of ERISA preemption have varied 
somewhat over the years. However, most jurisdictions across the country, and in particular federal courts in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, have until recently applied the 
ERISA preemption broadly to prevent state lawsuits against HMOs under theories of 
vicarious liability, breach of contract, loss of consortium, and intentional infl iction 
of emotional distress. 
 Since the Third Circuit case of Dukes v. U.S. Healthcare, Inc.,91 courts have generally divided derivative claims into two categories: quality of care or quantity of care. 
Generally, courts have held that quantity - of - care claims are preempted by ERISA. In 
contrast, a plaintiff ’ s claim that challenges the quality of care will not be preempted by 
ERISA. “ In other words, if the claim involves a denial of treatment or payment pursuant to the terms of the employee benefi t plan, the claim ‘ relates to ’ an ERISA plan and 
will be preempted. ” Alternatively, “ if the claim relates to the quality of care received, 
such as a claim for physician malpractice, courts often hold that these claims do not 
relate to an ERISA plan and are not preempted. ” 92 The Third Circuit acknowledged in 
Dukes that a determination as to whether a cause of action is based on the managed 
care organization ’ s quality of care or the quantity of care can be diffi cult because at 
times the two may be inextricably intertwined. Consequently, courts are apt to struggle 
in deciding whether ERISA is triggered by a plaintiff ’ s claim where both quality of 
care and quantity of treatment may arguably be at issue. 
 SUMMARY 
 The study of potential liability and regulation in the health care fi eld is a dynamic and 
expanding endeavor. Plaintiffs continue to try new theories of liability, and courts continue to recognize them. Potential liabilities and regulations relate directly to the nature 
of health care organizations and operations. Careful selection and management of the 
corporate form and operation are keys to reducing some of the liabilities inherent in 
health care. Understanding the legal environment in which organizations exist, once 
the corporate form has been selected, is the next key to controlling liability. 
 Although the amount of liability and regulation can be extremely frustrating at 
times, it is helpful to remember that people ’ s health is typically the number one 
c04.indd 150 3/3/09 3:13:21 PM
 determinant of their quality of life. All the laws and regulations are merely intended to 
help protect this precious gift. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Advance directive 
 Assisted living facility 
 Breach of duty 
 Cause of action 
 Damages 
 Duty 
 Duty to warn 
 General liability 
Impaired professional
 Informed consent 
 Integrated health organization 
 Management services organization 
 Medical professional liability 
 Negligence 
 Negligence per se 
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 
 Ostensible agency doctrine
 Patient Self - Determination Act 
 Physician - hospital organization 
 Privity 
 Quid pro quo 
Respondeat superior
 Standard of care 
 Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
 Vicarious liability 
 ACRONYMS 
 ADA 
 ADEA 
 AIDS 
 ALF 
 ALS 
 AMA 
 BLS 
 CCRC 
 EPO 
 ERISA 
 HIV 
 HMO 
 IDS 
 IHO 
 LTC 
 MSO 
 OBRA 
 PHO 
 POS 
 PPO 
 PSDA 
Notes 151
 NOTES 
 1. Osborne v. Montgomery, 203 Wis. 223, 234 N.W. 372 (1930). 
 2. Young v. Cerniak, 467 N.E.2d 1045 (Ill. App. Ct., 1984). 
 3. Cline v. William H. Friedman & Assoc., 882 S.W.2d 754 (Mo. Ct. App., 1994). 
 4. Young v. Cerniak.
 5. Logan v. Greenwich Hosp. Assoc., 191 Conn. 282, 302, 465 A.2d 294, 305 (1983); 
 Shilkret v. Annapolis Emergency Hosp. Assoc., 349 A.2d 245 (Md., 1975). 
c04.indd 151 3/3/09 3:13:21 PM
152 Health Care Legal Concepts
 6. Ibid. 
 7. Shilkret v. Annapolis; Pederson v. Dumouchel, 72 Wash. 2d 73, 431 P.2d 973 
(1967). 
 8. Sheeley v. Memorial Hosp., 710 A.2d 161, 167 (R.I., 1998); Vergara v. Doan, 593 
N.E.2d 185 (Ind., 1992). 
 9. Williams v. Hotel Dieu Hosp., 593 So.2d 783 (La. Ct. App., 1992); Jordan v. 
Bogner, 844 P.2d 664 (Colo., 1993). 
 10. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 590 (1993). 
 11. Frye v. United States, 293 F. 1013 (1923). 
 12. Hreha v. Benscoter, 381 Pa. Super. 556, 554 A.2d 525 (1989). 
 13. Restatement (Second) of Torts, § § 286 and 288 (1965). 
 14. Ibid., § § 288A and 288B. 
 15. Del. Code Ann., title 18, § 6801(8). 
 16. Kananen v. Alfred Dupont Institute of the Nemours Foundation, 796 A.2d 1 (Del. 
Super., 2000); Sacks v. Thomas Jefferson U. Hosp., 684 F.Supp. 858 (E.D.Pa., 
1988); Walters v. St. Francis Hosp., 932 P.2d 1041 (Kans. Ct. App., 1997). 
 17. Webb v. Jarvis, 575 N.E. 2d 992, 995 (Ind., 1991); Conboy v. Mogeloff, 567 N.Y.S.2d 
960, 961 (App. Div., 1991); Kirk v. Michael Reese Hosp. & Med. Ctr., 513 N.E. 2d 
387, 395 (Ill., 1987); Rebollal v. Payne, 536 N.Y.S. 2d 147, 148 (App. Div., 1988). 
 18. McElwain v. Van Beek, 447 N.W.2d 442 (Minn. Ct. App., 1989). 
 19. Ibid. 
 20. O ’ Hara v. Holy Cross Hosp., 561 N.E.2d 18 (Ill. Supr., 1990). 
 21. Watkins v. United States, 589 F.2d 214, 219 (5th Cir., 1979); Zavalas v. State 
Dept. of Corrections, 861 P.2d 1026, 1027 (Or. Ct. App., 1993); Kasier v. Suburban 
Transp. Sys. Corp. 398 P. 2d 14, 16 (Wash., 1965); Schuster v. Altenberg, 424 N.
W.2d 159, 161 (Wis., 1988). 
 22. 61 Am. Jur. 2d, Physicians, Surgeons, and Other Healers, § 186. 
 23. Rogala v. Silva, 305 N.E.2d 571 (Ill. App., 1973). 
 24. Noel v. Proud, 367 P.2d 61 (Kans., 1961); Colvin v. Smith, 92 N.Y.S. 2d 794 
(1949); Brooks v. Herd, 257 P. 238 (Wash., 1927). 
 25. Hudson v. Parvin, 582 So.2D 403 (Miss., 1991). 
 26. Gouse v. Casse, 615 A.2d 331 (Pa., 1992). 
 27. Corrigan v. Methodist Hosp., 869 F.Supp. 1202, 1206 (E.D. Pa., 1994). 
c04.indd 152 3/3/09 3:13:21 PM
 28. Craig v. Borcicky, 557 So.2d 1253 (Ala., 1990); Tappe v. Iowa Methodist Medical 
Ctr., 477 N.W.2d 396 (Iowa, 1991); Hudson v. Parvin, 582 So.2d 403 (Miss., 
1991); Roybal v. Bell, 778 P.2d 108 (Wyo., 1989). 
 29. Craig v. Borcicky; Smith v. Cotter, 810 P.2d 1204 (Nev., 1991). 
 30. Distefano v. Bell, 544 So.2d 567 (La. Ct. App., 1989), writ denied, 550 So.2d 650 
(La.., 1989). 
 31. Douget v. Touro Infi rmary, 537 So.2d 251 (La. Ct. App., 1988). 
 32. Kelley v. Kitahama, 675 So.2d 1181 (La. Ct. App., 1996), writ denied, 679 So.2d 
1352 (La., 1996); Petriello v. Kalman, 576 A.2d 474 (Conn., 1990); Kershaw v. 
Reichert, 445 N.W.2d 16 (N.D., 1989); Johnson v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., 832 
P.2d 797 (N.M. App., 2000); Johnson v. St. Joseph Hosp., 832 P.2d 1223 (N.M., 
1992); Friter v. Iolab Corp., 607 A.2d 1111 (Pa. Super., 1992). 
 33. Urban v. Spohn Hosp., 869 S.W.2d 450 (Tex. App., Corpus Christi, 1993, writ 
denied). 
 34. Friter v. Iolab.
 35. 81 Am. Jur. 2d, Witnesses, § 436 (1992). 
 36. Ibid., § 441. 
 37. Hammonds v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co., 243 F.Supp. 793, 797 (N.D. Ohio, 
1965); Va. Code Ann., § § 32.1 – 36.1. (Some statutes provide the negligence standard as a basis for bringing an action for improper disclosure.) 
 38. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), P.L. 104 -
 191, § § 1171 – 1177. 
 39. Doe v. Shady Grove, 598 A.2d 507 (Md. App., 1991) (the patient brought an invasion - of - privacy action against the hospital where he was treated because employees of the hospital allegedly disclosed that he was being treated for AIDS; the 
patient also sought an injunction barring the hospital from publicly identifying 
him in court proceedings; the court held that the failure to uphold such a request 
would undermine the state statutes that established a presumption of confi dentiality for medical records); Estate of Behringer v. Med. Ctr., 592 A.2d 1251, 1272 
(N.J. Super., 1991) (a physician was treated for AIDS at the hospital where he had 
staff privileges; word of his condition spread to other physicians within the hospital who were not involved in his treatment; the court found the hospital negligent 
for failing to protect the plaintiff ’ s medical information from other hospital 
employees). 
 40. In re Milton S. Hershey Med. Ctr., 407 Pa. Super. 565, 595 A.2d 1290 (1991), appeal 
granted, Application of Milton S. Hershey Med. Ctr., 531 Pa. 640, 611 A.2d 712 
(1992), and aff ’ d, In re Milton S. Hershey Med. Ctr., 535 Pa. 9, 634 A.2d 159 (1992). 
Notes 153
c04.indd 153 3/3/09 3:13:22 PM
154 Health Care Legal Concepts
 41. Ibid.; Estate of Behringer v. Med. Ctr., at 1251. 
 42. Calif. Health and Safety Code, § 120980. 
 43. An Overview of 1992 State HIV/AIDS Laws (George Washington Intergovernmental 
Health Policy Project, June 1992); 45 N.Y. Pub. Health Law, § 2130(1). Maryland 
requires the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to report HIV and CD4k 
counts of less than 200 mm 3
 . 
 44. Hale v. Sheikholeslam, 724 F.2d 1205 (5th Cir., 1984); Townsend v. Kiracoff, 545 
F.Supp. 465 (D.Colo., 1982); Ruane v. Niagara Falls Memorial Med. Ctr., 458 N.
E.2d 1253 (N.Y., 1983); Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospitals, 133 N.
Y.S. 1143 (App. Div., 1912), aff ’ d, 105 N.E. 92 (1914); Tabor v. Doctors Memorial 
Hosp., 563 So.2d 233 (La., 1990); Berel v. HCA Health Services, 881 S.W.2d 21, 
23 (Tex. App. - Houston [1st Dist.], 1994, writ denied). 
 45. 29 U.S.C.A., § 623(f)(1). 
 46. Sheridan v. E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Co., 100 F.3d 1061, 1077 – 1078 (3d Cir., 
1996). 
 47. 29 USCA 621 and 623(a)(1). 
 48. 42 USCA 12101. 
 49. Meritor Savings Bank, FSB v. Vinson, 477 U.S. 57, 67 (1986). 
 50. Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., 510 U.S. 17, 21 (1993). 
 51. Faragher v. City of Boca Raton, 524 U.S. 775, 777 (1998). 
 52. Ibid.; Burlington Industries Inc., v. Ellerth, 524 U.S. 742 (1998). 
 53. Burlington Industries, Inc., v. Ellerth, at 807. 
 54. Faragher v. City of Boca Raton.
 55. Restatement (Second) of Torts, § 429 (1965). 
 56. Mitchell v. Shepperd Memorial Hosp., 797 S.W.2d 144 (Tex. App. Austin, 1990, 
writ denied); Pamerin v. Trinity Memorial Hosp., 423 N.W.2d 848 (Wis., 1988). 
 57. Boyd v. Albert Einstein Med. Ctr., 547 A.2d 1229 (Pa. Super. Ct., 1988). 
 58. 1 Health L. Prac. Guide, § 2:30 (2002). 
 59. Thompson v. Nason Hosp., 527 Pa. 330, 591 A.2d 703 (1991). 
 60. U.S. Administration on Aging, http://www.aoa.gov 
 61. Mundy, W. J. “ Nursing Home Litigation: Defense Considerations from Initial 
Assessment to Discovery. ” Paper presented at the fourth annual Nursing Home 
Negligence Conference, Atlanta, 2002. 
 62. 42 USC 1395 and 1396. 
c04.indd 154 3/3/09 3:13:22 PM
 63. 1 Health L. Prac. Guide, § 2:37 (2002). 
 64. Bryant v. Hunt, 2002 Mich. App. LEXIS 725 (2002). 
 65. Adamski v. Tacoma General Hosp., 579 P.2d 970 (Wash. App., 1978); Capan v. 
Divine Providence Hosp., 430 A.2d. 647 (Pa., 1980); Rodebush v. Oklahoma 
Nursing Homes, Ltd., 867 P.2d 1241 (Okla., 1993). 
 66. Aptekman v. City of Philadelphia, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 19120 (E.D. Pa., 2001). 
 67. Perdieu v. Blackstone Family Practice Center, Inc., 2002 W.L. 61048324 (Va., 2002). 
 68. Barry by and through Cornell v. Manor Care Nursing Home, 1999 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 5928 (E.D. Pa., 1999); Ex parte McCollough, 747 So.2d 887 (Ala., 1999). 
In the latter case, the plaintiff sued the defendant nursing home for a “ systematic 
failure to enforce policies which minimize the risk of wrongdoing. ” 
 69. Schenck v. Living Centers - East, 917 F. Supp 432 (E.D. La., 1996); White v. Moses 
Taylor Hosp., 763 F.Supp. 776 (M.D. Pa., 1991). 
 70. U.S. Administration on Aging, http://www.aoa.gov 
 71. U.S. General Accounting Offi ce. “ Nursing Homes: More Can Be Done to Protect 
Residents from Abuse. ” Washington, D.C.: GPO, 2002, http://www.gao.gov/new
.items/d02312.pdf 
 72. Ibid. 
 73. Delaney v. Baker, 971 P.2d 986 (Calif., 1999). 
 74. 42 USC 1395ccc(f)(1). 
 75. Conservatorship of Wendland, 26 Calif. 4th 519, 28 P.3rd 151, 110 Calif. Rptr. 
2nd 412 (Calif., 2001). 
 76. Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, 529 P.2d 553 (Calif., 1974). 
See also George C. Harris, “ The Dangerous Patient Exception to the 
Psychotherapist - Patient Privilege: The Tarasoff Duty and the Jaffe Footnote. ” 
Washington Law Review, 1999, 74, 47 – 48. 
 77. Tarasoff v. Regents, at 559. 
78. 25 MPHYDLR 495, Mental and Physical Disability Law Reporter, May – June 
2001. 
 79. 42 CFR 410.40(e). 
 80. 42 CFR 410.41(a)(4). 
 81. Irwin Cohen, 2 Health L. Prac. Guide, § 19:2 (2002). 
 82. 42 CFR, 410.41(b)(1) - (2). 
 83. Cohen, § 19:2. 
Notes 155
c04.indd 155 3/3/09 3:13:23 PM
156 Health Care Legal Concepts
 84. Sloan v. Metropolitan Health Counsel of Indianapolis, Inc., 516 N.E. 2d 1104 
(Ind. App., 1987), holding that where an employer - employee relationship exists, a 
corporation may be held vicariously liable for the malpractice of its 
employee - physicians. 
 85. Dunn v. Praiss, 256 N.J. Super. 180, 606 A.2d 862, appeal denied, 611 A.2d 657 
(1992), holding that an HMO was liable under respondeat superior for medical 
malpractice committed by a urologist who was a member of a group of urologists 
that contracted to treat HMO subscribers. Signifi cant to the court ’ s fi nding that an 
employer - employee relationship existed was the fact that the group urologists 
were paid on a per capita as opposed to a fee - for - service basis and that they were 
not free to accept or reject a particular patient. 
 86. 29 USC 1001 et seq. 
 87. Fox v. Health Net, 219692 (Calif. Super. Ct., Riverside County, 1993), verdict 
entered against an IDS awarding $ 12 million in compensatory damages and $ 77 
million in punitive damages. 
 88. Pilot Life Ins. Co. v. Dedeaux, 481 U.S. 41, 44 – 45 (1987), quoting § 514(a), 29 
USC 1144 (a). 
 89. ERISA, § 514 (b)(2) (A). See Kentucky Assoc. of Health Plans, Inc. v. Miller, 538 
U.S. 329 (2003). 
 90. Settles v. Golden Rule Ins. Co., 927 F.2d 505 (10th Cir. 1991); Nealy v. U.S. 
Heathcare HMO, 844 F.Supp. 966, 971 (S.D.N.Y., 1994). 
 91. Dukes v. U.S. Healthcare, Inc., 57 F.3d 350 (3rd Cir.), cert. denied, 516 U.S. 1009 
(1995). 
 92. Bondurant, E. J., Cataland, A. K., and Dean, R. Update on ERISA Litigation 
Developments. American Law Institute, American Bar Association Continuing 
Legal Education, SG092 ALI - ABA 249 (2002). 
c04.indd 156 3/3/09 3:13:23 PM
157
CHAPTER
 5
GOVERNANCE OF THE 
HEALTH CARE 
ORGANIZATION 
 JOHN HORTY , MONICA HANSLOVAN 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to explain the importance and responsibility that governing boards 
have for every aspect of the organization 
■ To be able to recognize potential liability risks associated with not - for - profi t 
boards 
■ To be able to identify the elements of risk management board education for 
new board members and continuing education for all board members 
■ To be able to submit risk management reports to the board that are meaningful yet concise 
■ To be able to defi ne the two basic legal duties of a health care organization ’ s 
board members 
c05.indd 157 3/2/09 12:12:33 PM
158 Governance of the Health Care Organization
 The mark of a good health care corporation, like that of any corporation, is the way it 
is governed. Governance determines how any organization is centered. Governance in 
health care is particularly important because of the responsibility of the organization 
to patients and to the community. Governance is the art and skill, developed over many 
years, of making important corporate decisions. Making decisions is the ultimate legal 
authority of the corporation. 
 The board is not passive. It makes decisions. In most instances, the corporation 
board should confi ne itself to important decisions and let management manage. 
However, in some situations, decisions that appear to be small or limited are (or 
become) important. The decisions of the board, along with the culture and values of 
board and management, forge the culture and values of the corporation. The culture 
and values of the corporation are the essence and the result of leadership — good or 
bad. There is no other way to govern. 
 The principles of corporate governance do not change. What do change are the 
problems that an organization faces and the decisions that it must make. All parties 
who support the governance of the corporation — the chief executive offi cer (CEO) 
and top management personnel, including the risk management professional — must 
understand the essentials of governance. 
 Obviously, different health care organizations face different degrees of risk. 
Medical groups, health care systems, long - term care organizations, insurance companies, surgical centers, and hospitals all have boards. All have the same governance 
responsibilities, yet the need for risk management in each type of organization is different. All have signifi cant responsibilities for the care of patients. Even insurance 
companies (who by their actions may sometimes effectively deny care by refusing to 
pay for it under the terms of their policy) shoulder this responsibility. 
 There are several types of corporate structures, particularly in health care. Some 
are organized as for - profi t corporations, but the majority are not - for - profi t corporations. All of the health care corporations previously identifi ed may be organized either 
as for - profi t or not - for - profi t in every state in America. 
 The difference between for - profi t and not - for - profi t corporations is in two areas. 
For - profi t corporations have shareholders who own the corporation and hope to profi t 
from its business. Not - for - profi t corporations have no shareholders, and the people 
who govern them do not own the company or share in the profi ts. Any profi ts must be 
applied to the nonprofi t purpose of the corporation. 
 Not - for - profi t boards have a duty to the publics they serve. It is their only duty. 
Keeping the organization fi scally and organizationally strong is the means to that purpose. The mission of a not - for - profi t corporation in the health care fi eld is to provide 
quality care. In contrast, the board of a for - profi t corporation (in addition to its duty to 
patients) owes a duty to the owners of the corporation — the shareholders — to make the 
business a success and to pass the profi ts along to the shareholders. 
 Although, as noted, there are many different kinds of organizations in health care, 
the greatest liability and risks are in hospitals. Hospitals have the largest number of 
employees, physicians, and other independent practitioners; have the greatest interaction 
c05.indd 158 3/2/09 12:12:34 PM
with patients (by far the largest number of interactions that carry risk and potential liability); and are where procedures with the greatest risk and complexity are performed. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ A hospital board is responsible for ensuring that patients are safe, that the 
hospital is fi nancially prudent, and that all appropriate improvements to the hospital and its products and services are made.
■ A knowledgeable, committed board of directors is the strongest protector of a 
charitable organization ’ s accountability to the law, its donors, the consumers of 
its products and services, and the public. 
■ Establishing and maintaining an effective compliance and ethics program is a 
responsibility of the health care organization ’ s governing board. 
■ The purpose of the Volunteer Protection Act of 1997 is to sustain the viability of 
not - for - profi t organizations, such as hospitals, that rely on volunteers. 
■ Responsibility and accountability for risk management reside with the board of 
directors. 
 ESSENTIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HOSPITAL BOARD 
 The essential responsibilities of the hospital board are, fi rst and foremost, to ensure 
patient safety; second, to ensure that the hospital is fi nancially prudent so that 
 suffi cient funds are available to accomplish its mission; and third, to ensure that appropriate improvements to the hospital and what it does are consistently made. 
 Patient Safety 
 The foremost responsibility of any hospital board is to see that patients are safe. This 
is such an overriding responsibility that it almost needs no discussion. It is what every 
patient who enters the hospital expects and takes for granted. A board that does not see 
to patient safety is not doing its job. Anyone who cares for patients (physicians and 
others alike) must be competent and must act responsibly. The hospital must be adequately staffed, and equipment must be appropriately maintained and available as 
needed. The entire operation must put the patient fi rst. 
 Finances 
 Hospitals (including for - profi t hospitals) are in business to serve the patients who 
come to them for care. They must make enough money to do this job well, and the 
board is responsible to the community that it serves to ensure that the hospital has the 
Essential Responsibilities of the Hospital Board 159
c05.indd 159 3/2/09 12:12:34 PM
160 Governance of the Health Care Organization
fi nancial resources to accomplish its mission — now and in the future. Almost all boards 
wisely take this fi nancial responsibility seriously. However, patient safety must always 
come before profi t. 
 Improvements 
 The third major responsibility of the hospital or health care board is to improve the 
hospital ’ s ability to serve those who come to it as medicine changes. This responsibility has three aspects: 
■ New services. Health care is a dynamic part of our society. Advances in technology are continuous. They allow hospitals to provide new services and new methods 
for the delivery of care. Further advances, such as exploration of our genetic code, will 
revolutionize health care in ways yet to be fully understood. A hospital board ’ s responsibility is to weigh fi nances, safety, and community needs as it decides how these advances 
and new technologies will affect the services to provide and equipment to purchase. 
■ Better patient outcomes. Every hospital must strive to deliver quality care and to 
continuously improve patient outcomes. Patient safety must always come fi rst. By 
improving patient outcomes, the quality of care is enhanced and patient safety is maintained. Improved outcomes are the result of better equipment, better training of staff, and 
the understanding of new and better modalities of care. But equally important is the ability to measure and quantify the continuing improvements in outcomes and the changes in 
care that make them possible. Again, the board must make this continuous measurement 
of improvement a priority. Management, the medical staff, and the hospital must make it 
happen, but the board makes it a continuing priority and responsibility. 
■ A patient - friendly environment. Finally, it is the responsibility of the board to 
set the goal of a patient - friendly hospital. This is easy to say but sometimes hard to do. 
Putting the hospital ’ s patients fi rst is a clich é , but one with real meaning. If the board 
does not think that this is a major goal, it won ’ t be! 
 The hospital or health care board must continually strive to improve the ability to 
serve all who come to the hospital as medicine changes. By breaking board responsibilities into three segments, the understanding of the word quality is separated into 
three distinct and different parts: patient safety, better outcomes, and a patient - friendly 
environment. Clearly, the board should put patient safety fi rst, with outcomes an 
important second and a friendly environment third. Quality has become a buzzword in 
this fi eld. It often seems to be in the eye of the beholder, taken to mean whatever is 
being emphasized at the time. Safety, outcomes, and a friendly atmosphere are concrete and can be measured. Thus the board has a yardstick by which to measure that its 
responsibilities in all these areas are being met. 
 BASIC LEGAL DUTIES OF HEALTH CARE TRUSTEES 
 Two terms describe the individuals who serve on boards of corporations. For - profi t 
corporations almost uniformly use the term director. Many not - for - profi t corporations 
use the term trustee because many early not - for - profi t corporations began as charitable 
c05.indd 160 3/2/09 12:12:34 PM
trusts. The term trustee emphasizes the duty of trust to patients and the community. In 
this chapter, the term trustee is used to refer to both trustees and directors. 
 Management personnel who support the governance of a health care organization 
must understand the two basic duties of trustees: the duty of care and the duty of loyalty. These two duties are shared by all board members of all corporations but are particularly important in the governance of a hospital or health care organization because 
the business of a health care corporation has immediate effects on the lives and well -
 being of patients. 
 Duty of Care 
 The duty of care imposed on health care board members is the duty to act in good faith, 
with the care that an ordinarily prudent person in a similar position would use under 
those circumstances and in the reasonable belief that the actions taken are in the best 
interest of the corporation. Courts call this the “ reasonable person ” standard because the 
action or any failure to act by the board is judged by what a reasonable person would 
do. Health care and hospital board members have the duty to act reasonably under the 
circumstances — to exercise good business judgment and to use ordinary care and prudence in fulfi lling their duties. Trustees can be held liable for negligent acts or omissions in the performance of their duties and actions taken on behalf of the hospital. 
Good Faith Hospital and health care trustees must act honestly and faithfully, observing reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing. It means acting without intent to 
defraud or to take advantage of others. It ’ s easy to see the importance of good faith 
actions for any trustee, in health care or otherwise. Recent examples of the breach of 
this duty by some for - profi t directors and executives make this painfully obvious. 
Acting in the Best Interest of the Corporation This translates into a duty of reasonable care, meaning that board members have the duty to explore all options before they 
make an important decision — to “ do their homework, ” so to speak. In a for - profi t corporation, the duty to act in the best interest of the corporation generally means maximizing the return on the shareholders ’ investment. In contrast, in a nonprofi t hospital 
or health system where no shareholders or owners exist, the board members ’ fi duciary 
duty is to act in the best interest of the people served by the organization. 
 Duty of Loyalty 
 The duty of loyalty imposed on health care board members establishes the duty not to 
compete with the corporation, not to disclose confi dential information obtained in the 
performance of one ’ s duties as a board member, not to usurp corporate opportunity, 
and not to gain personal enrichment at the corporation ’ s expense. 
No Competing with the Corporation Board members have a duty not to compete 
with the corporation they serve. A hospital or health system board would be wise to 
defi ne “ signifi cant competition ” in an offi cial board policy so that it ’ s clear to all 
involved exactly what this limitation means. Such a policy would give the board an 
Basic Legal Duties of Health Care Trustees 161
c05.indd 161 3/2/09 12:12:35 PM
162 Governance of the Health Care Organization
objective template by which to measure any situation that occurs. For example, signifi -
cant competition might mean dealings with another organization that create a net job 
loss for the hospital or cost the hospital 1 percent or more of its market share. 
No Disclosure of Confi dential Information The reasons for this duty are obvious. 
Any trustee (in health care or otherwise) will inevitably encounter confi dential, privileged information while performing as a board member. Such information must remain 
confi dential in all respects, meaning no idle chatter or gossip regarding the information and no deliberate release of such information. 
No Usurping Corporate Opportunity In legal terms, this is known as the corporate 
opportunity doctrine. It means that a board member ’ s fi duciary duty of loyalty prohibits the trustee from profi ting from any business that properly belongs to the 
 corporation. A hospital or health care trustee must fi rst give the corporation ample 
opportunity to act before taking personal advantage of an opportunity that the corporation itself might have taken. 
No Personal Enrichment at Corporate Expense Board members should not participate 
in any decision involving a transaction between the health care corporation and an organization in which the board members have a personal interest without disclosing this fact 
and obtaining board approval. A personal interest might mean that the board member 
would profi t from the transaction, that a close family member of the board member would 
profi t from the transaction, or that the board member serves on the board of the other corporation involved or potentially involved in the transaction. 
 Every hospital or health system should have a confl ict - of - interest policy in place 
to address such situations. The board chair should see that the policy is followed when 
a confl ict arises. Adoption of such a policy eliminates the need for the organization to 
have a separate “ noncompete ” policy. 
 From time to time, all board members have confl icts of interest. In almost every 
case, board members need not resign if they declare the confl ict to the board chair and 
do not participate in decisions concerning these transactions. 
 Care and loyalty are the two basic duties shared by all trustees. Because of the 
nature of health care today, and because nonprofi t hospital trustees are ultimately 
responsible for the quality of patient care, health care trustees must take these duties 
very seriously. Health care governance is not an easy task. 
 LESSONS FROM THE PANEL ON THE NONPROFIT SECTOR 
 In June 2005, the Panel on the Nonprofi t Sector issued a report to Congress titled 
Strengthening Transparency, Governance, and Accountability of Charitable 
Organizations. The report made fi fteen major recommendations about how nonprofi t 
organizations should be regulated and governed. When discussing the structure, size, 
composition, and independence of governing boards, the report noted that “ a 
c05.indd 162 3/2/09 12:12:35 PM
 knowledgeable, committed board of directors is the strongest protector of a charitable 
organization ’ s accountability to the law, its donors, consumers of its products and services, and the public. ” 1
 This is certainly true for those who serve on the boards of nonprofi t hospitals and health care organizations. Directors of nonprofi t hospitals are 
strong protectors of the very people the hospital serves — its patients. 
 Major policymakers are sitting up and taking notice of the recommendations in 
the report. Senator Charles Grassley, chair of the Senate Finance Committee, said, 
 “ This report … will be of great use as the Finance Committee … now begins drafting 
legislation. My goal is legislation that will seek to encourage more checks to charities 
while also ensuring that the dollars are being spent appropriately to help the community and those in need. The panel report will inform the committee and its work, particularly in the important areas of governance and transparency. ” 2
 Some of the report ’ s recommendations will make it into law. And other provisions, while not becoming legislation, may well become “ best practices ” that nonprofi t 
boards and managers ignore at their peril. Although the report is wide - ranging, many 
of its observations about governance duties and roles are quite succinct. We shall discuss three of the report ’ s most pertinent observations and recommendations in the following pages. 
 “ Independent ” Board Members 
 The report defi nes “ independent board members ” as individuals (1) who have not been 
compensated by the organization within the past twelve months, including full - time 
and part - time compensation as an employee or as an independent contractor (except for 
 “ reasonable compensation ” for board service); (2) whose own compensation, except 
for board service, is not determined by individuals who are compensated by the organization; (3) who do not receive, directly or indirectly, material fi nancial benefi ts (such as 
service contracts, grants, or other payments) from the organization except as a member 
of the charitable class served by the organization; and (4) who are the spouse, sibling, 
parent, or child of any such individual. Nonprofi t hospitals should also remember that 
the Sarbanes - Oxley Act of 2002 sets forth standards for the independence of members 
of board audit committees of publicly traded corporations. Although Sarbanes - Oxley 
generally does not apply to nonprofi t corporations, it provides, with regard to director 
 “ independence, ” that companies registered with the New York Stock Exchange must 
have a majority of directors who meet the Exchange ’ s defi nition of “ independence. ” 
 With regard to public charities, the report recommends that at least one - third of 
their board members be free of the confl icts of interest that can arise when they have a 
personal interest in the fi nancial transactions of the charity. Individuals who receive 
compensation for services or material fi nancial benefi ts from the hospital (and their 
spouses or family members) would have inherent confl icts of interest and would not be 
considered independent board members. 
 Founders of many nonprofi t hospitals probably initially turned to family members, business partners, and neighbors and friends to serve on the hospital ’ s board. We 
Lessons from the Panel on the Nonprofi t Sector 163
c05.indd 163 3/2/09 12:12:36 PM
164 Governance of the Health Care Organization
often hear from hospitals that fi nding independent board members can be particularly 
problematic in smaller communities and rural areas. Although it can be diffi cult at 
times, hospitals should make every effort to fi nd independent board members. The 
report goes so far as to state that this should be a legal requirement for public charities 
that are eligible to receive tax - deductible contributions on the most favorable terms. 
 Disqualifi cation from Board Service 
 The report recommends that Congress amend the regulations to prohibit individuals 
who are barred from service on boards of publicly traded companies or convicted of 
crimes directly related to breaches of fi duciary duty in their service as an employee or 
board member of a charitable organization from serving on the board of a charitable 
organization for fi ve years following their conviction or removal. 
 The Sarbanes - Oxley Act (discussed in greater detail later in this chapter) grants 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) the authority to bar individuals 
from serving on the boards of publicly traded companies subject to the approval of a 
 federal judge or an SEC administrative law judge (ALJ). Currently, there is no prohibition on individuals barred by the SEC from serving on the boards of nonprofi t hospitals or health care organizations. But obviously, nonprofi t hospitals and other health 
care organizations should recognize that if someone has been barred from service on 
the board of a publicly traded company or convicted of a crime directly related to a 
breach of fi duciary duty while serving as an employee or board member of a charitable organization, this should raise serious concerns about the person ’ s perceived 
ability to fulfi ll the fi duciary responsibilities of a board member of a nonprofi t 
hospital. 
 Nonprofi t hospitals should begin to ask and remind current and prospective board 
members about this prohibition. Ultimately, though, the responsibility for resigning or 
declining board service should rest with the individual who has been prohibited from 
such service. The report suggests that individuals who fail to inform the hospital that 
they are ineligible to serve should be subject to a penalty equivalent to penalties 
imposed on tax preparers for omission or misrepresentation of information. 
 Board Compensation 
 The report confi rmed our experience that the vast majority of board members are not 
compensated for their services. However, charities and foundations are permitted 
under current law to pay “ reasonable compensation ” for services provided by board 
members. “ Reasonable compensation ” is defi ned as “ the amount that would ordinarily 
be paid for like services by like enterprises (whether tax - exempt or taxable) under like 
circumstances. ” Federal tax laws prohibit payment of excessive compensation and 
contracts and transactions that provide excessive economic benefi t to board members 
and other “ disqualifi ed persons. ” The report defi nes a “ disqualifi ed person ” for public 
charities and also for private foundations. For public charities, a disqualifi ed person is 
someone who at any time during the fi ve - year period ending on the date of the transaction in question was “ in a position to exercise substantial infl uence over the affairs of 
c05.indd 164 3/2/09 12:12:36 PM
the organization. ” Any member of a disqualifi ed person ’ s family is considered a 
 disqualifi ed person, as is any entity in which one or more disqualifi ed persons together 
own, directly or indirectly, more than a 35 percent interest. 
 The report “ strongly encourages ” charitable organizations to ask board members 
to serve on a voluntary basis. In situations where a nonprofi t hospital or health care 
organization feels that it is necessary to compensate board members, the report recommends that there be signifi cant disclosure requirements to detail the amount of and 
reasons for the compensation, including the services provided and the responsibilities 
of board members. Compensation for service as a board member must be “ reasonable ” 
and must be clearly differentiated from any compensation paid for services in the 
capacity of the staff of the organization. 
 In situations where the organization feels that board members should be compensated because of the complexity of the responsibility, the time commitment involved 
in board service, and the skills required for the particular assignment, the organization 
should, as a best practice, review information on compensation provided by organizations comparable in size, grantmaking or program practices, geographical scope, location, and with similar board responsibilities, to determine the “ reasonableness ” of any 
compensation provided to board members. 
 FEDERAL SENTENCING GUIDELINES FOR ORGANIZATIONS 
 Establishing and maintaining an effective compliance and ethics program is another 
responsibility of the health care organization ’ s governing board. On November 1, 
2004, the United States Sentencing Commission revised the “ Federal Sentencing 
Guidelines for Organizations, ” which apply to nonprofi t and for - profi t organizations. 
The guidelines were created in 1984 to respond to a perception and some evidence (in 
the case of individual, not corporate, defendants) that judges in the federal circuits 
were adopting very different sentences for similarly situated defendants found guilty 
of criminal charges. Chapter 8 in the guidelines, addressing sentencing of organizations, was added in 1991. 
 The guidelines set a baseline range of determinate sentences for different categories of offenses; judges increase or decrease the sentence depending on enumerated 
circumstances listed in the guidelines (setting a culpability score from which “ upward 
or downward departures ” are made). The 2004 amendments to Chapter 8 seek to 
strengthen the importance of the characteristics of an effective corporate compliance 
program defi ned in the guidelines. 
 The revised guidelines broadly defi ne the term organization to include “ corporations, partnerships, associations, joint - stock companies, unions, trusts, pension funds, 
unincorporated organizations, governments and political subdivisions thereof, and 
non - profi t organizations. ” 3
 The guidelines also speak directly to the responsibilities 
placed on the board. They provide that “ the organization ’ s governing authority shall be 
knowledgeable about the content and operation of the compliance and ethics program 
and shall exercise reasonable oversight with respect to the implementation and 
Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations 165
c05.indd 165 3/2/09 12:12:37 PM
166 Governance of the Health Care Organization
 effectiveness of the compliance and ethics program. ” 4
 “ Governing authority ” is defi ned 
as the board of directors or, if the organization does not have a board of directors, the 
highest - level governing body of the organization. 5
 The guidelines make it very clear that for an organization to receive a reduction in 
fi nes and penalties, oversight of programs designed to prevent and detect criminal 
activity is the responsibility of an organization ’ s board. The key 2004 changes to the 
guidelines from a board member ’ s perspective are the following: 
■ An explicit recognition of the important role ethics and culture play in ensuring effective compliance programs. The commission changed the defi nition of an 
effective program from one that provides due diligence to prevent and detect criminal 
violations to one that must also “ promote an organizational culture that encourages 
ethical conduct and a commitment to compliance with the law. ” With this revision, the 
commission sought to emphasize that without ethics, compliance becomes about following a minimum set of rules and refl ects the emphasis on ethics and values incorporated into recent legislative and regulatory reforms. 
■ The placement of responsibility for reasonable oversight of the compliance 
and ethics program with the board. This means that the board must ensure that management and employees act legally and ethically to protect the company ’ s reputation 
and the value that derives from that reputation. 
■ A requirement that senior management “ ensure ” that the organization has an 
effective compliance and ethics program (ECEP) by working closely with senior leadership to develop a strong program. 
■ A risk assessment requirement that demonstrates that the organization has 
identifi ed risk areas where criminal violations may occur. This may include the use of 
auditing and monitoring systems to detect criminal conduct, ongoing risk assessment, 
and periodic evaluation of the effectiveness of the program. 
■ A requirement that the organization encourage “ appropriate incentives to perform in accordance with the compliance and ethics program. ” 
■ A requirement that organizations provide employees with a means to seek 
guidance regarding potential or actual criminal conduct without fear of retribution. 
Practically, this means that boards should assess employee willingness to use the system in place in the organization. 
■ Required training in relevant legal standards and obligations. It is no longer 
an option. The revised guidelines include a mandatory training requirement for high -
 level offi cials and for employees. 
■ A requirement that compliance offi cers be given adequate authority and 
resources to carry out their responsibilities, including a direct reporting responsibility 
and access to the organizational leadership and the organization ’ s board. 6
 In sum, the amendments have both raised the bar for compliance and ethics and 
have put responsibility for an effective compliance and ethics program in the hands of 
the board. 
c05.indd 166 3/2/09 12:12:37 PM
 THE SARBANES - OXLEY ACT OF 2002 
 Even though not legally required to do so, some hospitals and health care organizations 
are revising their bylaws to be more consistent with the requirements of the Public 
Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act of 2002, widely referred to 
as the Sarbanes - Oxley Act. Sarbanes - Oxley established new requirements for the corporate governance of issuers of securities that are regulated by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission. Because nonprofi t hospitals and health care organizations do 
not issue securities that are regulated by the SEC, the act does not apply directly to 
these organizations. 
 At the same time, nonprofi t boards should recognize that some of the concepts 
included in the act have been adopted by the Exempt Organizations Branch of the 
Internal Revenue Service. Nonprofi t boards should also be aware that some states have 
been considering legislation that would impose the requirements of the Sarbanes -
 Oxley Act on nonprofi t corporations in those states. Therefore, the boards of health 
care organizations are well advised to consider the concepts on which Sarbanes - Oxley 
was based. An open question is the extent to which the act ’ s approach to implementing 
corporate accountability and other principles of governance may be applied to the 
nonprofi t setting either through subsequent legislation or judicial review. 
 Although the Sarbanes - Oxley Act does not apply to nonprofi t corporations, it 
 contains certain provisions that refl ect principles that directors and CEOs of nonprofi t 
organizations have long been expected to follow. At the very least, the act is educational 
in that it highlights these principles and expectations. It is also possible that at some 
point in the future, a court would look to the act for guidance when interpreting duties 
of directors and CEOs of nonprofi t organizations. Similarly, at some future point, legislatures may impose similar requirements on nonprofi ts. The following discusses the 
main provisions of the act that could potentially be applied to nonprofi t organizations. 
 Accountability Just as the Sarbanes - Oxley Act is intended to make corporate executives and auditors more accountable to the shareholders of public companies and 
impose new obligations and restrictions on directors and senior executives of such 
companies, similar accountability could eventually be placed on directors and senior 
executives of nonprofi ts. For example, certain sections of the act require senior executive certifi cation of fi nancial reports. The act holds signing offi cers responsible for 
establishing and maintaining internal controls to ensure that material information 
relating to the company and its consolidated subsidiaries is made known to such offi -
cers by others within those entities. It requires the signing offi cers to have disclosed to 
the company ’ s auditors and the board ’ s audit committee all signifi cant defi ciencies 
in the design or operation of internal controls that could adversely affect the company ’ s ability to record, process, summarize, and report fi nancial data. 
 Another section of the act prohibits directors and offi cers of public companies 
from taking any action to “ fraudulently infl uence, coerce, manipulate, or mislead ” any 
independent public or certifi ed accountant engaged in the performance of an audit of 
The Sarbanes - Oxley Act of 2002 167
c05.indd 167 3/2/09 12:12:38 PM
168 Governance of the Health Care Organization
the company ’ s fi nancial statements for the purpose of rendering such fi nancial statements materially misleading. 
 It ’ s easy to see how the same technical requirements could be placed on directors 
and offi cers of nonprofi ts. Even though there are no shareholders in a nonprofi t to 
bring derivative suits against corporate offi cers for such actions, a state attorney general could decide to look more closely into these matters. 
 Under Sarbanes - Oxley, the SEC is empowered to prohibit any person who violates federal securities laws, rules, or regulations from acting as an offi cer or director 
of any public company. Again, it is not a stretch to imagine that potential bars could be 
placed on offi cers and directors of nonprofi ts who violate certain laws, rules, or regulations, prohibiting them from serving in that capacity for any other nonprofi t organization. In fact, the exclusion from Medicare of individuals convicted of certain crimes 
is one example of how this principle has already been applied in the nonprofi t setting. 
Audit Process and Oversight Sarbanes - Oxley established the Accounting Oversight 
Board to oversee fi rms that audit public companies in the United States and abroad. 
That board ’ s regulations apply to the same independent auditing fi rms that audit 
 nonprofi ts. Nonprofi t boards should remember that annual external audits should be 
conducted and should be reviewed by the health care organization ’ s board of directors. 
It is equally important for accounting fi rms and auditors of nonprofi t health care organizations to avoid confl icts of interest and to have no business relationship with the 
organization outside of the auditing duties being provided. 
 Disclosures One signifi cant aspect of Sarbanes - Oxley is that it requires public companies to disclose material changes in fi nancial condition or operations on a rapid and 
current basis. The same “ real - time disclosure ” requirement could likewise be placed 
on nonprofi ts. It is foreseeable that nonprofi ts will be called on in the future to disclose 
(in plain English and on a rapid and current basis) information concerning material 
changes in fi nancial condition or operations. Such a requirement would lessen or perhaps completely avoid deferral of disclosures by nonprofi ts. 
 The act similarly requires each public company to disclose in its periodic reports 
whether the board ’ s audit committee has at least one member who is a “ fi nancial 
expert. ” This requirement for fi nancial expertise on the audit committee of a nonprofi t 
health care board seems reasonable, and it would not be a surprise if such a requirement were applied to nonprofi ts in the future. 
 Sarbanes - Oxley requires public companies to disclose whether their senior fi nancial executives have adopted a “ code of ethics. ” Likewise, senior fi nancial executives of 
nonprofi t corporations might be expected to follow this same type of code in the future 
(or at least to profess their allegiance to such a code to some governmental agency). 
 Finally, the act requires attorneys to report violations of securities laws and 
breaches of fi duciary duty by a public company or its agents to the chief legal counsel 
or CEO of the company. If the counsel or CEO does not respond appropriately, the 
attorney must report the evidence to the audit committee of the company ’ s board of 
c05.indd 168 3/2/09 12:12:38 PM
directors, to a committee composed entirely of outside directors, or to the board as a 
whole. In our estimation, it is possible that the same reporting obligations could be 
placed on attorneys for nonprofi t corporations to report breaches of fi duciary duty by 
senior executives. 
 THE VOLUNTEER PROTECTION ACT OF 1997 
 One little - known but very important protection afforded to hospital trustees is the federal Volunteer Protection Act of 1997. This statute was passed to protect volunteers 
active in not - for - profi t corporations such as the Boy Scouts, playgroups, Little League, 
and other community organizations. While not specifi cally incorporating trustees or 
hospitals, the language is broad enough to cover them. 
 The act defi nes a not - for - profi t organization as “ any organization which is 
described in section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 [of the Internal Revenue Code] and exempt 
from tax under section 501(a) of Title 26 … or any not - for - profi t organization which is 
organized and conducted for public benefi t and operated primarily for charitable, 
civic, educational, religious, welfare, or health purposes. ” 7
 Because most hospitals 
and health systems are tax - exempt organizations under 501(c)(3) of the Internal 
Revenue Code and are conducted for public benefi t and operated primarily for health 
purposes, most hospitals easily fi t within the act ’ s defi nition of a not - for - profi t 
organization. 
 Furthermore, trustees are specifi cally identifi ed as “ volunteers ” under the act. The 
Volunteer Protection Act defi nes a volunteer as “ an individual performing services for 
a non - profi t organization or a governmental entity who does not receive compensation … or any other thing of value in lieu of compensation … and such term includes a 
volunteer serving as a director, offi cer, trustee, or direct service volunteer. ” 8
 The act specifi cally limits liability for volunteers such as hospital trustees. It states 
that “ no volunteer of a non - profi t organization … shall be liable for harm caused by an 
act or omission of the volunteer on behalf of the organization or entity if the volunteer 
was acting within the scope of the volunteer ’ s responsibilities in the non - profi t organization … at the time of the act or omission … if the harm was not caused by willful or 
criminal misconduct, gross negligence, reckless misconduct, or a conscious, fl agrant 
indifference to the rights or safety of the individual harmed by the volunteer. ” 9
 Punitive damages are also limited by this act. The general rule is that “ punitive 
damages may not be awarded against a volunteer in an action brought for harm based 
on the action of a volunteer acting within the scope of the volunteer ’ s responsibilities 
to a non - profi t organization … unless the claimant establishes by clear and convincing 
evidence that the harm was proximately caused by action of such volunteer which 
constitutes willful or criminal misconduct, or a conscious, fl agrant indifference to the 
rights or safety of the individual harmed. ” 10 Although the act lists exceptions to volunteer liability protection based on certain provisions in state laws that may be applicable 
in some circumstances, it does limit liability for trustees of not - for - profi t organizations 
in many circumstances. 
The Volunteer Protection Act of 1997 169
c05.indd 169 3/2/09 12:12:38 PM
170 Governance of the Health Care Organization
 The purpose of the Volunteer Protection Act is to sustain the viability of not - for -
 profi t organizations (such as hospitals) that depend on volunteers. This act is an important federal law that by its very nature can limit the liability of hospital trustees should 
a claim be brought against them. Hospital trustees and counsel should be familiar with 
this protection. It is particularly valuable in this time of medical professional liability 
insurance crisis. Risk management professionals should be well aware of it. 
 RISK MANAGEMENT AND THE BOARD 
 A risk management professional ’ s duty is inherent in the title of the position itself —
 to prevent or minimize corporate loss from legal liability. This may involve developing systems to prevent adverse events and attempting to handle events that do occur 
in such a manner that the organization ’ s fi nancial and reputation cost are minimized. 
For example, in the case of a sentinel event or other unexpected occurrence that could 
risk liability, reputation, and accreditation, the risk management professional may 
interview central fi gures to determine what went wrong, hold personal discussions 
with the injured party or parties, or attempt to reach a satisfactory settlement without 
a lawsuit. 
 Board accountability and responsibility for risk management and quality are not 
new; they have always been the duty of the health care organization governing board. 
This section discusses the type of relationship between the health care organization ’ s 
risk management professional and its governing board that will shield the organization ’ s losses from legal liability most effectively and effi ciently. 
 Risk Management ’ s Role in Educating the Board 
 Although it is not common for the risk management professional to report directly to 
the board (as will be discussed later in this chapter), the CEO and the risk management 
professional still need to ensure that the board is educated about the overall task of risk 
management and the crucial part the board itself plays in reducing potential liability 
by effectively discharging its risk management oversight role. 
 Board members must understand that they play a key part (along with the risk 
management professional) in preventing patient injury, preventing medical professional liability, and overseeing the corporation ’ s prevention of loss from legal liability. 
This means that the board must work closely with the risk management professional 
and other hospital management staff, with the understanding that ineffective governance can cause harm to patients if it goes uncorrected and could also generate liability 
for the corporation. Board education is key, but remember that management of risk is 
the result of board attention to medical and other errors that harm or could harm patients 
and of a plan for preventing repeat errors. As previously stated, one of the most important responsibilities of the board is to see that care is taken by the hospital and physicians so that patients are not harmed. 
 The risk management professional and CEO should play a dual role in educating 
the board with regard to its risk management and oversight duties. Periodically, and 
c05.indd 170 3/2/09 12:12:39 PM
for new board members, the risk management professional and CEO may conduct a 
 “ risk management orientation program. ” In - house counsel and medical staff leadership may also participate in this introduction or orientation to risk management. The 
risk management professional and hospital management can use this opportunity to 
ensure that the board is familiar with the following concepts: 
■ The relationship between the health care organization ’ s quality improvement program and medical staff credentialing function and the risk management program 
■ The health care organization ’ s defi nition of risk management and the scope of the 
hospital ’ s or system ’ s risk management program 
■ The role and job of the risk management professional 
■ The relationship between the insurance, loss of control, and claims functions and 
the risk management program 
■ How the risk management professional gathers data and identifi es risks — incident 
reporting, occurrence reporting, generic screening, patient complaints, or other 
methods 
■ The highest - risk areas of patient injury and medical professional liability claims within 
the hospital and throughout the system and how they compare with national data 
■ Insurance coverage and costs 
■ The health care organization ’ s claims history 
■ The part the board plays in preventing patient injury and malpractice liability and 
reducing overall liability exposure by effectively discharging its risk management 
oversight role 
■ The role of ineffective governance in generating liability losses 11
 Participation in such an orientation process can ensure that both new and current 
board members have a basic understanding of the hospital or health system ’ s organizational structure vis - à - vis risk management and a basic understanding of the crucial role 
the board plays in accountability and responsibility for patient safety. The implementation 
of such an orientation program, however, is only the beginning of the larger role that 
the risk management professional (and hospital management) can play in establishing 
a comprehensive board orientation program. 
 Although an initial or periodic risk management orientation program is a good 
idea, it only scratches the surface of the knowledge that board members will need to 
effectively discharge their duties as corporate fi duciaries. The risk management professional can and should continue this educational process for the board by working 
with management to create a series of ongoing, well - designed activities for both new 
and current board members so that they are continually made aware of issues of patient 
safety. Such ongoing activities (as opposed to educational sessions held once or twice 
Risk Management and the Board 171
c05.indd 171 3/2/09 12:12:41 PM
172 Governance of the Health Care Organization
a year) ensure that the board ’ s education regarding its oversight duties is not an ad hoc 
event but rather a continuing process. 
 What are the core competencies that board members should possess to keep themselves and their organizations accountable? From a risk management perspective, at least 
some board members should possess specifi c competencies in law, accounting, fi nance, 
and clinical care. It is also important for trustees to understand governance obligations, 
functions, processes, and best practices; the health care industry and their individual market and organization; key success factors, including strategic, fi nancial, operational, and 
clinical variables; and how to read, analyze, and interpret basic fi nancial statements. 12
 A hospital or health system board cannot effectively discharge its oversight role in 
patient safety until it has been properly educated. The risk management professional 
can play a pivotal role in ensuring that this education takes place. 
 Delivery of Information to the Board 
 Management could ask the risk management professional to report directly to the board, 
but this is unusual. Risk management professionals generally report to hospital management, either directly to the CEO or through a chief operating offi cer or senior vice 
president. It is not unusual for the risk management professional to report to the chief 
medical offi cer or vice president of medical affairs. Information generally comes to the 
board through the hospital ’ s management. How this is accomplished is a matter to be 
worked out between the CEO and the board chair. Only in an extreme situation (in 
which the risk management professional believes that management is creating liability 
for the corporation and not telling the board about it) should a risk management professional bypass management and report concerns directly to the board. 
 Some organizations have the risk management professional report to a board committee, usually the professional affairs committee (PAC) of the board or the equivalent 
committee responsible for receiving and making recommendations on credentialing 
and peer review recommendations from the medical staff executive committee. 
Because the role of the PAC is generally to receive recommendations from the various 
medical staff committees and to make recommendations to the board regarding such 
things as initial appointment, reappointment, the delineation of privileges, disciplinary 
actions taken against medical staff appointees, bylaws, and rules and regulations of the 
medical staff, the PAC is an ideal committee for the risk management professional to 
report to in lieu of a report to the full board. This is especially true when potential liability involves a physician, as it does in almost all major cases. 
 Medicare and Medicaid Fraud and Abuse 
 The Medicare defi nition of fraud is “ an intentional representation that an individual 
knows to be false or does not believe to be true and makes, knowing that the representation could result in some unauthorized benefi t to himself/herself or some other 
 person. ” 13 The most frequent kind of fraud arises from a false statement or misrepresentation made or caused to be made that is material to entitlement or payment under 
c05.indd 172 3/2/09 12:12:42 PM
the Medicare program. The violator may be a physician or other practitioner, a hospital or other institutional provider, a clinical laboratory or other supplier, an employee 
of any provider, a billing service, a benefi ciary, a Medicare carrier employee, or any 
person in a position to fi le a claim for Medicare benefi ts. 
 Fraud schemes that a risk management professional might become aware of could 
include one or more of the following: offering or accepting kickbacks; routine waiver 
of copayments; fraudulent diagnosis; billing for services not rendered; unbundling 
charges; or falsifying certifi cates of medical necessity, plans of treatment, and medical 
records to justify payment. 
 A risk management professional ’ s discovery of Medicare or Medicaid fraud and 
abuse may sometimes represent the type of extreme situation that requires a risk management professional to bypass higher authority and go directly to the board. This 
would, of course, occur only if top management either were implicated or refused to 
take effective action. 
 What Should the Board Know? 
 What information should the hospital trustees have? First, it is very important to keep 
in mind that the risk management professional should couch all reports to the board in 
terms that maximize state peer review protection. Risk management professionals ’ 
reports should always provide a road map for peer review protection under state law. 
Also, it is important to strike a proper balance as to how much information to provide 
to the board. Nothing productive will be accomplished if trustees are overwhelmed 
with information. At the same time, it is essential that they be given enough information to thoroughly understand the issue. There are a few basics, however. The following should always be brought to the board ’ s attention: 
■ All sentinel events and follow - up 
■ All lawsuits fi led, the nature of claims, and what is being done to address any quality 
questions these raise 
■ All payments, settlements, and judgments 
■ Any quality trends 
■ Any questions raised by the death of a patient 
There is little point in having a risk management professional if this kind of information is not given to the board. 
 Content and Format of Reports to the Board 
 It is not easy for hospital management to decide what information the board should be 
privy to, nor is it easy for risk management professionals to strike the diffi cult balance 
between enabling the board to thoroughly understand an issue without overwhelming 
it with data. In addition to the basic information just listed that the board should always 
Risk Management and the Board 173
c05.indd 173 3/2/09 12:12:42 PM
174 Governance of the Health Care Organization
be given, risk management reports should strive to provide the board with meaningful 
information about issues of patient safety a clear, concise, graphic format. 
 Information provided to the board should be in the form of a single report that is 
short and easy to read. Such reports (by risk management or hospital management) 
should state in plain English where the organization stands with respect to incidents 
that affect patient safety and where it strives to be. 
 It may also be helpful to include a “ consent agenda ” to streamline board meeting 
procedures. Consent agenda items are considered routine and noncontroversial, with 
documentation provided to the board that is adequate and suffi cient for approval without discussion unless a board member raises a specifi c question. For instance, a consent agenda may routinely include such things as approval of the minutes from the last 
board meeting or approval of reports from the medical executive committee. The consent agenda is intended to minimize the time required for the handling of noncontroversial matters and to permit additional time to be spent on more signifi cant matters. 
Any item on the consent agenda should be moved to the regular agenda at the request 
of any board member. Such items may also be put off to a subsequent meeting for further consideration. 
 Recommendations of the medical staff credentials committee regarding physician 
appointments and clinical privileges are usually noncontroversial and are often posted 
on the consent agenda. We believe that this is a bad idea. The recommendations of the 
credentials committee dealing with appointment and clinical privileges go directly to 
the most important board responsibility — the safety of patients. These recommendations must be acted on directly by the board after the board asks for and receives the 
assurance of the credentials committee chair that these recommendations are the result 
of the thoughtful work of the committee. Even though the recommendations pass 
through and are approved by the medical staff executive committee, they should be 
presented to the board by the chair of the committee that did the work. The approval 
may, in most cases, be pro forma, but it should be received from the committee and be 
endorsed by the committee chair before the board acts. 
 Reports to the board should include a carefully selected group of risk management 
indicators that show board members at a glance how well their organization is performing with respect to patient safety. Indicators might include such items as analyses 
of trends identifi ed through incident reports and occurrence screens, open and closed 
claims, trends and costs of claims, or results of insurance audits and costs — all the 
while remembering that claims and their costs represent problems that need to be 
fi xed. Board members and risk management professionals alike should not forget that 
the harm done to patients is more important than the insurance loss. 
 The report should track the organization ’ s risk management trends over time in a 
graphic format and should show how the organization compares with benchmark organizations. Presenting information to boards in this way not only lays out the data 
for trustees but also actually helps board members interpret the data. This ensures that 
trustees are getting the information they need to know where their organization stands. 
c05.indd 174 3/2/09 12:12:42 PM
Moreover, when assessing the risk management status of an organization, boards will 
benefi t by being able to see the “ big picture ” rather than being bogged down in data. 
 Risk management professionals might begin by fi rst analyzing the most important 
fi ve to ten risk management variables that the board needs to know over the course of 
the next year. The risk management professional, CEO, and board chair should all 
play a part in deciding on the crucial indicators. A chart should be prepared for each 
indicator containing a line or curve showing the organization ’ s target for that indicator. Before each board meeting, management (with the risk management professional ’ s help) plots what actually happened in a different color so that all the board 
 members need to do is look at the chart to see if what actually happened is above or 
below the organization ’ s target line. 14 Such a format facilitates quick review of the 
essential indicators and provides the board with the easily understood, big - picture 
view of the issues that it needs to govern effectively in the areas of patient safety and 
risk management. 
 How the Board Can Help Hospital Management 
and the Risk Management Professional 
 It is important for the governing board and the risk management professional of any 
health care organization to realize that all duties delegated to the risk management professional ultimately fl ow from the board through the chief executive offi cer. The governance 
of the organization should be the source of responsibilities that the risk management professional carries out. From a managerial perspective, this eases the blame or resistance to 
things that must be done that could potentially fall to the risk management professional 
should others in the organization perceive that orders are fl owing from one individual 
alone. It must be clear that the risk management professional is carrying out delegated 
authority and responsibilities of the chief executive offi cer of the corporation. 
 THE MEDICAL STAFF, RISK MANAGEMENT, AND THE BOARD 
 The medical staff of the hospital or other health care organization is central to risk 
management. The most serious liability any health care organization (and particularly 
a hospital) faces is always at the intersection between the organization and the physicians who practice there. 
 The expression “ medical staff ” has two different meanings: one describes individual physicians who have received from the board an appointment to the hospital medical staff and treat patients in the hospital; the other refers to an organization of 
physicians established by the hospital board with various delegated duties pertaining 
to quality and the ability to act as a group to infl uence the hospital, its management, 
and its board. 
 How does the medical staff, both as an organization and as individuals, relate to 
governance? The purpose of the individual members of the medical staff is to provide 
The Medical Staff, Risk Management, and the Board 175
c05.indd 175 3/2/09 12:12:43 PM
176 Governance of the Health Care Organization
top - quality medicine, whereas the purpose of the medical staff as an organization is to 
monitor the care provided. 
 The medical staff organization acts as a consultant to the hospital board. It is asked 
to make recommendations on quality, appointments, discipline of medical appointees, 
and hospital needs and procedures. Members of medical staff committees who make 
such recommendations must act with the same care and loyalty as board members. 
The medical staff is not organized for political purposes or to protect the economic 
interests of any or all physicians. 
 The hospital ’ s relationship with members of the medical staff does not fi t easily 
within ordinary corporate law or organization. That is why it is sometimes diffi cult for 
the risk management professional to deal with quality or liability issues that involve 
members of the medical staff. However, it is essential that this be done. Management, 
including the risk management professional, is responsible to the board for investigating all potential liability, physician - related or otherwise. The medical staff organization does not have exclusive jurisdiction over acts by physicians in the hospital. 
 When the Board Must Step In 
 The board delegates responsibility for monitoring and overseeing the quality of care 
to the medical staff. However, if the medical staff fails or is unable to fulfi ll its responsibilities in monitoring the safety and outcome of care provided by the organization, 
the board has the legal authority and, more important, the obligation to step in to oversee the safety and outcomes. 
 Medical Staff Development Plans 
 A medical staff development plan defi nes what it means to be a member of the medical 
staff, including sharing the hospital ’ s vision, mission, and commitment to the community. 15 Many boards have found the development of such plans to be effective. For 
many hospitals, such plans have become critical to maintaining a good relationship 
with their medical staffs. Just going through the process of developing a plan has been 
helpful. Critical steps in the development of a plan follow: 
Step 1: Board Adopts Resolution and Statement of Community Service 
Principles The board adopts a resolution that authorizes the research and analysis that 
lead to the plan. That resolution also establishes a staff development committee or task 
force composed of board members, management representatives (including the chief 
executive offi cer), and physicians. It is important that the physicians selected for this 
committee not be those who might be economically advantaged by its recommendations. A Statement of Community Service Principles, adopted by the board, provides 
the foundation for further discussions and possible actions with respect to physicians 
who have economic confl icts of interest. 
Step 2: Communicate It is critical that physicians, especially those in leadership positions, know and understand how and why a medical staff development plan is being 
c05.indd 176 3/2/09 12:12:43 PM
developed, its purpose, and its objectives. The physicians should be kept apprised of 
the progress of the study, and when appropriate, input from physicians should be 
sought and considered. 
Step 3: Gather Data and Analyze Community Needs The ultimate purpose of the 
plan (and of the hospital itself) is to meet the needs of the community. That, obviously, 
is part of a hospital ’ s charitable purposes as articulated in its Statement of Community 
Service Principles. 
 A “ community needs assessment ” involves collecting data regarding individuals 
currently practicing in the hospital; information about their practices and referral patterns, including what care is referred outside of the community and why; demographic 
information regarding the population served by the hospital and that population ’ s 
health care needs; the study of the existing health resources in the community; and 
areas underserved from either a geographic, medical specialty, or income level 
standpoint. 
 Visits to the emergency department, calls from individuals seeking physicians to 
provide care, waiting lists for care in physician offi ce practices, or the inability to 
obtain an appointment can all indicate a community need for specifi c services. 
 The task force analyzes the data collected to determine on a specialty - by - specialty 
basis what is necessary to meet the current and projected needs of the community. 
Step 4: Communicate Again As this information is collected, it should be made 
available for physicians to review and comment on. Physicians should also be surveyed to gain insight into what services the hospital might offer, what services the 
hospital could provide better, and where effi ciencies or additional progress could be 
achieved. 
Step 5: Analyze Financial Relationships and Their Impact The task force should 
also analyze the fi nancial relationships that physicians on the medical staff may 
have with competing entities, and how each type of fi nancial relationship could 
compromise physicians ’ abilities to fulfi ll their responsibilities as members of the 
medical staff, or could otherwise impair the hospital ’ s ability to fulfi ll its charitable 
mission. 
 Two types of physician fi nancial relationships should be specifi cally analyzed: 
ownership or investment interests in competing facilities or services and compensation arrangements, such as employment contracts or medical directorships with competing facilities, including other hospitals or health systems. The task force ’ s analysis 
should include (a) information about competing entities in the market and how those 
entities affect the hospital both fi nancially and operationally; (b) disclosures from 
medical staff members and applicants of their fi nancial relationships; and (c) whether 
the hospital can be made a more attractive location in which to practice. 
Step 6: Task Force Recommends Based on its analysis of community needs and the 
effect of physicians ’ confl icting fi nancial relationships, the task force might recommend 
The Medical Staff, Risk Management, and the Board 177
c05.indd 177 3/2/09 12:12:43 PM
178 Governance of the Health Care Organization
(a) adding, expanding, reducing, or eliminating clinical or new services; (b) recruiting 
new practitioners to meet clinical service needs; (c) identifying specialties which are 
recruitment priorities; or (d) setting organizational criteria for applicants in specialties 
in which applications will be accepted. Examples of such criteria may include 
 “ Potential applicants must indicate an intention to actively use the hospital ’ s facilities 
to permit reasonable monitoring of their practices and to assure working familiarity 
with the hospital ’ s technology, regulations, procedures, and personnel ” [or] “ Potential 
applicants must be willing to work with the medical staff and hospital to develop protocols and best practices in their specialties, to practice in accordance with such protocols or to document the reasons for variance, and to attend meetings at which such 
practices and protocols are reviewed and improved. ” 
 Additional organizational criteria may relate to fi nancial concerns, including 
whether physicians who have confl icting fi nancial relationships should be permitted to 
serve on the board or in medical staff leadership positions; should be eligible for 
appointment or reappointment to the medical staff or to categories of the staff that 
would give them the ability to participate in the governance of the staff or hospital; 
and should be eligible for fi nancial relationships with, or assistance from, the hospital, 
for example, employment agreements, exclusive contracts, and malpractice premium 
assistance. 
Step 7: Board Adopts Plan The board adopts a plan that is reviewed and revised on a 
regular basis, at least every three years. 
 SUMMARY 
 The ever - expanding responsibilities that health care organization governing boards 
face today make it more important than ever that individuals who support governance, 
such as risk management professionals, are up to the task. Health care governing 
boards have always been ultimately responsible for the quality of patient care provided, physician performance, risk management, and appointment and disciplining of 
physicians. In the future, the responsibilities of health care governing board will continue to increase. 
 Current media emphasis on medical errors will encourage boards to be proactive 
in monitoring and improving quality data, and the fallout from the recent corporate 
accounting scandals is certain to result in greater board responsibility for nonprofi t 
corporate fi nancial statements. The necessity for risk management in organizations 
other than the hospital is growing as lawyers for plaintiffs look for additional deep 
pockets to pay claims. 
 This will only intensify if the medical professional liability insurance crisis becomes 
more widespread. A strong, cooperative relationship among an organization ’ s risk management professional, hospital management, and medical staff committees with quality 
responsibilities can ensure that the organization ’ s loss from legal liability is reduced or 
even eliminated. 
c05.indd 178 3/2/09 12:12:44 PM
 KEY TERMS 
 Allied health professional 
 Corporate compliance 
 Corporate liability 
 Credentialing 
 Director 
 Duty of care 
 Duty of loyalty 
 Ethics 
 Fiduciary duty 
 For - profi t hospital 
 Loss control 
Organizational culture
 Patient safety 
 Risk control techniques 
 Risk management 
 Sarbanes - Oxley Act 
 Trustee 
 Volunteer Protection Act of 1997 
 ACRONYMS 
 CEO 
SEC
Notes 179
 NOTES 
 1. Panel on the Nonprofi t Sector. Strengthening Transparency, Governance, and 
Accountability of Charitable Organizations: A Final Report to Congress and the 
Nonprofi t Sector. Washington, D.C.: Panel on the Nonprofi t Sector, June 2005, 
p. 75. 
 2. Sen. Charles Grassley, news conference of the Panel on the Nonprofi t Sector ’ s 
Final Report, June 22, 2005. 
 3. U.S. Sentencing Commission. “ Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations, ” 
 § 8A1.1, application note 1. 
 4. Ibid., § 8B2.1(b)(2)(A). 
 5. Ibid., § 8B2.1, application note 1. 
 6. Seidman, D. “ What Every Board Member Needs to Know About Compliance. ” 
Compliance Today, July 2005, pp. 6, 9. 
 7. 42 USCA § 14505(4)(A)(B). 
 8. Ibid., § 14505(6)(A)(B). 
 9. Ibid., § 14503(a)(1)(3). 
 10. Ibid., § 14503(e)(1). 
 11. Orlikoff, J. E. “ The Health Care Organization Governing Board. ” In R. L. Carroll 
(ed.), Risk Management Handbook for Health Care Organizations, 3rd ed. San 
Francisco: Jossey - Bass, 2001. 
c05.indd 179 3/2/09 12:12:44 PM
180 Governance of the Health Care Organization
 12. Mycek, S. “ Accountability Stops Here: Educating the Board to Meet Its 
Responsibilities. ” Trustee, 2002, 55(6), 13. 
 13. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. “ Glossary, ” http://www.cms.hhs.gov/
apps/glossary/ 
 14. Strenger, E. W. “ The Data Game. ” Trustee, 1997, 50(4), 28. 
 15. This entire section is from “ Medical Staff Development Plans, ” Action Kit for 
Hospital Trustees, Jan. - Feb. 2004. Copyright © 2004 by Horty, Springer, & 
Mattern, P.C. Reprinted with permission. 
c05.indd 180 3/2/09 12:12:44 PM
181
CHAPTER
6
EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS 
FOR THE IDENTIFICATION 
OF ORG ANIZATIONAL 
RISKS 
 ROBERTA L. CARROLL 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to compare formal and informal methods for reporting adverse 
events in a health care organization 
■ To be able to identify why risk identifi cation is a critical component in the risk 
management process 
■ To be able to recognize barriers to incident reporting 
■ To be able to identify and describe three internal and three external event 
reporting systems 
■ To be able to describe how the implementation of a risk management information system can assist in the identifi cation and analysis of organizational risk 
c06.indd 181 3/3/09 3:32:47 PM
182 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 The effectiveness of a risk management program is commensurate with the organization ’ s ability to identify and analyze its risk exposure. Risk management professionals 
use a fi ve - step decision - making process developed by the Insurance Institute of 
America 1
 and supported by the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. 2
This is the foundation for health care risk management programs. Its fi rst step is identifying and analyzing an organization ’ s exposure to loss. This is the starting point for 
all risk initiatives. 
 The principles of risk identifi cation and analysis can be used in all care settings 
and with all programs regardless of scope or size. All care settings, from an acute care 
hospital, home health agency, skilled nursing facility, and ambulatory surgery center 
to a physician group practice, fi nd that early identifi cation and analysis are pivotal to 
risk management program success. 
 Program scope can vary within the same type of care settings. One health care risk 
management program is just that: one health care risk management program. Factors 
on which program scope might be based include the following: 
■ Services. Services offered are prioritized by the frequency and severity of 
losses or are known to be problematic in the industry. For example, most risk management professionals promote patient safety in obstetrical practices even if there have 
been no liability lawsuits. On the other hand, if the organization does not have a labor 
and delivery unit, the only aspect of obstetrical risk of concern for the risk management 
professional is whether or not the emergency department manages laboring patients 
properly under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA). 
■ Locale. Several states have statutes that require the implementation of a risk 
management program. For example, Florida requires risk management programs in 
hospitals, 3
 long - term care facilities, 4
 and HMOs. 5
 One component of these programs is 
the development and implementation of an incident reporting system. 
■ Skill, expertise, and interest of the risk management professional. 
■ Organizational environment and culture. The more caring, trusting, and open 
to process change an organization is, the more robust and more effective are its risk 
management programs. 
 Regardless of the setting or scope, all risk management programs must identify 
and analyze exposure to loss. This is the premise on which this chapter is written. 
 EARLY IDENTIFICATION OF EXPOSURE TO LOSS 
 Tactical initiatives that help an organization identify risk may be thought of as early 
warning systems. The risk management professional is often best positioned to implement such systems when they are based on a comprehensive assessment of organizational risk. 
 Health care risk management programs employ many such initiatives to identify 
in a timely manner the events, activities, initiatives, practices, systems, and processes 
that can threaten or contribute to loss. One example is the inclusion of near misses or 
c06.indd 182 3/3/09 3:32:49 PM
close calls in the reporting system of many health care organizations. In this chapter, 
near misses and close calls are included in the defi nition of an incident. 
 Getting Started: Risk Identifi cation 
 If an organization does not identify real, threatened, or perceived exposure to loss, it 
will be unable to implement risk control techniques necessary to eliminate the exposure, minimize the loss, or implement fi nancing measures to pay for losses that do 
occur despite best efforts. Because all other activities stem from this fi rst step in the 
risk management process, it is a critical component of all risk management programs. 
 Assessment of organizational risk is a logical fi rst step in program development 
and a useful process when evaluating the effectiveness of current programs. Identifying 
risk across an organization ’ s structure or on an enterprisewide basis in what is now 
termed enterprise risk management allows the risk management professional to do all 
of the following: 
■ Identify all risks confronting the organization regardless of organizational 
setting. Risk management professionals need not act alone in this process. It is wise to 
engage others who have knowledge of the risks inherent in areas under their supervision. This is particularly true where the risk management professional might lack technical expertise and need the assistance of subject matter experts. 
■ Identify and analyze the relationship among risks. What is the synergistic 
relationship among risks? For example, consider how risks associated with human 
capital (personnel risk) such as staffi ng shortages, fatigue, low morale, turnover, and 
intimidation can increase the possibility of medical errors. Identifying risk across the 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ The effectiveness of a risk management program is directly related to the organization’s ability to identify and manage its exposure to loss.
■ Early warning systems alert the risk management professional to adverse events, 
incidents, occurrences, potentially compensable events, process and systems errors, claims, and near misses.
■ The identifi cation and analysis of risks on an enterprisewide basis encourages the 
risk management professional to look beyond operational or clinical risks.
■ Although some states protect peer review, quality, risk, and patient safety data, information assembled from adverse event and medical error reporting systems 
does not enjoy federal protection.
■ All employees have the responsibility to identify risks to the organization.
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 183
c06.indd 183 3/3/09 3:32:49 PM
184 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
organization ’ s continuum of care will allow the risk management professional to gain 
a better understanding of the relationships that exist among risks. 
■ Understand organizational dynamics and their effect on culture and the 
environment. 
■ Corroborate the organization ’ s mission, vision, and strategy. 
■ Understand the organization ’ s structure and identify lines of business, units, 
divisions, and programs. Engaging staff in identifying risks in their areas of responsibility allows the risk management professional to facilitate and partake in the assessment process and empowers the staff to follow through with any recommendations. 
Such an approach also produces the most relevant solutions. Given the opportunity to 
contribute, staff who work daily in specifi c units or divisions are in the best position 
to identify areas of weakness and risk and can offer meaningful and sustainable 
solutions. 
■ Educate senior leadership in understanding the risk exposure of the organization. Risk management professionals are perfectly positioned to see risk from an organizationwide perspective — the “ big picture. ” This understanding will support the 
offering of educational initiatives to the board of directors, medical staff leadership, 
and administrative leadership on risk issues that affect mission, vision, and strategy. 
■ Garner support necessary to develop and implement future solutions. 
■ Build credibility and promote collaboration for risk management activities. 
 Risk management professionals do not act alone. They engage all members of the 
organization in identifying and analyzing exposure to loss. 
 Knowledge of the organization is crucial to the success of risk management programs. The consequences of not thoroughly understanding the organization can 
threaten and weaken a risk management program by causing loss of trust and credibility; wasting resources (money, time, and staff support) by focusing effort in areas that 
do not signifi cantly affect quality outcomes, patient safety, and fi scal strength; and 
diminishing the role of risk management professionals by charging them with tasks 
that do not reduce risk or add value to the organization ’ s bottom line. An understanding of this last point can be reached by asking the following question: “ What adds 
more value to the organization and promotes patient safety, a risk management professional charged with locating lost patient items (teeth, canes, glasses) or a risk management professional charged with reducing variability and risk within the labor and 
delivery unit? ” 
 Although the primary business of health care is the delivery of safe and effective 
patient care, note that not all organizational risk management activities or programs 
should focus exclusively on clinical or patient - related risk. The identifi cation and analysis of risk on an enterprisewide basis encourages the risk management professional to 
identify and analyze other areas of risk beyond what is referred to as operational or 
clinical risk. Those other areas include risks associated with the fi nancial, human capital, legal, technological, regulatory, and hazard environments. This chapter is focused 
on identifying and analyzing patient - related risk. 
c06.indd 184 3/3/09 3:32:50 PM
 Early Warning of Risks 
 Once the risk management professional understands the business of the organization 
and the risk inherent in its operations, the next step is to review existing early warning 
systems and implement new systems as necessary. Early warning systems alert the risk 
management professional to adverse events — preventable and unpreventable, incidents, occurrences, potentially compensable events, and claims. Systems for identifying potential risk and loss - producing incidents vary among organizations. Although 
risk can differ in frequency, complexity, and severity depending on the health care 
delivery setting (for example, the risk of pressure ulcers and elopement are greater in 
a long - term care setting than in an acute care hospital), the risk management process 
and need for a robust early warning system are the same. Internal early warning systems for the identifi cation of risk can be formal or informal reporting and notifi cation 
mechanisms. Reporting systems are used internally by the organization and externally 
for reporting to outside parties. Reporting systems can be mandatory or voluntary. 
 Formal Internal Reporting Methods 
 Formal risk identifi cation systems are those that follow policies and procedures. 
Typically, these systems are implemented to comply with requirements by commercial insurance carriers as a requisite for coverage, alternative risk fi nancing arrangements such as programs of self - insurance (captives, risk retention groups, trusts, and 
so on), compliance with state statutes and other regulatory requirements, and to meet 
standards such as those promulgated by The Joint Commission, the Utilization 
Review Accreditation Committee (URAC), the Commission for Accreditation of 
Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF), and the National Committee for Quality Assurance 
(NCQA). 
The Incident Report Commercial insurance companies developed the incident 
report in the early 1960s as a means of event, claim, or loss notifi cation. Most industries used incident reports to give notice to their carriers of an event that might give 
rise to a claim. In health care specifi cally, these reports were forms on which to 
record basic information about the patient, any other potential claimants, or third 
parties in the case of general liability claims. Included were name, other identifying 
information associated with the potential claimant, and a brief description of the 
incident. In addition, many forms required that follow - up information be recorded by 
the reporter confi rming that the incident had been adequately addressed with appropriate intervention. Forms such as these were adopted for use in the majority of U.S. 
hospitals and other health care organizations. In fact, many insurance companies still 
provide the incident report forms and incident reporting protocols used in insured 
facilities today. 
 Traditionally, incident reporting has been the cornerstone of health care risk management. Generally, an incident is defi ned as any happening that is not consistent with 
the routine care of a particular patient or an event that is not consistent with the normal 
operations of a particular organization. Examples of incidents might include a union 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 185
c06.indd 185 3/3/09 3:32:51 PM
186 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
strike, criminal acts such as homicide or burglary, wrong - site or wrong - patient surgery, 
medication errors, or a physical disaster such as a hurricane, a bioterrorism threat, or 
the onset of mold contamination. The occurrence of an incident should trigger completion of a report sent to risk management and other necessary parties, depending on the 
organization ’ s policy and, as a general rule, on a “ need to know ” basis. The “ need to 
know ” standard must be reviewed annually for legal requirements to ensure that the 
confi dentiality of incident report information is maintained and the need as defi ned 
still exists. 
 Incident report data should be collected, coded for study, and analyzed to determine whether there are any trends that represent real or potential problems in the 
delivery of care or service. The results of this analysis should be distributed and discussed with the individuals and departments involved and those authorized to promote 
changes in protocol, policy, and procedures. The analysis may reveal positive fi ndings, 
which may be disseminated to employees or members of the medical staff, and issues 
of concern that should be addressed in a timely manner using the committee structures, problem resolution processes, and peer review mechanisms (if applicable) at the 
organization. 
 Long - term care (LTC) facilities — including skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) and 
assisted living facilities (ALFs), managed care organizations (MCOs), and home 
health care organizations (HHCs) — have designed and implemented reporting mechanisms to capture event data necessary for risk management and loss prevention efforts. 
Historically, these organizations have placed less emphasis on true risk identifi cation 
systems given their minimal medical professional liability experience. For example, 
over the past several years, the loss experience of LTC organizations has increased in 
terms of both frequency and severity of claims. Leading causes of loss are failure to 
provide adequate wound care, failure to monitor status of nutrition, elopement, pressure ulcers, abuse and neglect, and medication errors. The LTC industry has recently 
invested considerable time and effort in designing and implementing incident reporting systems for providers of care.
 Electronic Incident Reporting 
 The public, including the organization ’ s employee workforce and patient population, 
are in many instances experienced users of technology. Personal use of home computers, 
cellular phones, and personal digital assistants (PDAs) are the norm. Advances in technology, although somewhat slow in coming to health care documentation systems, are 
rapidly changing how and when care is delivered. Risk management professionals 
have increasingly embraced the computerization of risk management data. There are 
many commercially available prepackaged programs designed to track risk management data, including front - end reporting, statistical analysis, claims management, and 
insurance schedules. Database management programs can be used to customize an 
organization ’ s risk management information needs. 
 More than two dozen risk management information systems (RMISs) are currently available to risk management professionals. As with any new system or program, 
c06.indd 186 3/3/09 3:32:51 PM
implementing an RMIS is not without risk. The development of policies and procedures 
that specifi cally address the risk associated with computerized systems is a priority. 
Specifi c issues of concern include computer failures, breaches of security, unauthorized access to data, authority and access levels, pass code protection, and compliance 
with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) for 
electronic data that contain protected health information. 
 Many RMISs promote statistical analysis and offer graphic capabilities for benchmarking, allowing risk management professionals to compare their organization with 
similar organizations or signifi cant national trends. Many risk management professionals fi nd that implementing an RMIS decreases the common problems of underreporting and lack of timeliness because those reporting are getting timely feedback 
through more comprehensive and understandable computer - generated reports. 
 An effective RMIS must have a data collection form or computer screens that allow 
information to be recorded accurately, quickly, and in a manner that facilitates coding 
and entry. For example, incident report forms should be either precoded or designed for 
easy coding. This will ensure fast and accurate entry and swift retrieval of information. 
These forms often contain check - off boxes and limited space for narrative descriptions. 
New technology, such as scanning software, promotes an easier means of converting 
paper documents to soft data, which can then be manipulated using the software. 
 Although a user - friendly input mechanism is vital to encourage reporting, the 
most important element of a successful computerized system is its ability to generate 
useful and readable reports. Without the capacity to produce aggregate reports and 
data trends, the value of a computerized system is minimal. The whole purpose of 
automating the data is to promote easy tracking and facilitate trend analysis, which can 
help the organization identify patterns and problems by comparing current data with 
those of last month, last year, and perhaps the past fi ve years. 
 Without meaningful data, it is easy to forget that the purpose of identifi cation and 
analysis of incident report data is the development and implementation of systems 
and processes to minimize the potential for loss while enhancing patient care. Therefore, 
systems that generate clear and meaningful information are essential to risk control. 
 Variables related to occurrences that might be analyzed (regardless of the early 
warning system used) include the following: 
■ Date of occurrence. This is also sometimes called date of loss or incident or 
event date. This information is valuable for providing trending information to determine whether the number of occurrences has increased, decreased, or remained stable 
over time. 
■ Date of report. Tracking the date of occurrence in relationship to the date of 
report is one metric by which risk management professionals can evaluate the effectiveness of the organization ’ s early warning system. When a time lag in reporting is 
noted, systems, processes, policies, and procedures should be reviewed by the risk 
management professional to determine the reason for late notifi cation. The goal is to 
receive few surprises in the future and for adverse events to be known at the time of 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 187
c06.indd 187 3/3/09 3:32:51 PM
188 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
their occurrence. Failure to report occurrences in a timely manner will not allow the 
risk management professional to implement risk control techniques to mitigate damages or to prevent future occurrences. The date of report also needs descriptors. To 
whom was the report sent on this date? In a large integrated system, does the date of 
report refer to when central risk management received the report, when the local facility risk management professional received the report, or when the insurance carrier 
received the fi rst report or notice of an event? When possible, the RMIS should allow 
for the tracking of multiple dates in such circumstances. 
■ Date of lawsuit or notice of intent to fi le a lawsuit. Tracking the fi ling date of 
a lawsuit will allow the risk management professional to further evaluate the effectiveness of the organization ’ s early warning systems by identifying how many lawsuits 
were based on occurrences not previously known and reported to the risk management 
professional. Key metrics to monitor include time from the date of occurrence to the 
date of report to the date of fi ling suit or intent to fi le suit. These dates are used to evaluate the timeliness and effectiveness of the early warning system. 
■ Type of occurrence. Looking at types of occurrences (for example, falls, medication - related errors, diagnosis - related errors, treatment - related events, and so on) 
and their frequency is important when trying to prioritize loss prevention activities. 
■ Location of the occurrence. Analyzing where adverse occurrences are most 
likely to occur allows for targeted loss prevention activities. The effectiveness of these 
activities supports the generation of department - specifi c reports. These reports support 
departmental review and implementation of subsequent risk control activities. 
■ Severity of injury. By prioritizing loss prevention activities to address occurrences with the highest likelihood of severe injury, the risk management professional 
can respond to possible adverse events with the greatest potential for high cost. (To 
review an index of categories of medical errors, see the section on NCC - MERP reporting under “ Voluntary Reporting Systems ” later in this chapter.) 
 Other elements of the occurrence that can be examined for trends include patient 
demographics, such as age, gender, marital status, occupation, method of payment, 
and diagnosis; staff characteristics, such as name, title, employment status (for example, agency versus staff nurse) of all employees involved in the occurrence or name, 
department, and specialty of all involved physicians; and other occurrence - related 
details, such as time and shift of the occurrence, physical environment at the time of 
the occurrence (such as wet fl oor or inoperative call light), location of the occurrence 
within the organization, or the status of family training in home - care situations. 
 The selection of a computerized RMIS is not an easy task. Expense, ease of use, 
and utility are important factors in choosing to either build or buy a system to manage 
reporting and data manipulation. Compatibility with the clinical and fi nancial data 
systems currently in place at the organization is also a key decision element. To evaluate RMIS vendors and their products and services, risk management professionals 
might prepare an RMIS vendor request for proposals (RFP). The RFP process takes 
time and can be enhanced with the assistance of others in the organization with specialized skills, such as representatives from information technology (IT), the privacy 
c06.indd 188 3/3/09 3:32:52 PM
offi cer, fi nance, legal, quality improvement, and nursing. By involving these resources, 
the risk management professional can also ensure that needs of key risk management 
program stakeholders are met. Risk management professionals should plan early, as 
the process can take three to six months at a minimum from the development of a RFP 
to the selection of a vendor. In addition, visiting other organizations that use the system being considered can provide valuable information. 
Contents of the Incident Report 
 Today ’ s incident report forms vary in content and structure and from organization to 
organization throughout the continuum of care. Recent emphasis has been placed on 
making forms user - friendly, less cumbersome, and more likely to be used, given the 
time constraints and staffi ng shortages that affect the nursing staff, who are major contributors to reporting systems. 
 Although the majority of risk management programs use electronic RMISs, some 
reporting systems that still use a pencil - and - paper method remain effective. Not all 
medical errors can be captured in an electronic system, and a paper - based portable tool 
might identify adverse events and incidents previously unknown. Manual incident 
report forms can be an effective method for gathering information in some circumstances. These manual forms might have only preprinted data elements for check - off, 
whereas others have extensive narrative portions including description of the event, 
steps taken after the event, follow - up, and action plans. Regardless of format, most 
incident reports including the following basic information: 
■ Demographic information may include name, home address, and telephone 
number of the patient, visitor, or employee involved in the incident and medical record 
number, if the involved party is a patient. This information is used to identify the 
potential claimant and witnesses in case of litigation. Typically, most forms, particularly those in acute care settings, will have a section in which a patient ’ s identifi er 
 “ plate ” can be imprinted directly on the form. 
■ Facility - related information, such as admission or visit date, business number 
(a patient ’ s medical record number does not change; however, a different business 
number is generated for each admission), patient room number, and admitting diagnosis or presenting complaint. This information is used on an aggregate basis to determine whether certain units of the system are more incident - prone. Analyzing this 
information for trends promotes risk management interventions and action plans to 
manage the frequency of incidents reported. 
■ Socioeconomic data on the individual involved in the occurrence, such as 
age, gender, marital status, employment, and insurance status, help assess the severity 
of any potential loss. For example, collecting employment status helps the risk management professional and legal counsel determine the potential for economic damages 
that includes loss of wages or salary. 
■ Description of the incident and of the facts surrounding the event — location 
of the incident; type of incident (medication error, treatment error, diagnostic error, 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 189
c06.indd 189 3/3/09 3:32:52 PM
190 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
slip and fall, lost property, elopement, and so on); extent of injury incurred; pertinent 
environmental fi ndings (position of bed rails, condition of fl oor surfaces, physical 
defects in equipment, and the like); and results of any physical examination of the 
patient, visitor, or employee by clinical staff — is often provided by the staff in 
the emergency department. 
 Staff Participation in Incident Reporting 
 Incident reporting is the duty and responsibility of all staff, including employed and voluntary members of the medical staff, not just the nursing department. To enhance the 
effectiveness of the incident report as a tool for risk management, the risk management 
professional should encourage physicians, residents, interns, pharmacists, laboratory 
personnel, and other ancillary service personnel to report incidents. Working with these 
practitioners to identify the types of incidents to be reported is a worthwhile exercise. 
 For the risk management professional in an integrated delivery system (IDS), staff 
participation in incident reporting presents a signifi cant challenge. The various organizations that encompass the IDS can be geographically distant from each other; as a 
result, promoting the consistent and timely reporting of incidents demands effective 
staff education. Simplicity of the reporting system and easy accessibility to user training are especially important in encouraging staff members in widely dispersed locations to report incidents. 6
 For these systems, risk management professionals should 
include training and development for home health care providers, private physician 
offi ces, ambulatory care centers, mobile mammogram units, and so on. Many providers have turned to the Web - or intranet - based programs to provide access to such training and development. 
 One of the greatest challenges risk management professionals face today is dealing with underreporting and the negative perceptions of incident reports. Although 
organizations are changing the work environment and culture to eliminate the punitive 
aspects associated with incident reporting, the negative aspects continue nonetheless. 
Table 6.1 lists common reasons for failing to submit incident reports. 
 These barriers result in no reporting or slow reporting with delayed follow - up. By 
providing feedback on the results of investigation and problem resolution, the risk 
management professional can demonstrate the value of early and timely reporting. 
Once staff see the value of systematically identifying and addressing problems in 
patient care, they often are more motivated to report incidents. 
 The incident report should not be used as either a punitive measure for disciplining employees or as a vehicle for airing interpersonal disagreements. The risk management professional should make every effort to ensure that incident reports are used 
properly. Unfortunately, if the culture of the organization is one in which these reports 
have been used and continue to be used as a disciplinary tool or in a punitive manner, 
the risk management professional will have to spend time trying to make incremental 
changes to the environment — no easy task. This is not to say that repeated medication 
errors that lead to patient injury from a single practitioner might not involve some 
form of discipline. Under these circumstances, the risk management professional 
c06.indd 190 3/3/09 3:32:53 PM
TABLE 6.1 Common Barriers to Incident Reporting
Staff feel overworked with not enough time to report.
Reports are viewed as a nonclinical safety function and not for clinical events.
Staff are busy at the time of the incident and then forget to fi le a report.
Perception is that completion of an incident report is a nursing function only.
Reporter fears embarrassment or wants to avoid embarrassing a coworker.
Reporter does not want to be considered a whistleblower or tattletale.
Routine reminders or periodic refreshers on the importance of reporting are lacking.
Individual thought someone else would complete the incident report.
Nonphysicians are uncomfortable reporting on physicians.
Person lacks the computer skills needed to complete the form online.
Confi dentiality is lacking; anonymous reporting is not allowed.
Reporting is thought to be unnecessary due to lack of adverse outcome feedback or follow-up.
Person fears punishment, disciplinary action, or retribution.
Person fears a lawsuit, having to testify, or having to go to court.
The value of fi ling or completing incident reports is uncertain.
Administrative support is lacking.
Reporting policies and procedures are inadequate.
What constitutes a reportable incident is unclear.
Computer access is diffi cult or incident report forms are unavailable.
Person fears placing the facility at risk.
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 191
c06.indd 191 3/3/09 3:32:53 PM
192 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
should keep the focus on the elements of the practitioner ’ s performance that contributed to the error and refer to the human resource department or the practitioner ’ s manager any necessary disciplinary action. 
 Incident report training should stress that the report is a factual account of what 
happened; no fi nger - pointing or accusatory language should be included. Incident 
reports are meant to record “ just the facts, ” avoiding subjective, hearsay, or third - party 
opinions of what did or did not happen. If a grievous error was made resulting in a 
severe outcome for the patient, an employee might require counseling regarding the 
incident, and measures to prevent recurrence could be implemented. But the incident 
report should not be used as evidence against the employee in a disciplinary procedure 
and should not be placed in the personnel fi le. 
 Effectiveness of the reporting process can be enhanced by written policies and 
procedures that clearly defi ne a reportable incident. Incident reports have been used to 
report major categories of events, including patient slips and falls, medication errors, 
intravenous infusion problems, and lost valuables. Effectiveness has been limited due 
in part to the mistaken belief that the incident report is a document prepared for the 
facility ’ s environment of care or safety committee. Although events such as patient 
falls might occur frequently, claims studies clearly show that they are not the source of 
greatest payout in health care – related claims. By explaining the purpose and content 
of the incident report through in - service training and a clear written defi nition of what 
constitutes a reportable incident, the risk management professional can broaden the 
types of incidents reported to include clinically related events. 
 Finally, staff should be encouraged to complete incident reports promptly, accurately, and completely. Ideally, the form should be completed immediately or as soon 
as possible after the occurrence. Many organizations use a “ twenty - four - hour rule, ” 
requiring reporting within twenty - four hours of the event or knowledge of the event. 
It is important that the risk management professional be aware of any legally mandated requirements that the incident report must be received within a specifi c time 
frame. For accuracy ’ s sake, the individual who has the most knowledge about the 
event — that is, the employee involved in the occurrence, an employee witness, or 
the employee to whom it was reported — should report the incident. If the incident 
report requires that follow - up information be entered directly onto the form, policies 
should ensure that this information is transmitted rapidly, perhaps by telephone to the 
risk management professional, and that the completed incident report be forwarded 
to risk management as soon as possible. Any delay in transmitting information could 
prevent the risk management professional from reacting immediately to the event and 
following up in a timely manner. Immediacy of information and follow - up action is 
particularly critical in instances when the patient or other parties involved in the incident need medical attention to stabilize a condition brought on by the untoward or 
unanticipated event. 
 The analysis of incident reports will allow the risk management professional 
to evaluate processes, systems, protocols, and practices that give rise to losses. Efforts to 
c06.indd 192 3/3/09 3:32:54 PM
TABLE 6.2. Key Points to Remember About Incident Reports
Notify risk management within twenty-four hours of an incident either in person, 
telephonically, or by using the formal incident reporting system.
Record only the facts related to the event.
Record the names of any witnesses and responsible parties with knowledge or 
involvement.
Record the time and location of the incident.
For paper-based systems, use blue- or black-ink ballpoint pens (no felt-tip pens).
Use appropriate patient descriptors such as age and sex.
Record information on the condition of the patient, resident, or client after the incident, 
such as “resident brought to radiology, fi ndings negative for fracture.”
Record in the patient’s medical record a factual account of any unanticipated events 
involving patient injury.
Incident reports should go directly to risk management and not through any other 
department fi rst.
Incident report forms should be received in a timely manner for review by the risk 
management professional. In some jurisdictions, this time is mandated by law.a
 Receipt of 
incident reports should not be delayed for follow-up or extra review and signatures.
mitigate loss can then be targeted and focused on areas where incidents have been frequent 
or losses have been severe. 
 When educating staff on the policies and procedures for completing an incident 
report, the same questions that are asked during an investigative interview are useful: 
What happened? How did it happen? When did the event take place? How might it be 
prevented in the future? Who was involved? And so on. Risk management professionals should highlight key points for participants such as members of the medical 
staff, offi ce managers, and home health aides. A listing of those key points appears in 
Table 6.2 . 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 193
 (Continued)
c06.indd 193 3/3/09 3:32:54 PM
194 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
Preserving Incident Report Confi dentiality 
 Although completed incident reports are statements of fact and therefore contain information readily available from other sources, risk management professionals and staff 
should strive to maintain the confi dentiality of these reports and related information. 
The preservation of confi dentiality and any privilege that may attach. encourages 
accurate and frequent reporting, ensures factual information and promotes honesty of 
reports, prevents the perception (usually introduced by plaintiff ’ s counsel) that something “ wrong ” has occurred, and supports an attorney ’ s ability to provide for a proper 
defense. 
 Confi dentiality can be invoked either under state statutes regarding quality assurance studies and peer review activities or risk management activities. Privilege will 
attach as work product protection in anticipation of litigation or as attorney - client 
privilege. 
 To maintain confi dentiality, the original report should be sent to the risk management professional immediately upon completion. As mentioned previously, copies 
should never be made, and the report must never be made part of the medical record. 
 Frequently, a follow - up sheet is attached to the incident report form. This is usually completed by a departmental manager, the nursing supervisor, the nursing home 
TABLE 6.2. (Continued)
The clinical facts surrounding an incident should always be documented in the medical 
record. However, there should be no mention of the fact that a formal incident report has 
been completed.
Never place the incident report in the medical record. This is less of an issue as hospitals 
and other health care organizations move to electronic health records or use of an 
electronic incident reporting system. However, if the organization is using a paper-based 
incident report form, consider making the report form oversized, printed in another color, 
or printed with a colored border or strip—anything that will make it noticeable if placed 
inadvertently in the medical record.
The medical record and incident report are not the place for professional infi ghting. Do not 
use accusatory, threatening, or infl ammatory language. Assignment of blame, liability, or 
fault does not belong in the medical record.
Copying the incident report for any reason should not be permitted.
a
For example, Florida statutes require reporting an incident to the risk manager or designee within 
three business days.
c06.indd 194 3/3/09 3:32:54 PM
administrator, or some other responsible party who has investigated the occurrence 
and, when possible, ascertained the fact pattern of events (cause) leading to the incident. It is important to protect the confi dentiality of this addendum and other related 
information such as photographs and staffi ng records in addition to the actual incident 
report. 
 If managers use incident reports to support quality improvement (QI) studies or 
insist on having the reports for any reason, risk management professionals should suggest that managers review the originals in the risk management offi ce. Once again, it 
is important to ensure that copies are not made and the originals are not removed from 
the fi le. 
 If the incident report is best protected through assertion of attorney - client privilege, the incident report should be reviewed by legal counsel in a timely fashion and 
maintained in specifi cally identifi ed fi les. If report confi dentiality is best achieved 
through statutory protection afforded to QI data and peer review activities, the reports 
must be reviewed through the established QI program. This review can be accomplished when there is a distinct operational link between the risk management and 
quality assurance (performance improvement) departments. It is best to discuss these 
options with legal counsel to determine the best method for preserving confi dentiality, 
keeping in mind state statutes, regulations, and case law. Likewise, the risk management professional should consult with legal counsel regarding procedures for reviewing and maintaining the reports. 
 Risk management professionals and defense counsel have worked tirelessly to 
ensure protection of this type of information. However, recently, health care organizations have found an increasing number of challenges to this protection by plaintiffs ’ 
attorneys and the courts. So remember that while organizations work diligently to 
 protect this information, it must be assumed that all health care information is “ discoverable ” and that the health care organization cannot completely rely on evidentiary 
protections. Given that belief, it is of the utmost importance that only facts should be 
recorded on incident reports — the same facts or information that could be found in 
other documents, including the medical record. 
 Risk management professionals should be aware of efforts and advances in patient 
safety, promotion of and requirements for the disclosure of unanticipated events, and 
the cultural emphasis on honesty in dealing with patients and families. Although some 
people, particularly patients, may perceive the practice of sequestering ( “ hiding ” ) incident reports as undermining the cultural emphasis on disclosure, they must be made to 
understand that incident reports are business records created for a specifi c purpose and 
are not part of the patient ’ s medical record. This should not in any way diminish efforts 
to deal with patients in an open and honest manner with regard to issues that arise during the course of their care and treatment. 
 Contrasted with traditional incident reporting, many organizations are implementing anonymous hotlines. For example, one hospital found that anonymous reporting 
resulted in many times the number of patient safety issues raised via the traditional 
incident report. 7
 The risk management professional will need a clear understanding of 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 195
c06.indd 195 3/3/09 3:32:55 PM
196 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
how the organization approaches these issues before developing relevant policies and 
procedures for incident reporting. 
 Occurrence Reporting 
 Focused occurrence reporting gives staff clear guidelines and specifi c examples of 
reportable incidents, such as the following: 
■ Missed diagnoses or misdiagnoses that result in patient injury, such as failure to diagnose acute myocardial infarction, fractures, serious head trauma, or appendicitis 
■ Surgically related occurrences, such as the wrong patient being operated on, the 
wrong site operated on, the wrong procedure being performed, an incorrect instrument or sponge count, or an unplanned return to the operating room 
■ Treatment - or procedure - related occurrences, such as reactions to contrast material used in a diagnostic procedure, undesirable exposure to X - rays, or burns 
resulting from improper use of hot packs 
■ Blood - related occurrences, such as the wrong type of blood given to the patient, 
transmission of disease via infected blood, or improper use of blood or blood 
products 
■ Intravenous - related occurrences, such as the wrong solution being administered, 
infi ltration of solution, or an incorrect infusion rate 
■ Medication - related occurrences 
■ Lack of adequate follow - up, such as failure to notify a patient of abnormal laboratory fi ndings 
■ Falls 
 Given the attention that patient safety has been afforded via the media since the enactment of the Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act of 2005, the Joint Commission International Center for Patient Safety, and The Joint Commission ’ s National 
Patient Safety Goals, medication safety is at the forefront of the risk management agenda. 
Medication safety programs are based on adverse event reporting systems, human factor 
analysis, and data analysis. Medication - related claims can include the following: 
■ Wrong dosage 
■ Wrong route 
■ Wrong frequency (of rate for IV) 
■ Wrong medication 
■ Wrong choice of medication for condition 
■ Wrong time 
c06.indd 196 3/3/09 3:32:55 PM
■ Wrong administration technique 
■ Wrong patient 
■ Missed dose 
■ Known drug interaction 
■ Known allergy to drug 
■ Wrong reason 
 Ideally, the organization will implement a version of the event reporting system 
that is specifi c to the clinical area to focus on this important risk management concern. 
Many organizations have designed specifi c incident report forms for each clinical and 
operational department. The challenge of such reporting systems is to make certain 
that trends that cross department lines, such as medication errors in the radiology suite 
and the pharmacy, are identifi ed and assessed. 
 Although the majority of these examples apply to the acute care setting, many are 
applicable to other parts of the health care continuum. Medication - related occurrences 
should be reported and tracked in all health care settings, including the private offi ce 
setting. 
 Falls, which are a prevalent cause of injury in long - term care facilities, can occur 
in any setting, as can the development of pressure ulcers, hospital - acquired infections, 
patient elopement, and failure to refer. With the elderly, the resulting injury can be 
severe. Finally, as more primary care is provided in alternative settings such as in the 
home, providers of care in these settings must design incident reporting systems that 
track treatment variances and equipment malfunctions that lead to patient or client 
injury. 
 To further focus the reporting process, many health care organizations defi ne 
reportable occurrences by designated location, such as the emergency department 
(ED), surgical suite, labor and delivery room, high - risk nursery, and so on (see Table 
 6.3 ). For large integrated delivery systems and stand - alone alternative care settings, 
reportable occurrences are designed specifi cally to the type of service offered. By 
TABLE 6.3 Emergency Department Occurrence Reporting Criteria
Any patient who leaves without being seen (LWBS)
Any patient who leaves against medical advice (AMA)
Any patient who returns to the Emergency Department without a scheduled revisit within 
seventy-two hours
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 197
 (Continued)
c06.indd 197 3/3/09 3:32:56 PM
198 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
TABLE 6.3. (Continued)
Any discrepancy in reading the initial (wet read) X-ray from the fi nal read
Inappropriate EMTALA transfer received and transferred or discharged out
Missing or inadequate discharge instructions
Failure to deliver and act on critical test results
Failure to give patient ordered prescriptions
Any incidents of assault or violence
Patient falls
Medication errors
Any recognized failure to diagnose or misdiagnosis
Failure to use or deliver thrombolytics in a timely manner
Failure to initiate treatment in a timely manner
Failure to remove a foreign body
Inadequate staffi ng that affects patient care
Long wait time to be seen that affects quality of care
Misidentifi cation of a patient
Ineffective hand-off to other personnel, unit, or area
Inadequate or missing medication reconciliation
developing lists of specifi c adverse outcomes or events in these high - risk areas, the 
clinical focus of occurrence reporting is addressed, and the incidents that need to be 
reported are made clear. The risk management professional receives these reports 
directly. Because of the highly clinical nature of these data, most facilities will share 
c06.indd 198 3/3/09 3:32:56 PM
this information with quality assurance, performance improvement, or the QI committee. The data can then be peer - reviewed using root cause analyses (to be explained 
shortly). Action plans and incident follow - up will be implemented based on such a 
review. Aggregate reports of this information should be submitted to the QI and risk 
management committees. 
 Occurrence Screening 
 Another method that attempts to identify adverse patient occurrences in clinical areas 
is the occurrence screening process, originally developed by Joyce Craddick of 
Medical Management Analysis International. This system, and many others like it that 
followed, uses a clearly defi ned list of patient occurrences against which patient medical records are screened. The screeners are looking for deviations from practice, policy, and procedures. Criteria for the screens are established in areas that are considered 
to be high - risk, that have a high number of incidents identifi ed as quality - of - care “ red 
fl ags ” to be further evaluated, or in which the effects of an untoward event might have 
disastrous results from an injury standpoint. In the past, most screens were centered 
around clinical events and related administrative occurrences, but they can just as well 
be used for regulatory and fi nancial issues. Criteria are developed and exceptions are 
listed, if applicable. For example, in the operating room, one specifi c criterion that 
may be screened for is proper informed consent documentation. An exception to this 
criterion may be in a case of emergency surgery, where either the patient is unable to 
give consent or there is no time to obtain consent. Another criterion to screen for and 
evaluate, regardless of location in the health care setting, is an unexpected death. There 
are no exceptions to this criterion. In the emergency department, criteria may include 
misread X - rays or readmissions within twenty - four hours. 
 In an inpatient setting, all patient records are reviewed against the criteria within 
forty - eight to seventy - two hours of admission and every three or four days thereafter 
until the patient is discharged. The patient chart also is reviewed approximately two 
weeks after discharge to ensure that compliance with all criteria has been assessed. 
 Results of this screening process are prepared for each admission by trained data 
retrieval personnel (screeners). The abstract is then forwarded to the QI offi ce for 
 follow - up and data collection. When identifi ed, serious occurrences are reported 
immediately by the patient care reviewers to the correct person for action. All occurrences are aggregated to aid in identifying any trends that refl ect patient care problems 
that require remedial action. 
 Occurrence screening can also be effective in other settings; ambulatory care organizations (ACOs), physician group practices, and medical clinics, in particular, have 
found this method useful in identifying sources of risk. Using a checklist, the staff 
review outpatient records for items such as documentation of patient allergies, prescription refi lls, patient notifi cation of test results, and telephone communications. The 
records are also reviewed to see whether they are suffi cient for another practitioner to 
continue the patient ’ s care. 8
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 199
c06.indd 199 3/3/09 3:32:56 PM
200 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 Although occurrence screening is an effective method for identifying adverse 
occurrences, its implementation in most institutions is done entirely under the QI program. The major challenge of this system is how to ensure suffi cient involvement of the 
risk management professional. In some institutions, the risk management professional 
is notifi ed by having the patient care reviewer complete a separate risk management 
notifi cation form for serious adverse patient occurrences. In other instances, the risk 
management professional is part of the quality management team and is apprised of the 
results of the occurrence screening through departmental or QI committee meetings. 
 Regardless of the method chosen, the risk management professional should have 
ready access to these data for the process to be useful to the risk management program. 
In addition, the risk management professional should play a key role in identifying and 
implementing action plans relating to abnormal or increasingly negative data trends. 
 Failure Mode and Effects Analysis and Root Cause Analysis 
 Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) is a risk control technique used to prevent 
the occurrence of loss by analyzing a situation that might create risk at a later time, 
such as a new morphine pump that has been purchased but not been placed in use. By 
conducting a dry run of pump protocols, the staff can identify risk issues that require 
attention before the pump is used. The purpose of FMEA is to identify ways in which 
that process might potentially fail. The goal is to eliminate or reduce the likelihood or 
outcome severity of such a failure. 9
 FMEA is used before an adverse event or incident 
occurs, and it is considered a successful technique for proactive risk management. 
 A root cause analysis (RCA) is a structured analytical methodology used to examine the underlying contributors to an adverse event or condition. Because RCA is 
implemented after an event has occurred, it is considered a reactive risk management 
technique. 
 Health care organizations accredited by The Joint Commission are required to 
conduct a root cause analysis in response to any sentinel event. Joint Commission 
standard LD.5.2 requires facilities to select at least one high - risk process for proactive 
risk assessment each year. This selection is to be based in part on information published periodically by The Joint Commission that identifi es the most frequently occurring types of sentinel events. Organizations should also identify patient safety events 
and high - risk processes for which an FMEA would be valuable. 
 Informal Internal Reporting Methods 
 In addition to the more structured systems of risk identifi cation, such as incident 
reporting, occurrence reporting, and occurrence screening and FMEA, there are many 
other sources of information available to the risk management professional for identifying actual loss - producing events and potential risks, including the following: 
■ Committee meeting minutes, such as from those dealing with performance 
improvement, quality assurance, safety, patient safety, infection control, and bioethics, 
c06.indd 200 3/3/09 3:32:57 PM
as well as those from departmental committees such as morbidity and mortality, tissue 
review, pharmacy and therapeutics, and other quality - or risk - related committees will 
give the risk management professional information not readily available from other 
sources. 
■ Claims data, including a review of both the facility ’ s loss experience over a 
period of time and any national or regional trends as reported in various publications 
will show the organizations ’ frequency and severity of claims as well as highlight 
areas for improvement. Risk management professionals will serve their organizations 
well by tracking regional or national loss trends even if those types of incidents have 
not occurred or been reported in their organization. Planning and being proactive to 
avoid known risks is refl ective of a mature risk management program. 
■ Survey reports, including those from The Joint Commission, the National 
Committee on Quality Assurance (NCQA), the Commission on Accreditation of 
Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF), the federal Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA), the state fi re marshal, state licensure surveys, broker or 
underwriter site assessments, consultant fi ndings, and private review organization 
study results all offer information that will assist the risk management professional in 
identifying organizational risks. 
■ Patient complaints and standardized patient satisfaction surveys can offer the 
risk management professional valuable information from the patient ’ s perspective, a 
view not always ascertained in other reporting methods. 
■ Risk management walking rounds and patient safety walking rounds (commonly called “ rounding ” ), in which the risk management professional is visible and 
available to staff members, encourages the sharing of information that may be viewed 
by certain individuals as too sensitive for a written report. Having a routine presence 
on the units and availability in the offi ce or by pager are important factors in the continuous effort to enhance the early reporting of incidents. 
■ “ Management by walking around ” does not have to be a formalized scheduled process. Risk management professionals need to be visible and available. If the 
staff do not know who the risk managers are, where they are located, and what they 
do, staff members will be much less likely to call or report when they should. 
 Risk management professionals should contact legal counsel to determine how 
best to protect the confi dentiality of any data collected, whether it be through evidentiary protection, quality improvement activity, peer review, or risk management 
 process protections offered in some states. 
Ways to Enhance Reporting Effectiveness The many ways to enhance the effectiveness of the reporting process include the following three: 
■ Ensuring that departmental and medical staff are involved in development of 
the list of reportable occurrences so that there is agreement as to the type of occurrences to report. Physician buy - in is very important in this process. 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 201
c06.indd 201 3/3/09 3:32:57 PM
202 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
■ Streamlining the reporting process so that the paperwork is not burdensome 
and reporting is easy. Because many of the items on the list of reportable incidents 
occur frequently (for example, patients leaving the emergency department against 
medical advice), objective checklists might be more useful than lengthy narrative 
reports. Again, the intent is to improve reporting to improve performance. Simply 
increasing the number of reports is not the ultimate goal; rather receiving reports on 
events that require risk management review and that afford an opportunity to reduce 
the likelihood of legal liability is the objective. 
■ Ensuring that the results of the reporting are given to the departments involved 
as quickly as possible for their review and consideration, thus emphasizing the utility 
of identifying problems in patient care rather than the punitive aspect of potential 
claims. 
 External Reporting 
 Risk management professionals have a wealth of available information from which 
they can develop risk management activities to eliminate or reduce loss. Much of this 
information is generated internally and used internally. However, many groups outside 
the organization also need information. These outside users of an organization ’ s internal data are as varied as is the information they need or want. Some external reports 
are generated to comply with legal mandates, while other information is reported voluntarily as part of collaborative efforts to enhance patient safety. 
 Health care organizations with collaborative ties have the benefi t of identifying 
and analyzing adverse events and occurrences on a larger scale than is possible with 
data generated only internally. In many circumstances, these outside data will direct 
the organizations to conduct their own FMEAs or initiate other proactive measures to 
eliminate loss prior to an occurrence. 
 Let us look at a representative sampling of the external agencies and organizations 
with which health care organizations share data. This list is not an exhaustive and will 
evolve as time goes on. 
The Joint Commission The Joint Commission ’ s sentinel event policy is designed to 
 encourage the self - reporting of medical errors to learn about the relative frequencies and 
underlying causes of sentinel events and to share “ lessons learned ” with other health care 
organizations, thereby reducing the risk of future sentinel event occurrences. Accredited 
organizations must update their internal reporting systems to identify these types of events. 
 According to The Joint Commission, a sentinel event is any unexpected occurrence that involves death or serious physical or psychological injury or the risk thereof. 
Serious injuries specifi cally include a loss of limb or function. The phrase “ or the risk 
thereof ” includes any process variation for which a recurrence would carry a signifi -
cant chance of a serious adverse outcome. 10
 Whenever a sentinel event occurs, the accredited organization is expected to complete a RCA, implement improvements to reduce risk, and monitor the effectiveness 
c06.indd 202 3/3/09 3:32:58 PM
of those improvements. Although the immediate cause of most sentinel events is 
human fallibility, the RCA is expected to dig down to underlying organizational systems and processes that can be altered to reduce the likelihood of human error in the 
future and to protect patients from harm when human error does occur. 
Voluntary Self - Reporting of Sentinel Events 
 Under The Joint Commission ’ s sentinel event policy, a defi ned subset of sentinel events 
is subject to review by The Joint Commission and may be reported on a voluntary 
basis. Only sentinel events that affect recipients of care (patients, clients, and residents) 
and that meet one of the following criteria fall into this category. 11 
■ Unanticipated death or major permanent loss of function not related to the natural 
course of the patient ’ s illness or underlying condition 
■ Suicide of any individual receiving care, treatment, or services in a staffed around -
 the - clock care setting or within seventy - two hours of discharge 
■ Unanticipated death of a full - term infant 
■ Abduction of any individual receiving care, treatment, or services 
■ Discharge of an infant to the wrong family 
■ Rape 12
■ Hemolytic transfusion reaction involving administration of blood or blood products having major blood group incompatibilities 
■ Surgery on the wrong patient or wrong body part 
■ Unintended retention of a foreign object in an individual after surgery or other 
procedure 
■ Severe neonatal hyperbillirubinemia (billirubin 0.30 milligrams/deciliter) 
■ Prolonged fl uoroscopy with cumulative dose greater than 1,500 rads to a single 
fi eld or any delivery of radiotherapy to the wrong body region or greater than 
25 percent above the planned radiotherapy dose 
 Sentinel Events That Are Not Self - Reported 
 Each accredited health care organization is encouraged, but not required, to report to 
The Joint Commission any sentinel event that meets the aforementioned criteria for 
reviewable sentinel events. The Joint Commission may also be informed of a sentinel 
event by some other means, as from a patient, a family member, an employee of the 
organization, or the media. 
 Whether the organization voluntarily reports the event or The Joint Commission 
becomes aware of the event by some other means, there is no difference in the expected 
response, time frames, or review procedures. 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 203
c06.indd 203 3/3/09 3:32:58 PM
204 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
Joint Commission Response 
 When The Joint Commission becomes aware by any means of a sentinel event that 
meets the defi nition of a reviewable sentinel event, the organization is required to prepare a thorough and credible RCA and action plan within forty - fi ve calendar days of 
the event or of the organization ’ s becoming aware of the event and to submit the RCA 
and action plan or otherwise indicate the organization ’ s response to the sentinel event 
under an approved protocol, within forty - fi ve calendar days of the known occurrence 
of the event. 
Advantages to Reporting 
 There are several advantages to the organization that reports a sentinel event to The 
Joint Commission. First, doing so contributes to the general knowledge about sentinel 
events and the reduction of risk for such events in many other organizations. It also 
gives the organization the opportunity to consult with The Joint Commission staff 
while preparing the RCA and action plans. And it enhances the public perception that 
the organization, by collaborating and working with The Joint Commission, is doing 
everything possible to ensure that such an event will not happen again. 
Submission of the RCA and Action Plan 
 The Joint Commission has several procedures to protect the confi dentiality of sentinel 
event information submitted by accredited organizations. 
 For one thing, The Joint Commission advises health care organizations not to provide patient or caregiver identifi ers when reporting sentinel events. An organization 
that experiences a sentinel event should submit two separate documents: the RCA and 
the action plan. The RCA will be returned to the organization once information is 
abstracted and entered into the Joint Commission database. If copies have been made 
for internal review, they will be destroyed after the review. Also, once the action plan 
has been implemented to the satisfaction of The Joint Commission, it will be returned 
to the organization. 
 In addition, if the organization has concerns about increased risk of legal exposure 
as a result of sending the root cause analysis documents to The Joint Commission, the 
following alternative approaches to review the organization ’ s response to the sentinel 
event are acceptable. 
 1. An organization brings root cause analysis and action plan documents to The 
Joint Commission ’ s headquarters for review and then takes the documents back 
on the same day. 
 2. A specially trained surveyor conducts an on - site visit to review the RCA and 
action plan. 
 3. A specially trained surveyor conducts an on - site visit to review the RCA and 
fi ndings, without directly viewing the root cause analysis documents, through a 
series of interviews and review of relevant documentation. 
c06.indd 204 3/3/09 3:32:58 PM
 4. Where the organization affi rms that it meets specifi ed criteria respecting the 
risk of waiving legal protection for RCA information shared with The Joint 
Commission, a specially trained surveyor conducts an on - site visit to interview 
the staff and review relevant documentation to obtain information about the 
process the organization uses in responding to sentinel events and the relevant 
policies and procedures preceding and following the organization ’ s review of 
the specifi c event and the implementation thereof, suffi cient to permit inferences 
about the adequacy of the organization ’ s response to the sentinel event. 
 5. The surveyor also conducts a standards - based survey that traces the patient ’ s 
care, treatment, and services and the organization ’ s management functions relevant to the sentinel event under review. 
 Mandatory Reporting Systems 
 The reporting of adverse events by hospitals is legislated in twenty - seven states. In all 
but one, reporting is mandatory. 13 Many states have developed interpretive guidelines 
to clarify reporting requirements. States with electronic reporting guidelines may have 
developed Internet user guides for their systems. According to state offi cials, mandatory reporting systems play a vital role in hospital oversight by providing information 
about hospital patient safety practices. States use data to investigate individual events 
and ensure that corrective action is taken. Many states also share their data with other 
professional bodies such as licensure boards when professional standards may have 
been breached. 14
 Collaborative Arrangements 
 Publication of the 1999 Institute of Medicine report To Err Is Human: Building a Safer 
Health System, the advent of the Joint Commission – sponsored National Patient Safety 
Goals (NPSG) in 2003, and the prominence of organizations such as the National 
Patient Safety Foundation (NPSF) and the Institute for Safe Medication Practices 
(ISMP) prompted many organizations to develop complementary systems for risk 
identifi cation, particularly in the area of medication errors. These complementary systems broadened traditional incident reporting to involve other professionals not previously included in the reporting and analysis hierarchy, such as the hospital pharmacist. 
The use of technology such as bar coding, robotics for medication dispensing and 
packaging, and computerized physician (provider) order entry systems (CPOE) all 
have the potential to lower the risk profi le associated with medication administration. 
In many organizations, these professionals are now participating in frontline risk management activities. These complementary systems might receive near - miss and error 
reports before review by the risk management professional. Internal collaboration is 
crucial to ensure that the risk management professional is informed on a timely basis 
of the results and fi ndings associated with these new systems. As noted earlier, organizational risk should be assessed on an enterprisewide basis. The risk management 
 professional is the best person to fi ll that role. 
Early Identifi cation of Exposure to Loss 205
c06.indd 205 3/3/09 3:32:59 PM
206 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) collects information in various categories that health care risk management professionals should be aware of and incorporate 
into their reporting plans. These are the Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS), the 
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS), MedWatch Form 3500 for 
reporting as mandated by the Dietary Supplement and Nonprescription Drug Consumer 
Protection Act, and the Manufacturers and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) 
database. 
■ Adverse Event Reporting System. AERS collects information about adverse 
events, medication errors, and product problems that occur after the administration of 
approved drugs and therapeutic biological products. Quarterly (noncumulative) data 
fi les since January 2004 are available for downloading on the AERS Web site ( http://
www.fda.gov/cder/aers/default.htm ). 
■ Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System. VAERS is a cooperative program 
for vaccine safety of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the 
FDA. VAERS collects information about adverse events that occur after the administration of U.S. licensed vaccines. (For more information, go to http://www.vaers.org .) 
■ Dietary Supplement and Nonprescription Drug Consumer Protection Act 
(Pub. L. 109 - 462, 120 Stat. 3469 was signed into law December 22, 2006 amending the 
FD & C Act with respect to adverse event reporting and recordkeeping for dietary supplements. MedWatch Form 3500A is for use by manufacturers, packers, and distributors for 
mandatory reporting of serious adverse events associated with the use of dietary supplements ( http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/ ˜ dms/dsaergui.html ).
■ Manufacturers and User Facility Device Experience Database. Medical 
device reporting (MDR) is the mechanism used by the FDA to receive signifi cant 
medical device adverse event reports from manufacturers, importers, and user facilities. Under the Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990 (SMDA), user facilities (hospitals, 
nursing homes) are required to report suspected medical device – related deaths to both 
the FDA and the manufacturer. User facilities report medical device – related serious 
injuries only to the manufacturer unless the manufacturer is unknown, in which case 
the injury is reported to the FDA. For ease of reporting, the FDA has two forms: 
MedWatch 3500 for voluntary reporting (see Exhibit 6.1 ) and MedWatch 3500A for 
mandatory reporting. 15
 MAUDE has a searchable database of all voluntary reports since June 1993, user 
facility reports since 1991, distributor reports since 1993, and manufacturer reports 
since August 1996 (MDR data fi les, 1992 – 1996). 
 In 1992, the FDA began monitoring medication error reports forwarded from several organizations, including the Institute for Safe Medication Practices and the United 
States Pharmacopeia. MedWatch reports are also reviewed for possible medication 
errors. Furthermore, medication errors are reported to the FDA by manufacturers with 
reports for adverse events that result in serious injury and for which a medication error 
may be a component. 
c06.indd 206 3/3/09 3:32:59 PM
EXHIBIT 6.1. MedWatch Form 3500 for Voluntary Reporting and 
Advice About Reporting
The FDA Safety Information and
Adverse Event Reporting Program Page ____ of ____
A. PATIENT INFORMATION
FDA USE ONLY
Form Approved: OMB No. 0910-0291, Expires: 10/31/08
See OMB statement on reverse.
FORM FDA 3500 (10/05) Submission of a report does not constitutean admission that medical personnel or the product caused or contributed t
 the event.
1.
4. Weight
2. Outcomes Attributed to Adverse Event
(Check all that apply)
Problem with Different Manufacturer of Same Medicine
Check all that apply:
3. Date of Event(mm/dd/yyyy) 4. Date of this Report(mm/dd/yyyy)
5. Describe Event, Problem or Product Use Error
6. Relevant Tests/Laboratory Data, Including Dates
7. Other Relevant History, Including Preexisting Medical Conditions (e.g.
 allergies,race, pregnancy, smoking and alcohol use, liver/kidney problems, etc.)
Product Problem(e.g., defects/malfunctions)
Expiration Date(mm/dd/yyyy)
Female
1. Name, Strength, Manufacturer(from product label)
#1
2. Dose or Amount Frequency Route
#2
#2
#1
#2
3. Dates of Use (If unknown, give duration) from/to (or
best estimate)
Yes
4. Diagnosis or Reason for Use (Indication)
#1 Yes No Doesn't
Apply
8. Event Reappeared After
 Reintroduction?
Yes No
#1
#2
#1 No
#2 Doesn't
Apply
Doesn't
Apply
5. Event Abated After Use
Stopped or Dose Reduced?
6. Lot #
#2 Yes No Doesn't
Apply
#1
For VOLUNTARY reporting of
adverse events, product problems and
product use errors
9. NDC # or Unique ID
B. ADVERSE EVENT, PRODUCT PROBLEM OR ERROR
1. Brand Name
5. Operator of Device
6. If Implanted, Give Date(mm/dd/yyyy)
Product Available for Evaluation? (Do not send product to FDA)
7. If Explanted, Give Date(mm/dd/yyyy)
3. Manufacturer Name, City and State
4. Model #
8. Is this a Single-use Device that was Reprocessed and Reused on a Patient?
or
E. SUSPECT MEDICAL DEVICE
Yes No Returned to Manufacturer on:
Other:
7. Expiration Date
#1
#2
Male
Adverse Event
MED WATCH
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2. Age at Time of Event, or 3. Sex
 Date of Birth:
1. Patient Identifier
kg
Serial # Other #
9. If Yes to Item No. 8, Enter Name and Address of Reprocessor
Catalog #
Lot #
Yes No
Product Use Error
(mm/dd/yyyy)
Triage unit
sequence #
PKNI KCALB ESU RO EPYT ESAEL
Health Professional
Lay User/Patient
#1
In confidence
G. REPORTER (See confidentiality section on back)
Distributor/Importer
1. Name and Address
Product names and therapy dates (exclude treatment of event)
2. Health Professional?
5. If you do NOT want your identity disclosedt
 the manufacturer, place an "X" in this box:
E-mail
3. Occupation 4.Also Reported to:
Yes No
User Facility
Manufacturer
F. OTHER (CONCOMITANT) MEDICAL PRODUCTS
Phone #
#2
D. SUSPECT PRODUCT(S)
C. PRODUCT AVAILABILITY
lb
Hospitalization - initial or prolonged
Required Intervention to Prevent Permanent Impairment/Damage (Devices)
Life-threatening
(mm/dd/yyyy)
Congenital Anomaly/Birth Defect
Death: Disability or Permanent Damage
Other Serious (Important Medical Events)
2. Common Device Name
Food and Drug Administration 207
(Continued)
c06.indd 207 3/3/09 3:32:59 PM
208 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 INSTITUTE FOR SAFE MEDICATION PRACTICES, UNITED STATES 
PHARMACOPEIA, AND NATIONAL COORDINATING COUNCIL 
FOR MEDICATION ERROR REPORTING AND PREVENTION 
 Certain types of events have specifi c risks associated with them, due in large part to the 
complexity of the processes involved in delivering the care or providing the service. 
Medication ordering and administration is one such complex process. It involves many 
people, processes, and systems where failures can occur and can result in errors. Entire 
systems have been developed just to report, analyze, detect trends in, and ultimately 
reduce the occurrence of medication events. One medication - specifi c external event 
reporting system is the Medication Errors Reporting (MER) program, a voluntary 
EXHIBIT 6.1. (Continued)
1-800-FDA-0178 --
1-800-FDA-1088 --
.
.
. To FAX report
To report by phone
Other methods of reporting:
www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm -- To report online
ADVICE ABOUT VOLUNTARY REPORTING Detailed instructions available at: http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/report/consumer/instruct.htm
Report adverse events, product problems or productV
use errors with:
Suspected counterfeit product
Suspected contamination
Questionable stability
Defective components
Poor packaging or labeling
Therapeutic failures (product didn't work)
Medications(drugs or biologics)
Medical devices(including in-vitro diagnostics)
Combination products (medication & medical devices)
Human cells, tissues, and cellular and tissue-based
products
Special nutritional products (dietary supplements,
medical foods, infant formulas)
Cosmetics
.
.
.
.
.
.
Report SERIOUS adverse events. An event is serious
when the patient outcome is:
Death
Life-threatening
Hospitalization - initial or prolonged
Disability or permanent damage
Congenital anomaly/birth defect
Required intervention to prevent permanent
impairment or damage
Other serious (important medical events)
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Report even if:
.
.
Report product problems -quality, performance or
safety concerns such as:
If your report involves a serious adverse event with a
device and it occurred in a facility outside a doctor's
office, that facility may be legally required to report to FDA
and/or the manufacturer. Please notify the person in that
facility who would handle such reporting.
Please Use Address Provided Below -- Fold in Thirds, Tape and Mail
The public reporting burden for this collection of information has been estimated to average 36 minutes per response
including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, an
completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect o
this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden to:
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Food and Drug Administration
Please DO NOT
RETURN this form
to this address.
How to report:
Just fill in the sections that apply to your report
Use section D for all products except medical devices
Attach additional pages if needed
Use a separate form for each patient
Report either to FDA or the manufacturer (or both)
.
.
.
.
.
FORM FDA 3500 (10/05) (Back)
OMB statement:
"An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a
person is not required to respond to, a collection of
information unless it displays a currently valid
OMB control number."
Confidentiality: The patient's identity is held in strict
confidence by FDA and protected to the fullest extent of
the law. FDA will not disclose the reporter's identity in
response to a request from the public, pursuant to the
Freedom of Information Act. The reporter's identity,
including the identity of a self-reporter, may be shared with
the manufacturer unless requested otherwise.
You're not certain the product caused the event
You don't have all the details
-Fold Here- -Fold HereIf your report involves a serious adverse event with a
vaccine call 1-800-822-7967 to report.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration - MedWatch
10903 New Hampshire Avenue
Building 22, Mail Stop 4447
Silver Spring, MD 20993-0002
c06.indd 208 3/3/09 3:33:00 PM
EXHIBIT 6.2. USP Medication Errors Reporting Program Form
Medication Errors: Reporting and Prevention 209
c06.indd 209 3/3/09 3:33:01 PM
210 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
nationwide service operated by the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) in conjunction 
with the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP). The MER program is designed 
to collect information about medication errors from physicians, pharmacists, and 
nurses and to share that information anonymously and develop educational services to 
prevent future errors. (Information about the MER program can be found at http://
www.usp.org or http://www.ismp.org .) 
 The National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention 
(NCC-MERP) realized the need for a standardized categorization of errors. In 1996, 
the NCC-MERP adopted a “ medication error index ” that classifi es errors according to 
severity of outcome. It is hoped that by creating a standardized index, health care institutions and practitioners will track medication errors in a consistent and systematic 
manner. The council encourages the use of the index in all health care delivery settings. Exhibit 6.2 reproduces the USP Medication Errors Reporting Program Form, 
Exhibit 6.3 shows the NCC-MERP Index for Categorizing Medication Errors, and 
Exhibit 6.4 presents the NCC-MERP Index for Categorizing Medication Errors 
Algorithm. (Further information is available at http://www.nccmerp.org .) 
EXHIBIT 6.3. NCC MERP Index for Categorizing Medication Errors
Definitions
Harm
Impairment of the
physical, emotional, or
psychological function or
structure of the body
and/or pain resulting
therefrom.
Monitoring
To observe or record
relevant physiological
or psychological signs.
Intervention
May include change
in therapy or active
medical/surgical
treatment.
Intervention
Necessary to
Sustain Life
Includes cardiovascular
and respiratory support
(e.g., CPR, defibrillation,
intubation, etc.)
No Error
Error, No Harm
Error, Harm
Error, Death
Categry I:
An error occurred that
may have contributed
to patient’s death 
Category A:
Circumstances or
events that have the 
capacity to cause error 
Category B:
An error occurred but
the error did not reach
the patient (An "error
of omission" does
reach the patient)
Category H:
An error occurred that
required intervention
necessary to sustain life 
Category G:
An error occurred that may
have contributed to or
resulted in permanent
patient harm
Category F:
An error occurred that
may have contributed to
or resulted in temporary
harmto the patient and
required initial or
prolonged
hospitalization 
Category E:
An error occurred
that may have
contributed to or resulted
in temporary harm to the
patient and
required intervention 
Category D:
An error occurred
that reached the
patient and required
monitoring to confirm
that it resulted in no
harm to the patient
and/or required
intervention to
preclude
harm 
Category C:
An error occurred that
reached the patient but
did not cause patient harm 
©2001 National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention. All Rights Reserved.
*Permission is hereby granted to reproduce information contained herein provided that such reproduction shall
 not modify the text and shall include the copyright notice appearing on the pages from which it was copied.
c06.indd 210 3/3/09 3:33:10 PM
EXHIBIT 6.4. NCC MERP Index for Categorizing Medication Errors 
Algorithm
Harm
Impairment of the physical, emotional, or 
psychological function or structure of the 
body and/or pain resulting therefrom.
Monitoring
To observe or record relevant physiological or 
psychological signs.
Intervention
May include change in therapy or active 
medical/surgical treatment.
Intervention Necessary to Sustain Life
Includes cardiovascular and respiratory 
support 
(e.g., CPR, defibrillation, intubation, etc.)
*An error of omission does reach the patient.
NCC MERP Index for
Categorizing Medication
Errors Algorithm
Was the harm 
temporary?
Category A
Category B
Category C
Category D
Category E Category F
Category G
Category H
Category I
Did an actual 
error occur?
Did the error reach 
the patient? *
Did the 
error contribute to 
or result in patient 
death?
Was the patient 
harmed?
Was 
intervention to 
preclude harm or extra
monitoring 
required?
Did the 
error require an 
intervention necessary to 
sustain life?
Was the harm 
permanent?
YES
YES
YES YES
NO
YES
YES
NO
YES
NO NO
NO
YES
NO
NO
NO
Did the 
error require 
initial or prolonged 
hospitalization?
NO
YES
Circumstances or events 
that have the capacity to 
cause error
© 2001 National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting 
and Prevention. All Rights Reserved.
 Permission is hereby granted to reproduce information contained herein 
 provided that such reproduction shall not modify the text and shall include 
 the copyright notice appearing on the pages from which it was copied.
Medication Errors: Reporting and Prevention 211
c06.indd 211 3/3/09 3:33:11 PM
212 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 MEDICAL EVENT REPORTING SYSTEM — TRANSFUSION 
 MEDICINE 
 Another example of a specialized area with complex processes involved is transfusion medicine. An online national reporting system for collecting and analyzing 
blood transfusion errors, adverse events, and near misses is available. The voluntary 
reporting system, called the Medical Event Reporting System — Transfusion 
Medicine (MERS - TM), is housed at Columbia University in New York City. It 
allows participants to report anonymously and have access to a central aggregate 
database for comparative purposes. (Information on MERS - TM is available at http://
www.mers - tm.net .) 
 INTENSIVE CARE UNIT SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM 
 Medical specialties are also initiating event reporting systems geared specifi cally to 
patient care issues inherent in those specialties. The Intensive Care Unit Safety 
Reporting System (ICUSRS), run by the Society for Critical Care Medicine and a 
team of investigators from Johns Hopkins University and funded by the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), is an external reporting system specifi cally 
for intensive care units. Its leaders intend to expand the program nationwide. (The 
ICUSRS reporting form can be viewed at http://www.icusrs.org .) 
 PITTSBURGH REGIONAL HEALTHCARE INITIATIVE 
 What began in 1997 as a consortium of Pittsburgh - area medical, business, and civic 
leaders concerned about health care costs has become an innovator in patient safety 
initiatives. The Pittsburgh Regional Healthcare Initiative (PRHI) became one of the 
earliest community projects to experiment with transferring ideas from industry to 
improve safety and quality in health care. 
 PRHI and its partners are now starting to prove that improving quality of care not 
only benefi ts patients but also saves money. A template is emerging that confi rms one 
of PRHI ’ s foundational beliefs: that quality is the business case. (For more information, go to http://www.prhi.org .) 
 OTHER VOLUNTARY PROGRAMS 
 The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) developed in collaboration with NASA 
a voluntary, confi dential, nonpunitive external learning system for employees in May 
2000. This system, called the Patient Safety Reporting System (PSRS), was implemented departmentwide in 2002. It encourages the reporting of any issue or concern 
that affects patient safety. PSRS is modeled after NASA ’ s successful and long - standing 
Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS), which it developed and has administered 
for the Federal Aviation Administration since 1976. 
c06.indd 212 3/3/09 3:33:11 PM
 Part of the success of this program is not only the improved patient safety culture 
of the VA but also the legal and procedural protection afforded under Title 38 United 
States Code Section 5705. (For more information, visit http://www.psrs.arc.nasa.gov/
fl ashsite/programoverview/index.html .) 
 STANDARDIZING A PATIENT SAFETY TAXONOMY: 
THE NATIONAL QUALITY FORUM 
 Until recently, there was no common method to classify or aggregate patient safety 
data because there was no standardized and consensus - driven defi nition of terms or 
language with which all institutions and providers of care could communicate effectively. In 2006, the National Quality Forum (NQF) published a consensus report 
called Standardizing a Patient Safety Taxonomy.16 The NQF has endorsed this taxonomy and conveyed to it the special legal standing of a voluntary consensus standard. 
The taxonomy is not a reporting system. It is a classifi cation methodology by which 
data can be organized and analyzed. It is a tool to allow providers and organizations 
to turn data into information from which patient safety solutions can be developed 
and implemented. The report presents a set of four voluntary consensus standards 
around a specifi c patient safety taxonomy, the Patient Safety Event Taxonomy
(PSET). It was developed by The Joint Commission with the assistance of work 
groups and the federal government. The effectiveness of the PSET will be its usefulness over time in providing better decision support at the point of care and with system design and policy development. 
 PROTECTING SENSITIVE INFORMATION 
 Information assembled from medical error reporting systems does not have federal 
protection from discovery on a global basis. Although many states offer a level of protection through peer review, quality assurance, and risk management laws, attempts to 
implement a federal protection have not been successful to date. Organizations also 
rely on attorney - client privilege and work product protections to safeguard information regarding the investigation and analysis of serious patient events or catastrophic 
claims. Health care organizations shield sensitive information with several acceptable 
methods. Organizations fear the release of information gathered from early warning 
systems because such information could be used against them in the court of public 
opinion and in a court of law. 
 The reporting of catastrophic events to The Joint Commission under its sentinel 
event policy brought this issue to the forefront. Many hospitals determined that preparing RCA reports and reporting sentinel events to The Joint Commission without 
explicit legal protection might place the organizations in jeopardy for the discovery of 
sensitive documents. The Joint Commission, sensitive to constituents ’ concerns, created alternative methods to comply, as discussed earlier in this chapter. 
Protecting Sensitive Information 213
c06.indd 213 3/3/09 3:33:12 PM
214 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 In November 2004, Florida voters passed Amendment 7 by a large majority. As 
Paul Barach, a professor in the Department of Anesthesiology and Medicine and associate dean for patient safety at the University of Miami Medical School, explains: 
Amendment 7, the “ Patients ’Right to Know About Adverse Medical Incidents Act, ” 
allows full access to all patient records related to adverse medical events, turning 
back twenty years of quality assurance (QA) and peer review protection. The broad 
defi nition of the new law allowed patients, families, and their attorneys access to all 
records kept by a facility, including all meetings, morbidity and mortality conferences, 
root cause analyses, and any other professional exchange of information related to a 
patient ’ s injury or death. In April 2005, the Florida legislature partly narrowed the 
application and interpretation of the new law, but damage to the health care system 
had been done. Reporting of events started to decline, and the fear of weakened 
peer review and QA protection had permeated the state. Anecdotal evidence suggests that morbidity and mortality conferences have either stopped or have been 
greatly sanitized; many now use fi ctitious data during case presentations. They have 
put a chill on the reporting of all patient events and have put a damper on patient 
safety and sensitive quality improvement research. The passage of Amendment 7 has 
led to an alarming wave of paranoia among health care providers and administration 
in discussing patient safety initiatives. 17
 The developments in Florida illustrate the diffi culty that health care providers 
have with the reporting of medical errors. A primary cause for a hospital ’ s failure to 
report adverse events might be in direct relationship to its inability to ensure data confi dentiality. The only way to fully protect medical error reports from legal discovery is 
through legislation. 18
 Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act of 2005 
 The Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act of 2005 (PSQIA), signed into law 
July 29, 2005, by President George W. Bush, was established to create a national database on medical errors, create and allow for the development of patient safety organizations (PSO), and provide both a privilege and confi dentiality protection for certain 
patient safety work products (PSWPs) gathered under a patient safety evaluation 
system (PSES). 
 The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) compiles and maintains a list of PSOs whose certifi cation has been accepted by the HHS secretary. The 
fi rst listing of 10 approved PSO ’ s was posted to the PSO Website at AHRQ on 
November 5, 2008. 
 The fi nal rule implementing the PSQIA has not been released. However, because 
of strong interest by the healthcare community and to implement the protections of the 
Patient Safety Act before release of the fi nal rule, HHS has developed PSO Interim 
Guidance that outlines the statutory requirements and relevant sections of the proposed rule that are binding during the interim period. The Notice of the Availability of 
c06.indd 214 3/3/09 3:33:12 PM
the Interim Guidance was announced in the Federal Register on October 14, 2008. For 
more information on the Interim Guidance, please see the press release “ HHS Issues 
Interim Guidance For Patient Safety Organizations” available on the PSO Website at
 http://www.pso.ahrq.gov/index.html. 
 It is still too early to deliver concrete information about the implications and ramifi cations of this new law. It is hoped that over time, the language that now appears to 
be confusing and ambiguous will become clear. Currently, there seem to be more questions than answers: 
■ How will the new law interact with existing state mandatory reporting requirements for medical errors? 
■ How will the law interface with the Patient Safety Event Taxonomy? 
■ How will the law interpret the confi dentiality and privilege for each state? 
■ How will the law further defi ne patient safety work products and patient safety 
evaluation systems? Currently, those defi nitions are vague and ambiguous. 
 SUMMARY 
 Risk management professionals confront challenges today unheard of just a few years 
ago. The requirements for data collection and information reporting are staggering. 
The complexity of risk and development and implementation of sophisticated solutions requires continuous education. Handling risk management responsibilities and 
activities on a daily basis is an accomplishment in its own right. Prioritizing and simplifying activities are therefore important steps in gaining and maintaining control. 
Assessing the organization for its exposure to loss and the development of a robust 
early warning system to identify risk will enable the risk management professional to 
prioritize and focus efforts on risk areas of greatest frequency and severity while 
advancing patient safety efforts. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Attorney - client privilege 
 Confi dentiality 
 Date of occurrence 
 Date of report 
 Electronic incident reporting 
 Failure mode and effects analysis 
 Incident report 
 Institute for Safe Medication 
 Practices 
 The Joint Commission 
 MedWatch 
 Occurrence reporting 
 Occurrence screening 
 Patient Safety and Quality Improvement
 Act of 2005 
 Patient safety evaluation system 
 Patient Safety Event Taxonomy 
 Patient safety work product 
 Request for proposal 
 Root cause analysis 
 Sentinel event 
 Sentinel event policy 
Key Terms 215
c06.indd 215 3/3/09 3:33:13 PM
216 Early Warning Systems for the Identifi cation of Org anizational Risks
 ACRONYMS 
 AERS 
 ALF 
 ASRS 
 CPOE 
 EMTALA 
 FDA 
 FMEA 
 HHC 
 HHS 
 HIPAA 
 HMO 
 ICUSRS 
 ISMP 
 LTC 
 MAUDE 
 MCO 
 MER 
 MERS - TM 
 NCC-MERP 
 NQF 
 PSES 
 PSET 
 PSQIA 
 PSRS 
 PSWP 
 RCA 
 RFP 
 RMIS 
 SMDA 
 SNF 
 USP 
 VAERS 
NOTES 
 1. Information on the American Institute for Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters 
and the Insurance Institute of America is available at http://www.aicpcu.org . 
 2. Membership information available for the American Society for Healthcare Risk 
Management at [www.ashrm.org]
 3. Florida Statute 395.0197 internal risk management programs (hospitals)
 4. Florida Statute 400.147 internal risk management and quality assurance program 
(LTC)
 5. Florida Statute 641.55(2)
 6. Maley, R. A. “ Building Risk Management into Integrated Healthcare Delivery 
Systems. ” Journal of Healthcare Risk Management, 1996, 16 (4), 31 – 40. 
 7. Gautam, N. “ Ounce of Prevention: To Reduce Errors, Hospitals Prescribe 
Innovative Designs. ” Wall Street Journal, May 8, 2006, p. 1. 
 Florida B 395.0197 internal risk management programs (hospitals). 
 8. American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. Mapping Your Risk 
Management Course in Ambulatory Care. Chicago: American Society for 
Healthcare Risk Management, 1995, pp. 12 – 13. Information on the American 
Society for Healthcare Risk Management is available at http://www.ashrm.org 
 Florida B 400.147 internal risk management and quality assurance program (LTC). 
c06.indd 216 3/3/09 3:33:13 PM
 9. Medical Risk Management Associates. “ What Is the Difference Between Root 
Cause Analysis (RCA) and Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA)? ” http://
www.sentinel - event.com/rca - fmea.php 
 Florida § 641.55 (HMO) 
10 The Joint Commission online available at [www.jointcommission.org/Sentinel
Events/]
 11. The Joint Commission ’ s sentinel event policy is available online at http://
www.jointcommission.org/NR/rdonlyres/F84F9DC6 - A5DA - 490F - A91F -
 A9FCE26347C4/0/SE_chapter_july07.pdf 
 12. Ibid. Rape, as a reviewable sentinel event, is defi ned as unconsented sexual contact involving a patient and another patient, staff member, or other perpetrator 
while being treated or on the premises of the hospital, including oral, vaginal, or 
anal penetration or fondling of the patient ’ s sex organ(s) by another individual ’ s 
hand, sex organ, or object. One or more of the following must be present to determine reviewability: 
■ Any staff witnessed sexual contact as described above 
■ Suffi cient clinical evidence obtained by the hospital to support 
allegations of unconsented sexual contact 
■ Admission by the perpetrator that sexual contact, as described 
above, occurred on the premises. 
13 . National Academy for State Health Policy, http://www.nashp.org/ 
14 . Rosenthal J., and Booth, M. “ Defi ning Reportable Adverse Events: A Guide for 
States Tracking Medical Errors, ” March 2003, http://www.nashp.org/Files/
defi ning_adverse_events.pdf 
 15. For more information on mandatory reporting and to obtain the mandatory FDA 
Form 3500A, go to http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/REPORT/mtg.htm for drugs 
and biologicals or http://www.fda.gov.cdrh/mdr/ for devices. 
 16. National Quality Forum. Standardizing a Patient Safety Taxonomy: A Consensus 
Report, ed. K. W. Kizer and others. Washington, D.C.: National Quality Forum, 
2006. 
 17. Barach, P. “ The Unintended Consequences of Florida Medical Liability Legislation, ” Dec. 2005, http://www.webmm.ahrq.gov/perspective.aspx?perspective
ID=14 
 18. Medstat Group. Implementation Planning Study for the Integration of Medical Event 
Reporting Input and Data Structure for Reporting to AHRQ, CDC, CMS, and FDA: 
Final Report, Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Medstat Group, June 2002, p. 5. 
Notes 217
c06.indd 217 3/3/09 3:33:14 PM
c06.indd 218 3/3/09 3:33:14 PM
219
CHAPTER
 7 
THE RISK MANAGEMENT 
PROFESSIONAL AND 
MEDICATION SAFETY 
 HEDY COHEN , NANCY TUOHY 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify fi ve major safety issues associated with medication 
preparation that result in medication errors, as well as associated risk management strategies 
■ To be able to identify two key safety issues associated with infusion pump 
use, as well as associated risk management strategies 
■ To be able to discuss the role of environmental stressors in medication safety 
■ To be able to describe two medication error prevention strategies based on 
education 
■ To be able to discuss prioritization of medication - related information as a 
safety strategy 
■ To be able to understand the role of error reporting in addressing medication 
errors 
c07.indd 219 3/3/09 3:08:07 PM
220 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 Before a health care culture can truly promote safety, there must fi rst be an unquestioning acceptance, by everyone in the organization, of the premise that all practitioners make errors. There must be an appreciation by the entire staff that errors are never 
the result of any one isolated action or deed but rather that they result from the interaction of practitioners functioning in poorly designed systems. When an organization ’ s 
leaders understand and endorse these basic principles, that organization is able to 
move from the pointless disciplining of individual practitioners for unintentional mistakes — a tactic that has been shown in the literature to have little effect on error reduction — to a culture of safety that is focused on identifying and addressing multifactor 
causes of errors. Organizations that further operationalize safety culture through strategies such as crew resource management (CRM), thereby empowering the lowest -
 ranking member of a team to question more senior personnel about practice concerns, 
and that use resources such as human factors science to facilitate safer interaction 
between humans and machines are well on their way to becoming what is known as 
 “ high - reliability organizations. ” (CRM and high - reliability organization theory are 
discussed in Chapter Three . )
 When it comes to medication safety, health care organizations have proved to be 
highly unreliable. In the landmark report issued in 1999 by the Institute of Medicine, 
To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System, it was extrapolated that more than 
seven thousand hospitalized patients die each year due to preventable medication 
errors. Although the reason for this poor safety record is multifaceted, it is historically 
grounded in a culture that has focused on addressing individual practitioner errors 
rather than the more complex and signifi cant role of the system in which practitioners 
function. Another critical infl uence is the ongoing demand by consumers that organizations provide more health care with less money. 
 This chapter will delineate key issues and suggest specifi c strategies to enhance 
medication safety. To achieve success, however, health care organizations and practitioners must fi rst acknowledge and agree to address the many situations in wvhich 
frontline practitioners work with poorly designed equipment and technology, ambiguous policies and procedures, and inadequate communication between management 
and staff. The risk management professional ’ s role as a facilitator of senior - level commitment, as a teacher of the importance of systems — rather than individual - focused 
issues analysis — and as a partner to clinicians who are seeking to implement new 
approaches is essential and exciting. 
 LATENT AND ACTIVE FAILURES 
 The Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP), a nonprofi t organization dedicated 
to medication safety, recognizes that each unintentional medication error has its roots 
in multiple system failures. Although all errors are the result of active failures (which 
occur at the level of the frontline practitioner, with effects that are felt almost 
 immediately), latent failures (weaknesses in the organization whose effects are usually delayed) are often the most challenging causes of medical error. 1
 Active failures 
are sometimes characterized as “ sharp - end ” and latent failures denoted as 
c07.indd 220 3/3/09 3:08:07 PM
 “ blunt - end. ” To illustrate the interaction of active and latent failures in the context of 
a medication error, consider the following example (active failures are underlined , and 
the latent failures appear in italics ). 
 It is important that risk management professionals focus their energies on the role 
of latent failure to prevent other such heartbreaking outcomes from occurring. Because 
the medication administration process is in reality a complex system with parameters 
usually outside the control of the individual practitioner, most errors are rarely the 
fault of one individual. Providing an optimal level of medication safety therefore 
requires that organizations proactively recognize and correct underlying system failures before injuries to patients occur. This requires a shift in focus beyond “ naming, 
blaming, shaming, and training ” of individuals. 
 SYSTEMS THINKING 
 Based on the foregoing discussion, in addition to committing to a culture of patient 
safety and aspiring to become high - reliability operations, organizations addressing 
medication safety must also embrace systems thinking. This approach assesses how 
individual processes interrelate. Most important, it helps us understand how individual 
fl aws in a complex system like medication use can cause a serious error. As illustrated 
by Photo 7.1 , we are vulnerable to system failures in our everyday life. In this example, we see how poor design may impede the process of entering a building. You want 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ All practitioners make errors. Most are due to poorly designed systems or processes. 
How an organization responds to errors highlights its culture for patient safety.
■ Organizations addressing medication safety need to embrace systems thinking and 
understand how processes interrelate; the failure of one part can affect the whole 
process.
■ The Joint Commission standards and National Patient Safety Goals requiring medication reconciliation are meant to address systems issues during transitions in care.
■ Computerized provider order entry systems, in addition to documenting and 
transferring orders, are intended to verify appropriateness for treatment, to identify potential drug interactions and allergies, and possibly to make the ordering 
practitioner aware of any issues that may prevent completion of the order.
■ Interruptions during any step in the medication process can have devastating consequences. Prescribers, pharmacists, and nurses must never order, dispense, or administer any medication with which they are not totally familiar.
Systems Thinking 221
c07.indd 221 3/3/09 3:08:08 PM
222 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
CASE STUDY 7.1 An 
infant was born to a mother with a prior 
history of syphilis. Despite having incomplete patient information about the mother’s past treatment for syphilis and current 
medical status of both the mother and 
child, a decision was made to treat the 
infant for congenital syphilis. After consultation with infectious disease specialists and the health department, an order 
was written for one dose of “Benzathine 
Pen (penicillin) G 150,000U IM.”
The physicians, nurses, and pharmacists, unfamiliar with the treatment of 
congenital syphilis, also had limited knowledge about this drug, which was not in 
their formulary. The pharmacist consulted 
both the infant’s progress notes and Drug 
Facts and Comparisons2 to determine the 
usual dose of penicillin G benzathine for 
an infant. However, she misread the dose 
in both sources as 500,000 units/kg, a 
typical adult dose, instead of 50,000 units/
kg. Due to lack of a pharmacy procedure 
for independent double checking, the 
error was not detected. Because a unit 
dose system was not used in the nursery, 
the pharmacy dispensed a tenfold overdose in a plastic bag containing two full 
syringes of Permapen 1.2 million units/
2mL each, with green stickers on the 
plungers reminding the provider to “note 
dosage strength.” A pharmacy label on 
the bag indicated that 2.5 mL of medication was to be administered IM, to equal a 
dose of 1,500,000 units.
After glancing at the medication, 
the infant’s primary care nurse was concerned about the number of injections it 
would be necessary to give. (Because 0.5 
mL is the maximum that providers are 
allowed to administer intramuscularly to 
an infant, a 1,500,000-unit dose would 
require fi ve injections.) Anxious to prevent any unnecessary pain to the infant, 
the nurse involved two advanced-level 
colleagues, a neonatal nurse practitioner 
and an advanced-level nursery nurse, 
who decided to investigate the possibility of administering the medication IV 
instead of IM.
NeoFax3
 was consulted to determine 
if penicillin G benzathine could be administered IV. The NeoFax monograph on 
penicillin G did not specifi cally mention 
penicillin G benzathine; instead it 
described the treatment for congenital 
syphilis with aqueous crystalline penicillin G, IV slow push, or penicillin G procaine IM. Nowhere in the two-page 
monograph was penicillin G benzathine 
mentioned, and no specifi c warnings 
that penicillin G procaine and penicillin G 
benzathine were to be given “IM only” 
were present.
Unfamiliar with the various forms of 
penicillin G, the nurse practitioner believed 
that “benzathine” was a brand name for 
penicillin G. This misconception was reinforced by the physician’s method of writing the drug order, written with “benzathine” capitalized and placed on a line 
c07.indd 222 3/3/09 3:08:08 PM
Systems Thinking 223
above “penicillin G” rather than after it on the 
same line (see Figure 7.1). It is noteworthy that 
many texts use ambiguous synonyms when 
referring to various forms of penicillin. For 
example, penicillin G benzathine is frequently 
mentioned near or directly associated with the 
terms “crystalline penicillin” and “aqueous 
suspension.” Believing that aqueous crystalline 
penicillin G and penicillin G benzathine were 
the same drug, the nurse practitioner concluded that the drug could safely be administered IV. While the nurse practitioner had been 
taught in school that only clear liquids could be 
injected IV, she had learned through practical 
experience that certain milky white substances, 
such as IV lipids and other lipid-based drug 
products, can indeed be given IV. Therefore, 
she did not recognize the problem of giving 
penicillin G benzathine, a milky white substance, through an IV.
Complicating matters further in this 
example, hospital policies and practices did 
not clearly defi ne the prescriptive authority of 
nonphysicians. Partly as a result of this lack of 
clarity, the neonatal nurse practitioner assumed 
that she was operating under a national 
protocol, which allowed neonatal nurse practitioners to plan, direct, implement, and change 
drug therapy. Consequently, the nurse practitioner made a decision to administer the drug 
IV. The primary care nurse, who was not certifi ed to administer IV medication to infants, 
transferred care of the infant to the advancedlevel nursery RN and the nurse practitioner.
As they prepared for drug administration, neither of these providers noticed the 
tenfold overdose or that the syringe was 
labeled by the manufacturer “IM use only.”
The manufacturer’s warning was not prominently placed. The syringe needed to be 
rotated 180 degrees away from the name 
before the warning could be seen. The nurse 
began to administer the fi rst syringe of 
Permapen slow IV push. After about 1.8 mL 
was administered, the infant became unresponsive, and resuscitation efforts were 
unsuccessful.
FIGURE 7.1. Entry for Benzathine on the Patient’s Chart.
c07.indd 223 3/3/09 3:08:09 PM
224 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
to open a door that has a pull handle. You pull the door toward you to open it, but the 
door does not budge. 
 You pull again with no success. Then you realize that the door is to be opened by 
pushing rather than pulling. Your expectation was that a door designed with a pull handle is supposed to be pulled, not pushed. This same type of misperception can occur 
when a nurse obtains a medication from an automated dispensing machine. When the 
medication bin is labeled with the name of a specifi c drug, the nurse assumes that 
the correct drug is in that bin. If, however, the wrong drug was inadvertently placed 
in the bin, an error can easily occur. 
 To facilitate understanding of the complex processes that interact to cause medication errors, ISMP identifi ed twelve safety - critical components of the medication use 
system and categorized numerous reported errors accordingly. The following discussion of issues associated with each component provides insight into medication use –
 related risk. Specifi c risk reduction strategies are also presented. 
 Patient Information 
 More than 18 percent of prescribing errors are due to inadequate patient information. 
Of particular concern are lack of information about allergies and comorbidities such as 
hepatic function and pregnancy status. 4
 A critical related issue is that key patient 
PHOTO 7.1. Door Handle.
c07.indd 224 3/3/09 3:08:10 PM
 information (see Table 7.1 ) is often unavailable to pharmacy and nursing staff prior to 
dispensing or administering drugs for new admissions. 
 When drugs are dispensed or administered without adequate patient information 
such as laboratory values or key patient comorbidities, critical data that should be 
 double - checked is omitted, and risk potentially increases. For example, warfarin, an 
anticoagulant, is ordered on admission, but the provider ordering warfarin is unaware 
that the patient ’ s international normalized ratio (INR) is elevated. (The INR is a standardized measure of clotting time.) In another hypothetical situation, a prescriber 
might order a standard dosage of aminoglycide, which is contraindicated, for an end -
 stage renal patient, because there is no available documentation of the patient ’ s condition. Barring an emergency situation, drugs should never be dispensed unless specifi c 
clinical information has been reviewed during the ordering process. Clearly, health 
care practitioners must identify effective ways to facilitate the presence of key clinical 
information at this critical point in the patient ’ s care. 
 A real - life example of an error due to lack of information about comorbidities 
involved an eighty - four - year - old woman who was transferred from a nursing home to 
a hospital for a coronary artery bypass graft. After surgery, her platelet count dropped 
by 50 percent. A hematologist was consulted, who determined that the patient was suffering from heparin - induced thrombocytopenia. Although the physician documented 
this diagnosis in his consultation report, it was not written elsewhere in the patient ’ s 
chart, and the pharmacy was not notifi ed. As a result, two days later, when the patient 
was transferred to a surgical unit, nurses, unaware of the patient ’ s comorbid diagnosis 
of heparin - induced thrombocytopenia, fl ushed her IV lines with heparin. The patient 
TABLE 7.1. Essential Patient Information
Allergies
Diagnosis and comorbid conditions
Renal and hepatic function
Pregnancy and lactation status
Age, weight, height
Full medication history (over-the-counter, herbals, cultural)
Laboratory and other diagnostic results
Clinical observations (vital signs, mentation)
Demographics
Systems Thinking 225
c07.indd 225 3/3/09 3:08:11 PM
226 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
suffered a stroke six hours later and died. Although her death was probably due to the 
surgery, the illicit heparin administration was likely a contributing factor. 
 Another error that resulted from inadequate patient information occurred when a 
double - strength concentration of a potentially dangerous or “ high - alert ”drug was 
ordered for a cardiac patient in the intensive care unit (ICU). A nurse called the pharmacy and inadvertently requested that an infusion of regular insulin be prepared, at 
twice normal strength. In carrying out this erroneous verbal order, the pharmacist 
failed to notice in the order entry system that diabetes mellitus was not documented as 
a patient diagnosis. Then, without seeing a copy of the written order, he prepared and 
delivered the insulin infusion. Subsequently, during ICU pharmacy rounds, he failed 
to obtain a copy of the physician ’ s order or review the patient ’ s chart to verify hyperglycemia. Without an independent double check, the nurse hung the double - strength 
regular insulin infusion. As a result, the patient suffered permanent central nervous 
system impairment. 
 Information that is of obvious and closely related concern is the patient ’ s identity. 
The Joint Commission requires that staff use two patient - specifi c identifi ers before 
administering any medication. These are likely to include patient name and birth date. 
But accurate and complete validation of patient identifi cation for purposes of medication administration cannot occur without comparing the patient identifi cation to the 
medication administration record (MAR). Staff members should also encourage 
patients to state their name and show their identifi cation bracelet before accepting any 
medications. 
 Further illustrating the importance of patient identifi cation, medication errors also 
occur due to order sheets without a name. In one case, a potentially serious error occurred 
when an order for high - dose cytabarine, a chemotherapy agent, was written on a blank 
order sheet that contained no patient identifi cation. The order sheet was then accidentally stamped by the unit clerk with the wrong patient ’ s name and faxed to the pharmacy. Luckily, the patient ’ s diagnosis of hairy cell leukemia was in the pharmacy ’ s 
computer system. The error was averted when an oncology pharmacy specialist, scanning patient demographics before entering the order, realized that the high - dose 
cytabarine was totally inappropriate for the patient. 
 To enhance the collection of key patient data, all medication forms, including prescriber order forms, the MAR, and the pharmacy profi le, should contain a designated 
area with pertinent prompts and suffi cient space to document essential patient information. Such approaches should make it easy to capture issues such as weight fl uctuation 
and new allergies. Health care organizations must educate all staff on the importance of 
obtaining accurate inpatient and outpatient information. Ideally, an electronic medical 
record (EMR) or other form of computer technology should integrate all collected data, 
including outpatient information. 
 As another safeguard, the organization should have policies and procedures in 
place that prevent medication orders from being profi led in the pharmacy without 
basic clinical and demographic information. It is also important that high - alert 
c07.indd 226 3/3/09 3:08:12 PM
 nonprofi led medications available from unit stock be independently double - checked 
before administration, except in emergency situations. An independent double 
check is effective only if done in the following way. The fi rst practitioner completes 
the task (calculation, pump programming, syringe verifi cation, and so on) without 
sharing methods with the checking practitioner. The second checking practitioner 
completes the task again, without help or hints from the fi rst. The second practitioner then compares the results of both practitioners against the original order for 
accuracy. 
 Still other preventive strategies include the following. The pharmacy information 
system and computerized provider order entry (CPOE) should be kept up to date as 
drugs are added to the formulary. Furthermore, all systems should contain alerts for 
allergies, cross - sensitivities, weight and age restrictions, and drug duplications when 
new medications are added to a patient ’ s profi le. 
 Drug Information 
 In recent years, there has been an explosion of new medications and innovative uses 
of older drugs. Keeping abreast of all this constantly evolving information is a daunting, if not impossible, task. It has been noted that most medication errors occur during the prescribing and administration stages because up - to - date drug information is 
not available at the point of care. 5
 In addition, many health care organizations do not 
have pharmacists readily available to interact, face to face, with practitioners on 
patient care units. 6
 
 Because many medication errors occur due to lack of essential drug information, 
ongoing staff education regarding the appropriate uses, dosages, side effects, and 
interactions of drugs is crucial. For example, the use of the cancer chemotherapeutic 
agent methotrexate is well established in the oncology setting. Recently, providers 
have begun to prescribe this medication in low doses for rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, 
psoriasis, infl ammatory bowel disease, myasthenia gravis, and infl ammatory myositis. 
When used for these chronic diseases, such doses are administered weekly or sometimes twice a week. However, because relatively few medications are dosed on a 
weekly basis, practitioners who are unfamiliar with this new clinical approach make 
mistakes related to frequency of administration and to the novel dosage. In one reported 
case, a seventy - nine - year - old patient was to receive methotrexate for a nononcology 
indication. The prescription was erroneously written and dispensed as methotrexate 
four times daily. This patient died after receiving nine doses of the medication in a 
seventy - two - hour period. 
 Prescribers, pharmacists, and nurses must never order, dispense, or administer any 
medication with which they are not totally familiar. Although this might be challenging 
for organizations that face demands for effi ciency, it is essential to provide practitioners 
with a workload that allows adequate time to learn about their patients ’ medications. In 
yet another example of an error, a cardiac patient was admitted from the ED as an 
 “ overfl ow ” patient to a surgical ICU unit where the staff was unfamiliar with the adminSystems Thinking 227
c07.indd 227 3/3/09 3:08:12 PM
228 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
istration of thromobolytics. The cardiologist mistakenly ordered a loading dose of epifi batide (used to inhibit platelet aggregation) as 180 mcg, not as 180 mcg/kg. The pharmacy was particularly busy, and the pharmacist, who was unfamiliar with epifi batide 
dosing, did not read the package insert or verify the dose with the prescriber. The surgical 
ICU nurse, who had never administered this drug before, compounded the error when 
she misread the prescriber ’ s order as 180 mg. She initiated the loading dose by giving 
75 mg over one hour, planning to call the pharmacy for the remainder of the dose. As 
the infusion was ending, another pharmacist discovered the error, and the infusion was 
discontinued. Fortunately, the patient suffered no permanent harm. 
 Strategies to make drug information available at the point of care include the use 
of rule - based computerized provider order entry systems that provide drug information, warnings, and alerts during order input. If CPOE is not available in the organization, the use of a sound, user - friendly computerized drug information system such as 
Formulary Advisor ® and Clinical Xpert part of the Micromedex Healthcare Series 
offered through Thomson Reuter ’ s 7
 or up - to - date drug information books can provide 
valuable current drug information. The pharmacy computer system should also give 
specifi c warnings for drugs that have unusual dosing schedules, such as weekly or 
monthly, and alerts for cumulative drug dosing. Another effective strategy is to move 
the pharmacist, an expert in the clinical uses of medication, from the centralized pharmacy into satellite pharmacies within patient care areas. This allows the pharmacist to 
establish a close working relationship with the practitioners and patients, follow the 
patients ’ clinical courses, and consult regularly with the professional staff about appropriate drug selection, dosing, and administration. It has been shown that when the 
pharmacist is close to the point of care, patient outcomes are improved and errors and 
drug costs are signifi cantly reduced. 8
 If pharmacists are not already in place in patient 
care units, organizations can take a fi rst step toward this model of care by having pharmacists make daily rounds of patient care units or enter medication orders directly at 
the computer terminals in patient care units. The next logical step in integrating pharmacists more closely with the care team should be to prioritize implementation of 
unit - based pharmacy support in key areas, such as the intensive care unit, the pediatrics or oncology units, the operating room, and the emergency department. 
 Communication of Information 
 Organizational barriers to communicating essential clinical patient and drug information effectively include drug information systems that do not interface with other 
vital patient information systems, such as the electronic medical record and the laboratory system. Such disconnects clearly hamper the practitioner ’ s access to information essential for safe administration, such as allergies and pertinent test results. 
Another closely related obstacle is the absence of computer order entry systems. 
Without such systems, there is increased risk of order - related error due to illegible 
handwriting, missing or ambiguous information, nonconventional abbreviations, and 
unclear documentation of dosage. 
c07.indd 228 3/3/09 3:08:13 PM
 Another barrier is a provider ’ s fl awed communication style. Of particular concern 
is intimidation, which contributes to about 10 percent of the serious errors that occur 
during administration. In fact, ISMP receives many reports of lethal errors in which 
orders were questioned but not changed. In one ISMP survey, almost half (49 percent) 
of all respondents related that their past experiences with intimidation had altered the 
way they handle order clarifi cation or questions about medication orders. At least once 
during the previous year, about 40 percent of respondents did not act on concerns about 
a medication order or ask another professional to talk to the prescriber, rather than 
interact with a particularly intimidating prescriber. Three - quarters (75 percent) had 
asked colleagues to help them interpret an order or validate its safety so that they did 
not have to interact with an intimidating prescriber. Also, 34 percent reported that they 
had found the prescriber ’ s stellar reputation intimidating and had not questioned an 
order about which they had concerns. When the prescriber had been questioned about 
the safety of an order and refused to change it, 31 percent of respondents suggested that 
the physician administer the drug or simply allowed the physician to give the medication himself, and almost half (49 percent) felt pressured to accept the order, dispense a 
product, or administer a medication despite their concerns. As a result, 7 percent of 
respondents reported that they had been involved in a medication error during the previous year, in which intimidation clearly played a role. 9
 
 To address fl awed communication style, many health care organizations are using 
established protocols, consistent with human resource protocols and medical staff 
bylaws, to follow up with providers who are perceived to be intimidating. Appropriate 
strategies in this regard may include the use of incident or event reports, objectively 
completed, to document clinically pertinent events. Of great assistance in improving 
communication housewide is a crew resource management approach, in which a team 
member with minimal stature is empowered to question team leaders. Recognize that 
effective implementation of such strategies cannot occur without senior administrative 
and clinical leadership endorsement. 
 Another key communication issue involves verbal orders. Such orders, whether 
spoken in person or over the telephone, are inherently problematic because they can 
easily be misheard or misinterpreted. For example, there have been error reports in 
which verbal orders for “ Celebrex 100 mg PO ” were misheard to be for “ Cerebyx 100 
mg PO. ” Drug names are not the only verbal information prone to misinterpretation. 
Numbers are also problematic. For example, an emergency room physician verbally 
ordered “ morphine 2 mg IV, ” but the nurse heard “ morphine 10 mg IV, ” and the patient 
subsequently received a 10 - mg infusion that caused respiratory arrest. In another situation, a physician called in an order for “ 15 mg of hydralazine ” to be given IV every 
two hours. The nurse, thinking that he had said “ 50 mg, ” administered an overdose to 
the patient, who developed tachycardia and had a signifi cant drop in blood pressure. 
 To reduce the frequency of verbal orders, some organizations have instituted the 
use of fax machines to communicate orders. However, fax machines are connected to 
telephone lines, and signifi cant line noise can result in the loss of important information, 
such as portions of a drug name or even the dose. For example, the order shown in 
Systems Thinking 229
c07.indd 229 3/3/09 3:08:13 PM
230 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
Figure 7.2 was mistaken as Flagyl 250 mg instead of Flagyl 500 mg. A related problem 
occurs when prescribers write on the very edge of the order form, making it impossible 
for some fax machines and scanners to read the entire order. Thus an order for “ Lomotil 
QID PRN ” may appear as “ Lomotil QID, ” as if the “ PRN ” were never written. 
 Verbal orders must be eliminated, except in emergency and sterile situations. Such 
orders are especially inappropriate when potentially lethal drugs, such as chemotherapy agents, are prescribed. To further decrease the risk of verbal order – related errors, 
health care organizations should adopt yet another crew resource management principle. This particular strategy concerns the standardization of communication. Here are 
approaches that might help achieve standardization of verbal orders: 
■ When verbal orders are allowed, prescribers must enunciate the order clearly and the 
receiver should always repeat the order to the prescriber to avoid misinterpretation. 
■ As an extra check, either the prescriber or receiver should spell unfamiliar drug 
names, using “ T as in Tom, ” “ C as in Charley, ” and so forth. Pronounce each 
numerical digit separately, saying for example, “ one six ” instead of “ sixteen ” to 
avoid confusion with “ sixty. ” 
■ The receiver must ensure that the verbal order makes sense when considered in 
conjunction with the patient ’ s diagnosis. 
■ The verbal order must be immediately recorded on an order sheet in the patient ’ s 
chart, whenever possible. 
■ For telephone orders, the recipient must obtain a telephone number in case it is 
necessary to call back with follow - up questions. 
FIGURE 7.2. Faxes Don’t Always Resolve Order Communication 
Problems.
c07.indd 230 3/3/09 3:08:13 PM
■ Limit verbal orders to formulary drugs, as staff members are more likely to 
 misunderstand drug names and dosages with which they are unfamiliar. 
■ Limit the number of personnel who routinely receive telephone orders, to reduce 
the potential for unauthorized orders. 
 Still another issue is poor communication of medical information at care transition points. According to the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI), miscommunication when the patient moves from one care environment to another is responsible 
for about 50 percent of all medication errors and up to 20 percent of adverse drug 
events, in numerous health care organizations across the country. 10 One illustration of 
this type of error involved a patient who was transferred from one hospital to another 
and received a duplicate dose of insulin because the receiving nurse did not know that 
the medication had been given before transfer. In another case, enalapril 2.5 mg IV 
was administered to a patient after transfer from a critical care unit to a medical unit. 
The drug had been discontinued upon transfer, but the orders had not yet been transcribed. Yet another error occurred when, before discharge, the patient ’ s Lexapro was 
increased to 10 mg daily, but the discharge instructions erroneously called for 5 mg 
daily. When the error was noticed, a pharmacist called the patient and learned that she 
had been cutting her newly prescribed 10 mg tablets in half. 
 Joint Commission standards now require that health care organizations address 
medication reconciliation. Particularly helpful is documentation of this process, which 
assesses and addresses medication duplications and incompatibilities at vulnerable points 
of transition, such as admission, transfers between care settings, and at discharge. 
 Finally, to facilitate communication about medication orders, it is of great importance that written and computerized medication orders include the generic and brand 
names of the medication, without abbreviations. There are literally thousands of drug 
pair names that sound and look similar, so detailed information helps prevent these 
medications from being mistaken for one another. In addition, medication should 
never be prescribed by volume, number of vials, or ampoules. When such orders are 
received, the staff should seek clarifi cation immediately. 
 Labeling, Packaging, and Drug Nomenclature 
 Improper hospital drug labeling and failing to keep drugs in packaging until administering them contribute to medication errors. Furthermore, the pharmaceutical industry 
has sometimes unwittingly undermined the safe use of medication by marketing drugs 
under names that look alike and sound alike, using confusing labeling, or providing 
drugs to health care organizations in nondistinctive or ambiguously marked packages. In reports submitted to MEDMARX (a subscription - based reporting program 
sponsored by the United States Pharmacopeia), nearly 32,000 medication errors over 
a thirty - nine - month period occurred among look - alike or sound - alike drugs due to 
packaging or labeling. Approximately 2.6 percent of these errors were classifi ed as 
harmful. 11 
Systems Thinking 231
c07.indd 231 3/3/09 3:08:14 PM
232 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 Labeling Confusing labeling, sometimes associated with manufacturers ’ use of similar colors, font sizes, and layout to achieve a product image, can result in errors. 
 For example, the drug Temodar (temozolomide) has reportedly been the subject of 
numerous dispensing and administration errors because labeling leads staff members 
to misinterpret capsule strength. This alkylating agent is available in 5, 20, 100, and 
250 mg capsules. The strength is stated directly beside the quantity of capsules (see 
Photo 7.2 ). Someone who reads the number of capsules right next to the strength, as in 
 “ 20 capsules 100 mg, ” might conclude that the total number of capsules in the bottle 
adds up to the strength, for example, “ twenty capsules of 5 mg each equal 100 mg, ” 
rather than “ twenty capsules of 100 mg each. ” Adding to the confusion is similarity 
between the strength of the dosage and the number of capsules in the bottle. Capsules 
in strengths of 5 mg and 20 mg are often dispensed in packages that contain either fi ve 
or twenty capsules. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) pointed out that this 
confusing packaging and labeling can lead to serious and even fatal errors. 12
 Recently, an error was reported in which a prescription for oral Temodar 60 mg 
daily was written for a patient with a brain tumor. The pharmacist dispensed the dosage from a 100 - mg bottle containing twenty capsules and simply misread the label. 
The pharmacist was under the impression that twenty capsules were equal to 100 mg, 
so he concluded that each capsule contained 5 mg and dispensed twelve capsules to 
make up a 60 - mg dose. Fortunately, the patient ’ s mother caught the error when she 
was fi lling the patient ’ s pillbox before any of the medication was given. 
 To address these issues, the manufacturer submitted a redesigned label to the FDA 
for approval. 
 To proactively address label confusion like this, organizations may affi x “ name and 
strength alert ” stickers on products that have potentially confusing labels and highlight 
PHOTO 7.2. Capsule Quantity Is Often Mistaken for Product Strength.
c07.indd 232 3/3/09 3:08:15 PM
the differences with a pen or highlighter. The staff should also employ at least two independent checks in the dispensing and administration processes for these medications. 
Organizations might also consider implementation of point - of - care bar coding technology, which, for example, requires the provider to scan the patient ’ s name band with the 
drug package before administering the drug. Other valuable devices are “ smart ” infusion 
pumps that contain drug libraries to further enhance safe administration of such drugs. 
 Packaging Like confusing dose information, look - alike packaging is of great concern. Related errors generally involve assumptions by staff members that a medication 
that sounds similar to the one they are ordered to give is appropriate, or they pick up a 
wrong vial or other dispensing device because it looks like the medication they are 
ordered to give. In one example, a woman who was thirty - one weeks pregnant received 
Methergine (methylergonovine) instead of Brethine (terbutaline), which resulted in 
the emergency premature C - section delivery of her baby. Similar - sounding names and 
similar - looking packaging contributed to the error (see Photo 7.3 ). Fortunately, mother 
and child were unharmed. 
 Another look - alike medication issue involves respiratory therapy inhalation drugs, 
such as ipratropium (Atrovent) and levalbuterol (Xopenex), which are packaged in 
disposable, clear plastic containers with raised, embossed labels that are diffi cult to 
Systems Thinking 233
PHOTO 7.3. Top Six Vials Are Brethine; Bottom Eight Are Methergine.
c07.indd 233 3/3/09 3:08:16 PM
234 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
read. Compounding the risk, respiratory therapists often pocket several of each of 
these medications, to be more effi cient. Of additional concern, other products, such as 
opthalmic solutions and preservative - free medications, like xylocaine, are also illegibly packaged in small plastic vials (see Photo 7.4 ). 
 To minimize confusion associated with look - alike packaging, health care organizations should, whenever possible, consider using equivalent products from different 
manufacturers. Organizations should also avoid storing look - alike products near one 
another in unit stock and automated dispensing cabinets. 
 Applying auxiliary labels might help distinguish similar - looking packages. In 
addition, the use of “ tall - man ” lettering might visually differentiate drug names on 
similar - looking packages. Tall - man lettering uses capital letters within a drug name to 
highlight the letters that differentiate two similar names: for instance, “ hydrALAZINE ” and “ hydrOXYzine. ” In 2001, the FDA ’ s Offi ce of Generic Drugs requested 
manufacturers of sixteen look - alike name pairs to reformat the appearance of these 
drug names on their packaging, and tall - man lettering was used extensively in this 
effort (the list can be viewed at http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/MedErrors/name
Diff.htm) . This was a voluntary program, and not all manufacturers complied. 
Facilities, however, may choose to employ tall - man lettering on auxiliary labels, shelf 
and bin labels, or medication administration records. 
 Yet another packaging - related issue that contributes to errors involves the removal 
or discarding of packaging before the drug is administered. Although most drugs are 
PHOTO 7.4. Mix of Opthalmic and Respiratory Medications.
c07.indd 234 3/3/09 3:08:18 PM
packaged as unit doses, this does not ensure that medications will remain labeled until 
they reach the patient ’ s bedside. Often nurses prepare drugs at a central location, 
removing pharmacy or manufacturer drug packaging and labeling and placing the 
open medication in cups for administration. Thus the chance for errors, especially 
administering a medication to the wrong patient, is greatly increased. Institutions 
should require that the drug remain labeled throughout the drug use process, up to the 
point of administration. Using bar code technology might make this easier. Until this 
technology is instituted nationwide, however, it might be valuable to convene staff 
focus groups to identify and address the reasons that providers remove drug packaging 
and labels before administering drugs. 
Nomenclature Errors in identifying medication sometimes occur when providers refer 
to medication by a shorter name. Other reasons for misidentifi cation include confusion 
due to the indiscriminate use of brand and generic names, in combination and separately, 
in written and computerized orders. Sometimes confusion results from a “ line extension, ” 
when the manufacturer substantively changes the drug but changes only the suffi x of the 
name, to facilitate marketing of the progeny of a successful pharmaceutical. To address 
such confusion, ISMP recommends that both brand and generic names be documented (if 
appropriate) in ordering and transcribing, with the indication for the medication. 
 One example of potential omission related to nomenclature was generated by a 
mix - up between the sound - alike medications Cerebyx and Celebrex. In this case, 
Cerebyx (fosphenytoin) 100 mg IV TID, an anticonvulsant, was listed on a patient ’ s 
medication administration record from a transferring hospital. The admitting cardiologist at the receiving hospital was unfamiliar with Cerebyx and misread the drug as 
Celebrex (celecoxib), a pain medication, even though he knew it was not available in a 
parenteral form. He did not order the drug because the patient was not having pain. 
When a pharmacist reviewed the orders along with the old MAR and investigated, he 
was able to correct the order, thus preventing an omission error. Although often not 
considered as serious a potential threat to patient safety, patients can be harmed as 
much by the omission of a drug as from an erroneous dose. 
 In another issue related to nomenclature, Pamelor (nortriptyline), an antidepressant, was misheard as Tambocor (fl ecainide), an antiarrhythmic, and the prescription 
was dispensed as such. Although the patient took this erroneous medication for one 
month and experienced fatigue, he fortunately suffered no cardiovascular symptoms. 
 In yet another example, a pharmacist received an order for Gabitril (tiagabine), 
which is used for seizure disorders. He entered the order correctly, but the patient still 
received the wrong drug because the pharmacy mistakenly dispensed Zanafl ex (tizanidine), a drug used for muscle spasticity. Tiagabine and tizanidine were stored alphabetically by generic name in the pharmacy, separated by only one space on the shelves. 
Both drugs are also available in 2 - mg and 4 - mg strengths. The error occurred despite 
a bright - orange warning sticker stating “ Name Alert ” on the tizanidine supply. The 
potential for error was increased because the hospital had repackaged the drugs in unit 
doses using only the generic names. Fortunately, in this case, a nurse detected the difference before administering the drug. 
Systems Thinking 235
c07.indd 235 3/3/09 3:08:20 PM
236 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 Recent discussion of nomenclature - related safety issues has taken place at the 
United States Pharmacopeia (USP), resulting in adoption of a resolution to encourage 
the use of generic names alone for new single - active - ingredient products marketed 
after January 1, 2006. However, a single drug name — generic or brand — would not 
prevent all such mix - ups. Examination of the drug pairs delineated in the Joint 
Commission National Patient Safety Goals, requiring accredited entities to review a 
list of pertinent look - and sound - alike drugs annually, reveals that nine of ten problem 
pairs are similar generic names. 13
 Trademark extensions are another risk issue. There are no standard meanings for various suffi xes such as “ XL, ” “ ER, ” and “ SR ” following drug names. The line of Wellbutrin 
(bupropion) products has been of particular concern in this regard. Twice in one week, a 
hospital psychiatrist ordered Wellbutrin XL 300 mg, but two tablets of Wellbutrin SR 150 
mg were dispensed. The pharmacists fi lling the orders were unaware of the new XL formulation, and poor physician handwriting made it diffi cult to discern the XL portion of 
the drug name. In another reported case, a prescriber wrote Wellbutrin “ XR ” (instead 
of either XL or SR) 150 mg daily. The pharmacist could have looked at the once - daily frequency and concluded that it must be the XL product. However, he reviewed the profi le 
and found that the patient had in fact been taking Wellbutrin SR daily, so that is what he 
dispensed. Unfortunately, the physician actually meant to prescribe the XL formulation. 
 Different forms of a drug can also be confused. For example, signifi cant harm can 
occur when liposomal and conventional products are mixed up. In one case, liposomal 
doxorubicin (Doxil) and conventional doxorubicin (brand names include Adriamycin 
and Rubex), both packaged in 20 - mg vials, were stored together in the same drawer in a 
pharmacy refrigerator. Although both drugs are chemotherapeutic agents, their mode of 
action is very different. The patient involved received an IV push injection of 75 mg 
of Doxil, rather than the conventional doxorubicin that was intended. The patient ’ s reaction was not serious, but other reports of similar incidents have resulted in severe side 
effects and even death. 
 To reduce drug mix - ups related to nomenclature, it is important that providers 
seek clarifi cation if the drug being ordered does not seem to match the patient ’ s condition. Furthermore, institutions should require both the brand and generic names in all 
documentation, including orders, and on pharmacy labels. 
 Drug Storage, Stocking, and Standardization 
 The traditional model of medication storage and stocking has been phased out in most 
U.S. hospitals. Formerly, a nearly complete pharmacy was maintained on every unit in 
a hospital or nursing home, which increased the probability of errors. Acting alone, the 
nurse typically interpreted and transcribed a physician ’ s order, chose the proper container from hundreds available on the shelves, prepared the correct amount, placed the 
dose in a syringe or cup, labeled it, took it to the patient, administered it, and verifi ed 
that the dose had been administered. The obvious lack of check systems has led to the 
elimination of this medication administration model in most organizations. 
 Errors are still likely to occur, however, in organizations that employ a modifi ed 
fl oor stock model on nursing units, even if there are just a few “ stock bottles ” for 
c07.indd 236 3/3/09 3:08:21 PM
nurses to manage. The chance of error under these circumstances increases if drugs are 
stored by alphabetical name on units (or in the pharmacy) or the unit fails to sequester 
high - alert drugs (such as neuromuscular blockers). 
 Technological solutions are helpful only to a point. For example, even when unit 
stock is placed in automated dispensing machines, problems might still occur if there 
are not enough machines or if poor workspace planning results in nurses ’ crowding the 
machines at times when many patients require medications simultaneously. Under 
such circumstances, staff members often try to circumvent an ineffi cient work environment by storing medications in their pockets. Also of concern is the partial implementation of technological solutions — for example, the pertinent technology does not 
integrate with other in - house documentation systems or fails to encompass safety features such as patient profi ling and on - screen alerts. 
 Indeed, if automated dispensing cabinets (ADCs) store a wide assortment of medications or excessive quantities of a single medication but do not interface with the 
pharmacy ’ s computer - based profi ling system, the risk of error actually increases. 
Pharmacy profi ling allows a pharmacist to review each medication order and screen it 
for safety before the drug can be removed from the cabinet. Without this safeguard, 
nurses might not be alerted to unsafe doses, potential allergic reactions, duplicate therapy, contraindications, drug interactions, or other important information that could 
make the drug, dose, or route of administration unsafe. In addition, medications in 
ADCs are not always limited to the dosage that is necessary for a patient. Also, manufacturer - generated unit dose medication is not often labeled with the individual 
patient ’ s dose. These issues resulted in a serious error when a patient died after receiving 10 mg of colchicine IV. The physician had prescribed “ colchicine 1.0 mg IV now, ” 
but the decimal point was hidden on the line of the order form, and the use of an 
unnecessary trailing zero led to misinterpretation. However, the error reached the 
patient primarily because there was an excessive quantity of colchicine in the ADC. 
Ten ampoules of colchicine (1 mg each) were available in the ADC; thus the nurse had 
enough ampoules to prepare the overdose. 
 Safety procedures for automated dispensing technology are essential error prevention tools. For example, without a protocol that addresses proper storage, drugs 
can erroneously be placed in compartments of a cabinet that has been labeled for other 
medications. Procedures should also require that no medication be routinely available 
for administering to patients without appropriate order screening by the pharmacist. 
This includes initial doses of medication. Particularly dangerous drugs should be dispensed directly only from the pharmacy. 
 Device Acquisition, Use, and Monitoring 
 Practitioners involved in the medication - use process often employ one or more devices 
to administer a specifi c drug. Historically, many devices, such as infusion pumps, were 
designed without the benefi t of human factors engineering. Human factors engineering and human factors ergonomics are the “ scientifi c disciplines concerned with 
the understanding of interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and 
the profession that applies theory, principles, data, and other methods to design in 
Systems Thinking 237
c07.indd 237 3/3/09 3:08:21 PM
238 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
order to optimize human well - being and overall system performance. ” 14 This defi nition was adopted by the International Ergonomics Association in 2000. Failure to take 
human factors principles into consideration while designing medication delivery 
devices can contribute to patient harm. 
 For example, the misuse of infusion pumps and other parenteral device systems is 
the second leading cause of serious errors during drug administration. 15 A classic human 
factors – related problem that involves infusion pumps is the free fl ow of medication 
into a patient due to the lack of free - fl ow protection on intravenous (IV) pumps. Before 
The Joint Commission standard that required free - fl ow protection on pumps, such 
errors occurred when practitioners forgot to slide the clamping mechanism closed when 
they removed the infusion tubing sets from pumps. As the issues associated with infusion pumps illustrate, reliance on human vigilance is inherently prone to error. All 
devices should be designed to compensate for normal error - causing human behavior, 
such as momentary lapses in attention and fatigue. 
 Even with more recent equipment, errors may still occur. For example, the 
design of infusion pump keypads makes it easy for tenfold dosing errors to occur. 
Specifi cally, the close proximity of the zero and decimal point keys on some IV 
pumps, and multiple - function keys, such as an up arrow that also serves as an enter 
key, has led nurses to misprogram pumps with rates that can cause overdose. The 
newest pumps, called smart pumps, may include a computerized drug library of preset dose limits that alert nurses to programming errors, but many older pumps without such features remain in use. 
 Other problems involving IV infusion pumps include the following: 
■ Infusion pumps being turned off accidentally by users or when physically bumped 
against other objects 
■ Lack of visible or audible warning alarms when the syringe or cassette is not properly loaded, resulting in overdosing or underdosing of medication 
■ Confusing tubing on pumps where multiple lines are used 
■ The inadvertent setting of a drug or solution at the primary IV rate instead of at the 
intended secondary rate 
■ Decimal point errors, such as keying in the infusion rate at ten times the intended 
rate (for example, 44.5 mL/h instead of 4.5 mL/h or 88 mL/h instead of 8 mL/h) 
■ Dosage calculation errors 
■ Keying in the volume of the drug to be infused as the infusion rate (for example, a 
volume of 500 mL heparin mistakenly entered as rate of 500 mL/h) 
 Special precautions are needed with patient - controlled analgesia (PCA) pumps. 
When used as intended, PCA reduces the risk of oversedation by allowing patients to 
self - administer more frequent but smaller doses of analgesia through an infusion 
c07.indd 238 3/3/09 3:08:21 PM
TABLE 7.2. Patient-Controlled Analgesia (PCA) Problems and Safety 
Recommendations.
Problem Description Safety Recommendations
PCA by proxy When another person (health 
professional, family member) 
administers a dose of medication 
instead of the patient’s dosing 
themselves.
Can lead to oversedation, 
respiratory depression, and 
death. Patients must control 
the PCA, but a sedated patient 
cannot press the button, thereby 
overdosing.
Warn patients, family members, and 
visitors about the dangers of PCA by 
proxy.
Place warning labels on activation 
buttons that state “FOR PATIENT USE 
ONLY.”
Keep PCA fl owsheets at the bedside 
to document PCA doses and patient 
monitoring.
Improper 
patient selection 
and education
Only patients who have the 
mental alertness and suffi cient 
cognitive, physical, and 
psychological ability should use a 
PCA pump
Can lead to inadequate pain 
control or oversedation.
Teaching patients during the 
immediate postoperative period 
is ineffective if the patient is too 
groggy to understand. This has 
often led to poor pain control in 
the fi rst twelve hours following 
surgery.
Check patient allergies, which 
should be visible on the MAR, before 
initiating PCA.
Educate patients preoperatively about 
PCA use.
Establish patient selection criteria.
In general, infants, young children, 
and confused patients are not suitable 
candidates to use a PCA pump.
(Continued)
Systems Thinking 239
pump. However, because this therapeutic intervention combines inherently error - prone 
devices, and narcotics, serious unintended outcomes have frequently occurred. 
 Fortunately, by identifying specifi c issues, risks associated with this technology 
can be reduced. Table 7.2 summarizes some of the issues surrounding the use of PCA 
pumps and appropriate solutions. 
c07.indd 239 3/3/09 3:08:22 PM
TABLE 7.2. (Continued)
Problem Description Safety Recommendations
I nadequate 
 patient 
 monitoring
Patients using a PCA pump must 
be frequently and appropriately 
monitored. The level of consciousness achieved from physical stimulus is only a temporary 
way to monitor for toxicity.
Ensure that nurses recognize the signs 
and symptoms of opiate toxicity.
Have oxygen and naloxone readily 
available.
Teach the need to assess using minimal 
verbal or tactile stimulation.
When the physical stimulus is 
removed, patients can quickly 
fall back into an oversedated 
state.
Pulse oximetery alone can 
give a false sense of security 
because oxygen saturation 
is usually maintained even at 
low respiratory rates.
Establish a standard pain assessment 
scale.
At minimum, evaluate pain, alertness, 
and vital signs, including rate and quality of respirations, every four hours.
More frequent monitoring should be 
done in the fi rst twenty-four hours and 
at night, when hypoventilation and 
nocturnal hypoxia may occur.
Keep PCA fl owsheets at the bedside 
to document PCA doses and patient 
monitoring.
Monitor the use of naloxone to identify adverse events related to PCA.
Drug product 
mix-ups
Many opiates used for PCA 
have similar names and packaging, leading to selection errors.
Morphine and meperidine have 
been packaged in similar boxes.
Use of fl oor stock of opiates in 
PCA pumps has led to signifi -
cant overdoses.
Require independent double checks 
for patient identifi cation, drug and 
concentration, pump settings, and the 
line attachment.
Establish one concentration for each 
opiate used for PCA.
Store hydromorphone and morphine 
separately.
Affi x prominent warning labels on 
nonstandard concentrations.
Use commercially prefi lled syringes, 
bags, and cassettes.
Require pharmacy review of all PCA 
orders before initiation.
Alert all clinicians to drug shortages, 
and provide clear alternative dosing 
instructions.
c07.indd 240 3/3/09 3:08:22 PM
Practice-related 
problems
Misprogramming the PCA 
pump is the most frequently 
reported practice-related issue.
Require independent double checks 
for patient identifi cation, drug and 
concentration, pump settings, and the 
line attachment.
Other problems include incorrect transcription of orders, 
miscalculation of dose or rate 
of infusion, and IV admixture 
errors.
Limit PCA pumps to a single model to 
promote profi ciency.
Provide laminated instructions 
attached to each pump.
Program pumps to require a review of 
settings before infusing.
Device design 
fl aws
Many PCAs are not intuitive in 
their design, making programming problematic. Many PCAs 
have default programming for 
medication concentrations, 
such as 0.1 mg/mL or 1 mg/mL, 
but a higher concentration may 
be used in the device, leading 
to overdoses and deaths.
Other drug delivery problems 
include failure to review programming before starting the 
infusion and free fl ow of medication as a result of syringe or 
cassette breakage.
Patients may also confuse the 
PCA button with the nurse call 
button, resulting in overdosing 
and frustration.
Establish default settings of zero for all 
opiates.
Connect the PCA pump to a port close 
to the patient (to avoid dead space), 
and prominently label the infusion line 
to avoid mix-ups.
Require pumps to be programmed in 
mg/mL and mcg/mL, not just mL.
Program pumps to alert users and stop 
PCA if a syringe or bag is empty or 
damaged.
Limit PCA pumps to a single model to 
promote profi ciency.
Provide visual and auditory feedback to 
patients when the button is pressed.
Inadequate staff 
training
Nurses may not receive 
effective training or may not 
retain profi ciency when PCA 
pumps are used infrequently 
or if multiple types of devices 
are in use. 
Ensure that training is timely and comprehensive and that annual competency testing is required.
Require independent double checks 
for patient identifi cation, drug and 
concentration, pump settings, and the 
line attachment.
(Continued)
c07.indd 241 3/3/09 3:08:23 PM
242 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 PCA Problems and Safety Recommendations 
 Nursing staff, biomedical engineers, and others should plan and monitor the effectiveness 
of infusion pump deployment. A fi rst step is to provide nursing and other users with input 
into selection of all new pumps. All IV pumps should be tested for free - fl ow protection, 
and any that fail (medication fl ows freely from the tubing as the set is removed) should be 
removed from service. By limiting standard hospital IV pumps to a single model, and limiting specialty pumps, such as syringe and PCA pumps, to clinical areas where the staff are 
fully competent in their use, the profi ciency of all nurses using these devices can be maximized. Attaching laminated instructions and a safety checklist to each pump raises awareness and reinforces key safety measures. Each provider who uses a pump should also be 
required to label all tubing and have a partner assist with independent double checks for 
patient identifi cation, drug and concentration, pump settings, and line attachment. 
TABLE 7.2. (Continued)
Problem Description Safety Recommendations
Prescribers may not undergo 
verifi cation of profi ciency with 
this form of pain management, 
resulting in improper 
medications and dosing.
Limit PCA pumps to a single model to 
promote profi ciency.
Provide laminated instructions attached to each pump.
Order 
communication 
errors
Mistakes are made in converting 
an oral opiate dose to the IV 
route.
Most problematic is 
hydromorphone.
Concurrent orders for other 
opiates while a PCA pump is 
in use have resulted in opiate 
toxicity.
Design standard order sets to guide 
drug selection, doses, and lockout 
periods; patient monitoring; and precautions such as avoiding concomitant 
analgesics.
Limit verbal orders to dose changes only.
Require independent double checks 
for patient identifi cation, drug and 
concentration, pump settings, and the 
line attachment.
Use morphine as the opiate of 
choice; use hydromorphone for 
patients needing very high doses; 
reserve meperidine for patients allergic 
to morphine and hydromorphone.
c07.indd 242 3/3/09 3:08:23 PM
Systems Thinking 243
 Above all, an independent double check that verifi es dose and rate settings is 
indispensable. This is because the settings on PCA pumps often default to a standard 
concentration, which requires the operator to change the settings if a nonstandard concentration is used. Even when the staff have expertise in the proper use of these drug 
delivery devices, serious dosing errors have been associated with improper fl ow rate 
settings. PCA pump settings should therefore be programmed by one individual and 
checked independently by another before administering. Settings at the time of administration should be documented, based on this independent check. 
 Other medication administration devices can also cause errors in a health care setting. For example, the wrong reservoir in implantable medication delivery devices has 
reportedly been fi lled with medication, causing patient death. Also, patients are often 
admitted to the hospital with implantable devices, such as insulin pumps, yet no 
instructions are available to assist nurses with the use of these devices. 
 Additional misuses of medication - related devices, with often serious outcomes, 
include the inadvertent connection of intravenous tubing to devices not intended for 
medication delivery. In one case, a nurse accidentally connected the blood pressure 
monitor tubing to a needleless IV port. Propofol, which is white and opaque, had been 
infusing through the patient ’ s IV line. Thus the IV tubing and its port looked very similar to the white length of tubing and connector on the BP cuff (see Photo 7.5 ). In a 
similar case, an agitated patient died when he removed the tubing from his BP cuff and 
attached it to his IV line. 
PHOTO 7.5. Tubing Lines.
c07.indd 243 3/3/09 3:08:24 PM
244 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 In another tubing - related event, a young child died when her oxygen tubing was 
mistakenly connected to her IV line. The child had been receiving medication via a 
nebulizer to treat asthma. While still attached to a wall outlet, the oxygen tubing 
became disconnected from the nebulizer fl uid chamber (see Photo 7.6 ). 
 The situation worsened when the staff member who discovered the disconnected 
oxygen tubing accidentally reconnected it to the injection port on a Baxter Clearlink 
Needleless Access System IV tubing Y - site. Although oxygen tubing does not have a 
Luer connector, the staff member managed to make the connection with Baxter ’ s 
Clearlink valve work by applying considerable force (see Photo 7.7 ). The oxygen tubing 
disconnected from the IV tubing in seconds, but not before the pressure of the compressed oxygen supply forced the needleless valve open and allowed air into the tubing. 
The child died instantly. 
PHOTO 7.6. IV Tubing to Oxygen.
c07.indd 244 3/3/09 3:08:26 PM
TABLE 7.3: Using Failure Mode and Effect Analysis to Predict Failures 
with Infusion Pumps
Basic Functionality: How Well Does the Pump Perform the Required Task?
Is this the correct pump to perform the desired task?
Can the pump deliver the volume or increments needed under the correct pressure?
Systems Thinking 245
PHOTO 7.7: IV Misconnection
 Similar issues have occurred when medications have inadvertently been delivered 
into the balloon infl ation ports of endotracheal tubes, gastrostomy tubes, and Foley 
catheters, instead of into the intended IV catheter. In each case, the balloon expanded 
when the medication was injected, causing harm to the patient. 16
 Health care organizations should review existing medical equipment used in their 
facilities to identify the potential for misconnection. Each practitioner who connects 
or reconnects tubing should be required by policy to completely trace the tube from 
the patient to the point of origin before beginning. Appropriately labeled IV lines help 
alert the staff that they may be about to access the incorrect line accidentally. In 
 addition, before introducing new tubes, catheters, and connectors, an interdisciplinary 
team should use failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA) to identify potential issues 
related to connectivity with other medical equipment. 
 As previously noted, medication safety is enhanced when health care organizations involve end users in the product selection process. Building on this principle by 
using a standardized evaluation process for devices and looking for areas of potential 
failure, before the device is acquired, might help the organization avoid future errors. 
A suggested approach for evaluating infusion pumps is identifi ed in Table 7.3 . The 
same process can be adapted for use with any new medical device. 
(Continued)
c07.indd 245 3/3/09 3:08:27 PM
246 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
TABLE 7.3: (Continued)
Are any features incompatible with the environment where it will be used (size, weight, 
number of channels)?
Will the pump deliver medications in the concentrations most typically used?
What tubing and other supplies are required for the pump to perform effectively and 
safely? Are they interchangeable with other pumps? Could interchangeable tubing be 
used for this pump, rendering it unsafe?
Are users alerted to pump-setting errors? Wrong-patient errors? Wrong-channel errors? 
Wrong-medication or wrong-solution errors? Mechanical failure?
Does the pump have memory functions for settings and alarms with an easily retrievable 
log? If the pump is turned off, does it retain settings for a period of time?
User-Machine Interface: How Easy and Intuitive Is It for People to Use the 
Pump?
What functionalities do users expect the pump to have?
Is the number of steps for programming minimal?
Are the touch buttons used for programming clearly labeled, logically positioned, and the 
proper size?
Are the screens readable with proper font size, lighting, contrast, and other cues to 
 enhance performance?
Do the units of medication delivery (mcg/kg, mcg/kg/min) match current practices?
Do the medications, units of delivery, and strengths appear in a logical sequence for selection?
Is there any information that defaults to a predetermined value? If yes, is it safe?
Is it easy to install and prime administration sets and to remove air in the line?
Are any special features, such as drug or dose calculations and dose alerts, helpful and 
easy to use?
Are the screens free of abbreviations, trailing zeros (as in 1.0 mg), and naked decimal 
points (.1mg)?
c07.indd 246 3/3/09 3:08:28 PM
 Patient Monitoring 
 Connected to each medical device or piece of equipment is a patient. For therapeutic 
interventions to succeed, practitioners must continually assess their effectiveness by 
monitoring the patient, based on predetermined parameters such as vital signs, including criteria for neurological assessment, quality of respirations, and lab results. In 
addition to proactively defi ning key parameters as part of established protocols, order 
sets, and fl owsheets, health care providers might also need to incorporate them in computerized monitoring systems. 
 Documentation of monitoring is critical, and all associated forms (for example, diabetic fl owsheets, PCA fl owsheets, and sedation fl owsheets) should be used at the bedside, and the information should remain there for quick reference. This is the case whether 
documentation is entered on paper or into a computerized record. Appropriate antidotes 
and resuscitation equipment should also be readily available at the bedside, and their 
presence should be noted in the record. Subsequent chart audits should contrast documentation of patient monitoring with outcomes to identify patterns in untoward care 
results and opportunities for improvement. 
 Environmental Stressors 
 In an ideal health care setting, medications would be prescribed, transcribed, prepared, 
and administered in an environment free of distractions, with comfortable surroundings, adequate physical space, and lighting. Practitioners would come to work rested 
Systems Thinking 247
Do the alarms clearly guide staff to the problems? Is it possible to disable audible alarms 
permanently or to set them too low to be heard?
If the infusion rate is changed but not confi rmed, does the device continuously alert the 
user that the solution is infusing at the old rate?
Could the administration sets be mispositioned during installation or accidentally 
 dislodged, separated, or removed by patients?
Does the administration set prevent gravity free-fl ow of the solution when it is removed 
from the pump?
Is the device tamper-resistant?
Does the pump fi t into the typical workfl ow?
How does the pump compare to the pumps now in use?
c07.indd 247 3/3/09 3:08:28 PM
248 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
and could take rest and meal breaks to maintain focus and attention. In reality, hospital 
workers are constantly exposed to noise, interruptions, and nonstop activity. The process of order transcription is particularly vulnerable to distraction, as it usually occurs 
in an environment where unit secretaries, nurses, and pharmacy personnel are answering telephones and talking with other providers and patients. A study confi rms that 
simple slips due to distractions are responsible for almost three - quarters of all transcription errors. 17 Some strategies that might minimize such distractions include overlapping of staffi ng coverage during peak activity times and encouraging fax or e - mail 
communications to the nursing station instead of telephone calls. 
 Interruptions during any step in the medication - use process can have devastating 
consequences. In one example, an emergency department patient died after receiving a 
10 - mg dose of hydromorphone when morphine 10 mg was ordered. As the ED nurse was 
selecting the drug, she was temporarily distracted by another of her patients who 
was attempting to climb off the end of the stretcher. She quickly placed a vial of hydromorphone in her pocket while she attended to the second patient, interrupting her normal routine of checking the medication and documenting the signout on the narcotic record. After 
settling the agitated patient, she resumed medication administration to the fi rst patient, 
inadvertently omitting the step of signing out the narcotic. After receiving 10 mg of hydromorphone, when 2 mg is the usual intramuscular dose, the patient was discharged. He subsequently suffered a respiratory arrest in the family car and could not be resuscitated. 
 Fatigue, too, can contribute to medication errors. Research conducted by the 
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation documented anesthesiologists ’ performance 
failures when fatigued. 18 One group of researchers observed in a study of anesthesiologists the incidence of a phenomenon called “ micro - sleeps. ” Micro - sleeps are intermittent lapses in consciousness, lasting seconds to minutes. The person ’ s eyes are open, 
but the person is not cognizant of surroundings, cannot process information, and once 
fully conscious again, is unaware that the lapse has even occurred! 19 In videotapes of 
surgical procedures, the researchers identifi ed behaviors indicative of micro - sleeps 30 
percent of the time in a four - hour case. 20
 Research has also shown that the risk of nurses making medication - related errors is 
increased signifi cantly when they work longer than twelve hours in a shift, when working overtime, or when working greater than forty hours in one week. 21 Performance of a 
fatigued health care worker has been shown to equal that of a person with a blood alcohol level of 0.1 percent — over the legal limit for driving in many states. 22 See Table 7.4 
for a list of the effects of fatigue. 
 Addressing safety issues associated with fatigue requires that the institution support a culture in which admission of fatigue is accepted and rewarded. To achieve this 
environment, management and staff must be educated about the risks associated with 
fatigue and research - based approaches to optimize performance in the face of fatigue, 
especially with regard to night - shift workers. Based on organizational commitment to 
address this important problem, health care organizations should examine staffi ng patterns to ensure adequate rest and recovery opportunities for their employees. 
Contingency plans should be developed to manage staffi ng needs if personnel appear 
c07.indd 248 3/3/09 3:08:28 PM
Systems Thinking 249
TABLE 7.4. Effects of Fatigue
Slowed reaction time
Reduced accuracy
Diminished ability to recognize signifi cant but subtle changes in a patient’s health
Inability to deal with the unexpected
Lapses of attention and inability to stay focused
Omissions and neglect of nonessential activities
Compromised problem solving and decision making
Impaired communication skills
Inability to recall
Short-term memory lapses
Reduced motivation
Irritability or hostility
Indifference and loss of empathy
Intrusion of sleep into wakefulness
Decreased energy for successful completion of required tasks
Decreased learning of new activities
Reduced hand-eye coordination
Sources: M. Gillberg, G. Kecklund, and T. Akerstedt, “Relations Between Performance and Subjective Ratings of Sleepiness During a Night Awake,” Sleep, 1994, 17, 236–241; L. M. Linde and 
M. Bergstrom, “The Effect of One Night Without Sleep on Problem-Solving and Immediate Recall,” 
Psychological Research, 1992, 54, 127–136; S. Howard, “Fatigue and the Practice of Medicine,” 
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation Newsletter, Spring 2005, 20, 1–4.
c07.indd 249 3/3/09 3:08:29 PM
250 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
to be or consider themselves too fatigued to work safely. It is important to ensure that 
staff members can take fi fteen - to thirty - minute rest breaks away from the work area 
and a meal break during each shift. Other interventions to consider are providing for 
short planned naps in the workplace and offering light therapy to reduce the effects of 
fatiguing schedules and disrupted circadian rhythms. 23
 To address all of these environmental impediments to medication safety, organizational leaders should aim to foster a “ sterile cockpit ” similar to the one used by the airline industry to promote safety. In a sterile - cockpit environment, pilots and fl ight crew 
members are specifi cally prohibited from participating in distracting activities while 
performing critical duties. The Federal Aviation Administration ’ s written policies (14 
CFR 121.542) state: 
(a) No certifi cate holder shall require, nor may any fl ight crewmember perform, 
any duties during a critical phase of fl ight except those duties required for the safe 
operation of the aircraft. Duties such as company required calls made for such nonsafety related purposes as ordering galley supplies and confi rming passenger connections, announcements made to passengers promoting the air carrier or pointing out 
sights of interest, and fi lling out company payroll and related records are not required 
for the safe operation of the aircraft. 
(b) No fl ight crewmember may engage in, nor may any pilot in command permit, 
any activity during a critical phase of fl ight which could distract any fl ight crewmember from the performance of his or her duties or which could interfere in any way 
with the proper conduct of those duties. Activities such as eating meals, engaging in 
nonessential conversations within the cockpit and nonessential communications 
between the cabin and cockpit crews, and reading publications not related to the 
proper conduct of the fl ight are not required for the safe operation of the aircraft. 
(c) For the purposes of this section, critical phases of fl ight includes all ground 
operations involving taxi, takeoff and landing, and all other fl ight operations conducted below 10,000 feet, except cruise fl ight. 
 Because a failure in any step of the complex medication use process could lead to 
a medication error and patient harm, every step equates to an aircraft ’ s “ critical phase 
of fl ight. ” Distractions, interruptions, and competing activities should be eliminated or 
minimized. Managers and staff members should focus on creating and supporting an 
environment that allows concentration on the critical task at hand. 
 Competency and Staff Education 
 Many practitioners have limited awareness of error - prone situations, even those that are 
well documented in their own organization or published in professional literature. Without 
this information, these staff members are likely to make similar errors. With the information, staff members can help the organization identify ways to prevent such errors from 
occurring. Upon hire or joining the medical staff and regularly thereafter, staff members 
should be provided with current information about errors that have occurred within the 
c07.indd 250 3/3/09 3:08:29 PM
organization and those that occur elsewhere. Health care organizations should also 
develop a “ medication safety ” test for providers who will administer medications. 
Included should be questions that address problem - prone areas such as morphine and 
insulin dosing and the use of cross - allergenic medications such as Toradol and aspirin. 
 Medication Competency Tests 
 Anecdotal evidence from ISMP shows that many medication competency tests currently in use are outdated. For example, the questions on such tests often contain, and 
thus legitimize, dangerous abbreviations and dose designations. They also test obsolete approaches such as conversion from apothecary units (formally eliminated in 2001 
by the American Society of Health - System Pharmacists) to metric units. 
 In addition to updating the content, it is crucial that such tests go beyond mere calculation and memorization of drugs and doses to encourage critical thinking. 
Medication competency tests should incorporate questions about safety issues, such as 
laboratory values associated with drug use, appropriate monitoring of patients, and 
correct patient identifi cation procedures. They should address such issues as identifying high - alert medications and the special precautions that these drugs require. It is, of 
course, important to have staff members explain the correct procedure for an independent double - check, and they should also be able to describe appropriate and inappropriate therapy for patients, based on medical history. 
 When administering a medication competency test, allow the practitioner who is 
unsure of an answer to use medication resources (books, Internet or intranet, other 
practitioners). With this approach, all questions should be answered correctly, and any 
wrong response should be thoroughly followed up with the test taker. 
 Staff education, vitally important, cannot be successful as a singular safety strategy; it must be provided in conjunction with other approaches. One case that illustrates 
the importance of this principle involved a nurse who successfully completed her medication competency test but later administered a dose of pronestyl after checking the 
pronestyl level but not the NAPA level. (NAPA is a metabolite of pronestyl that has
the same pharmaceutical effect as pronestyl.) The NAPA level was elevated. Therefore, 
the medication should have been held and the prescriber contacted. The nurse was 
unaware of the need to check the NAPA level before administration of this drug. 
 Simply drafting a policy or including a question on a competency exam about 
NAPA levels and pronestyl administration is likely to be ineffective in addressing this 
situation without the accompanying use of such resources as auxiliary warnings printed 
on MARs to check NAPA levels, warnings, and hard stops. A hard stop prevents the 
practitioner from proceeding with an order unless a current lab value or other patient 
data (weight, allergy status, and so on) are entered. In this case, a hard stop would 
probably take the form of a note that appears on the provider order entry screen, requiring the user to check or enter the NAPA lab result before administration. A hard stop 
requiring lab value entry could also be implemented in bedside bar code drug administration software. Tools like these compensate for natural lapses in human concentration and memory in ways that education alone cannot. 
Systems Thinking 251
c07.indd 251 3/3/09 3:08:30 PM
252 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 Patient Education 
 An alert and knowledgeable patient can serve as the last line of defense in preventing 
medication errors. For example, patients who have been educated about the need for 
proper identifi cation prior to procedures or medication can alert staff members when 
their armband has not been checked. Also, when patients are aware of the usual times for 
drug administration, they can remind staff members that their medication is due, to prevent drug omission errors. To fulfi ll this role in preventing errors, patients must receive 
ongoing education by physicians, pharmacists, and nurses about drug brand and generic 
names, indications, usual and actual doses, expected and possible adverse effects, drug 
or food interactions, and how to protect themselves from errors. Although this education 
takes additional staff time, it can pay signifi cant dividends in patient safety. 
 Even patients who have merely been encouraged to ask questions and seek satisfactory answers can play a vital role in preventing medication errors. A tragic example 
of a case in which a staff member did not heed the patient ’ s questions involved an 
informed patient at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute who told her health care practitioners that she felt that something was wrong after two days of cancer chemotherapy. 
Numerous times, both the patient and her husband requested that the staff check her 
chemotherapy orders for accuracy because she was experiencing different side effects 
from her previous courses of therapy. Without a thorough investigation of their concerns, the patient ’ s practitioners reassured the patient and her husband that the medication she was receiving was correct. Unfortunately, she received an entire course of 
chemotherapy every day for four days. It is impossible to say whether the patient 
would have survived if the error had been detected earlier, but there is no doubt that 
those four days of chemotherapy were the direct cause of her death. 
 The way in which patients are educated about their medication is also critical. Simply 
handing a drug information sheet to a patient is often not suffi cient, as patients might misunderstand or be frightened by the information concerning the risk of taking the medication. Also, one study claims that 36 percent of the population has either basic or below 
basic health literary skills. Among adults who receive Medicare and Medicaid, 27 percent 
and 30 percent respectively had below basic health literacy. 24 Thus practitioners need to 
assess whether patients fully understand their medications by asking what they are taking 
and why these medications are being given. For patients receiving multiple drugs or receiving medications with a narrow therapeutic index, the health care organization should consider involving a pharmacist in patient education during admission and at discharge. 
 RISK MANAGEMENT: A PRIORITIZING APPROACH 
 To help the organization address risk and improve safety of medication use, it is crucial that the risk management professional be aware of strategies for prioritizing issues 
and interventions. 
 Some medication safety strategies are more effective, or have more leverage, than 
others. Actions that produce an output more powerful than the input are considered to 
possess high leverage and thus are more effective in producing change. Leverage is 
c07.indd 252 3/3/09 3:08:30 PM
considered to be highest when it meets ISMP ’ s fi rst principle of error reduction: lessening or eliminating the possibility of errors. The second principle of error reduction, 
possessing moderate leverage, is to make errors visible. The third is to minimize the 
consequences of errors after their occurrence. These principles provide a framework 
for developing error reduction strategies. The error reduction strategies in Figure 7.3 
are presented in order of leverage, from highest to lowest. 
 An example of a constraint is purchasing epidural tubing without any ports that 
might allow accidental injection of intravenous drugs. Forcing functions are strategies 
that do not allow an action to occur unless certain conditions are met, potentially preventing an error. (The terms forcing function and hard stop are often used interchangeably.) Computerized or automated devices can act as forcing functions — for example, 
the provider might be prevented from entering a drug order unless patient weight is 
entered or might be unable to access an automated dispensing drawer unless the drug 
in that drawer is in the patient ’ s pharmacy profi le. 
 Automated devices may also alert the user in the event of a negative outcome, thereby 
making an error visible (for example, alarms on infusion pumps, patient monitors). 
Although the result might be after the fact and therefore lower in leverage, automated 
alerts can also prompt drug orders for antidotes and reversal agents, thereby minimizing 
the consequences of an error. Rules, policies, and education are important components of 
error reduction strategies but have very limited leverage in creating real change. 
Risk Management: A Prioritizing Approach 253
FIGURE 7.3. Error Reduction Strategies.
Forcing functions and constraints
Rank Order of Error Reduction
Strategies
Automation and computerization
Standardization and protocols
Checklists and double check systems
Rules and policies
Education/Information
c07.indd 253 3/3/09 3:08:31 PM
254 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
TABLE 7.5. High-Alert Medications by Class or Category
adrenergic agonists, IV
adrenergic antagonists, IV
anesthetic agents, general, inhaled, and IV
cardioplegic solutions
chemotherapeutic agents
dextrose, hypertonic
dialysis solutions
epidural or intrathecal medications
glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
hypoglycemics, oral and insulin
inotropic medications, IV
liposomal forms of drugs
moderate sedation agents
narcotics/opiates, IV and oral
neuromuscular blocking agents
radiocontrast agents, IV
thrombolytics/fi brinolytics
total parenteral nutrition
 Another important prioritizing strategy is to categorize certain medications and 
patient populations as “ high - alert ” or “ high - risk. ” Medications considered high - alert 
are those that pose the greatest risk of causing signifi cant harm when misused (see 
Tables 7.5 and 7.6). High - risk patients are those at risk of suffering signifi cant harm if 
c07.indd 254 3/3/09 3:08:31 PM
TABLE 7.6. Specifi c High-Alert Medications
amiodarone, IV
colchicine injection
heparin, low molecular weight, injection
heparin, unfractionated, IV
insulin, subcutaneous and IV
lidocaine, IV
magnesium sulfate injection
methotrexate, oral, nononcologic use
nesiritide
nitroprusside, sodium, for injection
potassium chloride for injection concentrate
potassium phosphates injection
sodium chloride injection, hypertonic
warfarin
they experience a medication error (see Table 7.7 ). “ High - alert ” and “ high - risk ”do not 
mean that errors occur more frequently with these medications or to these patients; it 
simply means that the resulting harm is more diffi cult to ameliorate. Such categories 
help the health care organization properly prioritize error reduction efforts. 
 Because risk reduction efforts must begin at the highest leverage point, where the 
most effectiveness can be gained from minimal actions, prioritization is crucial to 
maximize the organization ’ s resources, including staff time. 
 Furthermore, certain subprocesses in the medication - use process may be considered more error - prone than others (see Table 7.8 ). These processes should be examined in detail, with attention to various ways that things could go wrong at each step 
Risk Management: A Prioritizing Approach 255
c07.indd 255 3/3/09 3:08:31 PM
256 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
TABLE 7.7. High-Risk Patient Populations
Patients with renal or liver impairment
Pregnant or breast-feeding patients
Neonates
Elderly or chronically ill patients
Patients on multiple medications
Oncology patients
TABLE 7.8. Error-Prone Processes
Patient-controlled analgesia; epidural analgesia
Use of automated dispensing equipment
Preparation of complex products in the pharmacy with automated compounders
Administration of enteral feedings in patients with IV catheters in place
Obtaining accurate allergy information
and the potential for patient harm that might result from a failure at each process 
step. A more formalized examination entails a failure mode effects analysis 
(http://www.ismp.org/profdevelopment/pcamonograph.pdf). 
 Yet another high - priority activity that often involves the risk management professional is due diligence regarding a new clinical development. In some settings, competition with other organizations is resulting in rapidly expanding services. Neonatal 
intensive care, organ transplants, open - heart surgery, home care infusion, and oncology units are but a few examples of the areas currently experiencing growth. Often in 
such situations, there has been little time to properly prepare for the new activity by 
reorganizing workfl ow and providing staff education. 
c07.indd 256 3/3/09 3:08:32 PM
 It is essential that appropriate planning take place and that medication use issues 
be given high priority. In one unfortunate situation, soon after a hospital established a 
new pediatric emergency service, a pharmacist was called to supply the unit with ketamine injection to sedate children during procedures in the ED. Ketamine is available 
in vials with concentrations of 10 mg/mL, 50 mg/mL, and 100 mg/mL. The pharmacy 
sent fi ve 100 - mg/mL vials to the unit. Before long, a four - year - old patient came to the 
ED for suturing of a wound. A physician who was accustomed to using vials of ketamine 10 mg/mL did not notice the 100 mg/mL concentration and inadvertently 
administered the total content of the 500 - mg vial instead of the 50 - mg pediatric dose. 
The child suffered a respiratory arrest but was successfully resuscitated. During review 
of the error, the pharmacy staff readily admitted that they were not well informed 
about the use of ketamine for ambulatory sedation in pediatric patients and were therefore unsure about which concentration to supply. It was also determined that no one in 
the pharmacy department had prior pediatric care experience. 
 When a new service or expansion of an existing department is contemplated, 
senior management must ensure that all staff members are provided with timely communication. A failure mode and effect analysis should take place to uncover potential 
areas of weakness and explore steps that are needed to promote safety. Staff orientation and proper education for new services must be planned as early as possible, but 
close enough to the start of the new service to maintain an appropriate skill level. In 
addition, consideration must be given to staffi ng levels, which might need to be 
increased (perhaps temporarily) in proportion to the new workload. The risk management professional can play a valuable role in facilitating senior administrative support 
of necessary planning. 
 Error Reporting and Follow - Up 
 Each individual practitioner must fi rmly believe that errors may be reported without 
disciplinary action and that the organization will use the incident report to evaluate the 
medication delivery system. In one case, a nurse was afraid to report a serious medication error to her manager because of her concern that this would blemish her record. 
She feared that the next time she committed an error, she might be suspended or even 
fi red. The nurse contacted ISMP because she was afraid to ask anyone at work if her 
patient, who was scheduled for an invasive procedure later that day, could be adversely 
affected by an inadvertent overdose of heparin. Although it seemed unlikely that the 
increased amount of heparin would have an effect several hours later, ISMP encouraged her to report the error because the physician might choose to postpone the procedure as a precaution. It was later learned that because of her fears, she did not inform 
anyone of the incident. Therefore, any opportunity for preventing patient harm or 
addressing the system issues that caused this error was lost. 
 Although no one would condone this nurse ’ s decision, it is easy to understand the 
mind - set behind it. If practitioners do not see any benefi t associated with reporting, 
there is no incentive to report. If they perceive a danger to themselves, they will be discouraged from reporting and may even discourage others. 
Risk Management: A Prioritizing Approach 257
c07.indd 257 3/3/09 3:08:32 PM
258 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
 Patient safety cannot be promoted in any organization without open communication about errors. Risk management professionals have the opportunity to encourage 
such openness and maximize the value of reporting. Practitioners can be motivated to 
report if they are clear that the purpose of reporting is proactively aimed at protecting 
their patients from future harm. 
 SUMMARY 
 It is fundamental that risk management professionals and the multidisciplinary team they 
are part of accept ownership of the medication - use process and enthusiastically embrace 
the opportunity to improve patient safety. While they may celebrate a “ safety week ” or 
 “ safety month, ” organizational leaders must also demonstrate around - the - clock commitment to medication safety. Risk management professionals can facilitate senior 
 management support of the fi nancial commitment and time required to train staff members in communication skills and maintain a physical environment that promotes safe 
and effective medication - use processes. Critical to achievement of this goal is a thorough 
understanding of exactly how each component of these processes interacts, taking into 
account the varied perspectives of practitioners and the complexity of their patients. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Active failure 
 Automated dispensing cabinet 
 Blunt - end 
 Computerized physician-provider
 order entry 
 Crew resource management 
 Failure mode effects analysis 
 High - alert medications 
 High - reliability organizations 
 High - risk patients 
 Latent failure 
 Medication administration record 
 Patient - controlled analgesia 
 Sharp - end 
 ACRONYMS 
 ADC 
 CPOE 
 FDA 
 FMEA 
 ICU 
 INR 
 ISMP 
 IV 
 MAR 
 PCA
 NOTES 
 1. Reason, J. Managing the Risks of Organization Accidents. Aldershot, England: 
Ashgate, 1990. 
 2. Drug Facts and Comparisons. Saint Louis, Mo.: Facts and Comparisons. 
c07.indd 258 3/3/09 3:08:33 PM
 3. NeoFax. Raleigh, N.C.: Acorn Publishing, 1995. 
 4. Leape, L. L., and others. “ Systems Analysis of Adverse Drug Events. ” Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 1995, 274, 35 – 43. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6. Institute for Safe Medication Practices. 2004 ISMP Medication Safety Self - Assessment 
for Hospitals. Huntingdon Valley, Pa.: Institute for Safe Medication Practices; 2004. 
 7. Thomson Reuter ’ s Micromedex Healthcare Series, Clinical Xpert and Formulary 
Advisor ® & reg; online database at http://www.micromedex.com/products/clinic
alxpert 
 8. Leape, L. L., and others. “ Pharmacist Participation on Physician Rounds and 
Adverse Drug Events in the Intensive Care Unit. ” Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 1999, 282, 267 – 270. 
 9. Institute for Safe Medication Practices. “ Intimidation: Practitioners Speak Up 
About This Unresolved Problem (Part I). ” ISMP Medication Safety Alert! 2004, 
9(5). Available at: https://www.ismp.org/Newsletters/acutecare/articles/20040311_
2.asp Survey results available at https://www.ismp.org/Survey/surveyResults/
Survey0311.asp (accessed November 10, 2008). 
 “ Intimidation: Mapping a Plan for Cultural Change in Healthcare (Part II). ” ISMP 
Medication Safety Alert! 2004, 9 (6). Available at: https://www.ismp.org/
Newsletters/acutecare/articles/20040325.asp (accessed November 10, 2008). 
10. Institute for Healthcare Improvement. “ Reconcile Medications at All Transition Points, ” http://www.ihi.org/IHI/Topics/PatientSafety/MedicationSystems/
Changes/Reconcile+Medications+at+All+Transition+Points.htm 
11. “ Look - Alike/Sound - Alike Drug Products Affect Cognition. ” USP CAPSLink, May 
2004, pp. 1 – 5, http://www.usp.org/pdf/EN/patientSafety/capsLink2004 - 05 - 01.pdf 
12. Holquist, C., and Phillips, J. “ Fatal Medication Errors Associated with Temodar. ” 
Drug Topics, 2003, 7, 42. 
13. The current Joint Commission NPSG for look - alike and sound - alike drug names 
can be found at http://www.jointcommission.org/NR/rdonlyres/C92AAB3F -
 A9BD - 431C - 8628 - 11DD2D1D53CC/0/LASA.pdf 
14. International Ergonomics Association. “ What Is Ergonomics? ” http://www.iea.cc/
browse.php?contID=what_is_ergonomics 
15. Ibid.; Leape and others, “ Systems Analysis. ” 
16. Institute for Safe Medication Practices Canada. “ Devices with Infl ation Ports: Risk 
for Medication Error – Induced Injuries. ” ISMP Canada Safety Bulletin, 2004, 4 (5), 
 http://www.ismp - canada.org/download/ISMPCSB2004 - 05.pdf 
Notes 259
c07.indd 259 3/3/09 3:08:33 PM
260 The Risk Management Professional and Medication Safety
17. Leape and others, “ Systems Analysis. ” 
18. Howard, S. K. “ Fatigue and the Practice of Medicine. ” Anesthesia Patient Safety 
Foundation Newsletter, Spring 2005 20, 1 – 24. 
19. Rosekind, M. R., and others. “ Crew Factors in Flight Operations: Alertness 
Management in Flight Operations. ” NASA Technical Memorandum No. 1999 -
 208780. Moffett Field, Calif.: National Aeronautic and Space Agency; 1999. 
20. Howard, S. K., and others. “ Simulation Study of Rested Versus Sleep - Deprived 
Anesthesiologists. ” Anesthesiology, 2003, 98, 1345 – 1355, discussion A. 
21. Rogers, A. E., Hwang, W. - T., Scott, L. D., Aiken, L. H., and Dinges, D. F. “ Hospital 
Staff Nurse Work and Patient Safety. ” Health Affairs, 2004, 23, 1 – 11. 
22. Dawson, D., and Reid, K. “ Fatigue, Alcohol and Performance Impairment. ” 
Nature, 1997, 388, 235. 
23. Howard, “ Fatigue and the Practice of Medicine. ” 
24. Kutner, M., Greenberg, E., Jin,Y., and Paulsen, C. (2006). The Health Literacy of 
America ’ s Adults: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy 
(NCES 2006 – 483). U.S.Department of Education, Washington, DC: National 
Center for Education Statistics, pp. v and 17. 
c07.indd 260 3/3/09 3:08:33 PM
261
CHAPTER
 8 
ETHICS IN PATIENT CARE 
 SHEILA COHEN ZIMMET 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to describe the ethical principles of patient autonomy 
■ To be able to discuss the principles in the Belmont Report in assessing biomedical and behavioral research principles 
■ To be able to operationalize research principles into policies for institutional 
review boards based on protecting the safety of human subjects 
■ To be able to recognize the obligations and rights of patients for treatment 
and refusal of treatment 
■ To be able to describe the functions of institutional review boards 
c08.indd 261 3/2/09 12:19:10 PM
262 Ethics in Patient Care
 This chapter is intended to provide an understanding of the ethics and law affecting everyday patient care issues, particularly those that are the most diffi cult to 
resolve— decisions to withhold or withdraw medical treatment and experimentation 
on human subjects. It is hoped that an understanding of the relevant bioethical and 
legal principles will assist the risk management professional in reducing legal exposures by promoting communication among health care providers, patients, and their 
families as to available treatment options and the benefi ts and burdens of each. All too 
often risk management issues arise because patients, their family members or surrogates 1
 are uncomfortable about treatment decisions that have been made either with 
or without their participation. They feel they have been the subject of experimentation 
without their knowledge, or they simply are not comfortable deciding to forgo further 
treatment because they think it might not be the “ right ” thing to do. 
 If the families or surrogates of patients with terminal, incurable illnesses were 
counseled, understood the benefi ts and burdens of treatment, and understood that it is 
ethically permissible, or perhaps preferable, to withhold futile care when the burdens 
of treatment outweighed the benefi ts of that treatment, there would be far less suspicion and even hostility in intensive care units. It is important that patients and their 
families understand and believe that treatment recommendations are made on the basis 
of burdens and benefi ts to the patient, not to the managed care system. It is the rare 
family dispute or stalemate over a terminally ill patient ’ s treatment options that cannot 
be resolved by having health care providers, family members or other surrogates, and 
religious and ethics consultants together in one room, openly discussing the ethically 
permissible options, including the option of no further treatment. 
KEY CONCEPTS
 ■ The success of medical research depends on trust between the scientifi c enterprise and the public, trust in the integrity of the discovery process, and especially 
trust in the safety of patients and healthy volunteers who participate. 
■ The role of the industrial review board is to safeguard that trust and to assess 
research in terms of risks and benefits, the adequacy of informed consent, the 
adequacy of safeguards to protect the privacy and confi dentiality of subjects, and 
the equitable selection of subjects. 
■ It is ethically appropriate to reject treatment when the burdens of treatment outweigh the benefi ts of treatment or when treatment is deemed to be futile. 
■ Basic ethical principles most relevant to clinical bioethics are benefi cence, autonomy, nonmalefi cence, and justice.
c08.indd 262 3/2/09 12:19:10 PM
 The reading selections and Web sites listed at the end of this chapter consist of 
basic ethics and regulatory documents that are useful reference tools for the risk management professional. The emphasis is on ethics because ethical principles, along with 
constitutional interpretation, are the source of the law that has developed in this area. 
The legal concept of patient self - determination that is recognized in judicial opinions 
and codifi ed into law derives from the ethical principle of respect for autonomy 
(defi ned further on), as does the law applicable to research on human subjects. 
 ETHICAL PRINCIPLES AND MORAL OBLIGATIONS 
 The relationships between health care providers and their patients and families are 
guided by certain basic ethical principles and the morally binding obligations that 
are derived from those principles. The basic ethical principles that are most relevant to 
clinical bioethics are the following: 
Benefi cence, which creates an obligation to benefi t patients and other people and 
to further their welfare and interests 
 Respect for patients ’ autonomy2
Nonmalefi cence, which asserts an obligation to prevent harm or, if risks of harm 
must be taken, to minimize those risks 
Justice, which is relevant to fairness of access to health care and to issues of 
rationing at the bedside 
 The morally binding obligations between patient and clinician or other health care 
provider that derive from these principles are these: 
 To respect the patient ’ s privacy and maintain a process that protects confi dentiality 
 To communicate honestly about all aspects of the patient ’ s diagnosis, treatment, 
and prognosis 
 To determine whether the patient is capable of sharing in decision making 
 To conduct an ethically valid process of informed consent throughout the relationship 
 The concepts of doing good (benefi cence), avoiding harm (nonmalefi cence), privacy, confi dentiality, and justice that are central to these ethical principles and moral 
obligations are recognized in the Oath of Hippocrates. 
3
 RESEARCH 
 In 1990, Dr. Marcia Angell, the New England Journal of Medicine ’ s executive editor, 
reiterated the journal ’ s position that only research conducted in accordance with the 
rights of human subjects would be published. The results of unethical research would 
not be published, regardless of scientifi c merit. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Research 263
c08.indd 263 3/2/09 12:19:11 PM
264 Ethics in Patient Care
There are three reasons for our position. First, the policy of publishing only ethical 
research, if generally applied, would deter unethical work … . Furthermore, any other 
policy would tend to lead to more unethical work … . Second, denying publication 
even when the ethical violations are minor protects the principle of the primacy of 
the research subject. If small lapses were permitted we would become inured to 
them, and this would lead to larger violations. And fi nally, refusal to publish unethical 
work serves notice to society at large that even scientists do not consider science the 
primary measure of a civilization. Knowledge, although important, may be less important to a decent society than the way it is obtained. 4
 The primacy of the human subject of which Angell wrote is the central concept of 
the modern system of human subject protection in biomedical research. It has its roots 
in the basic ethical principles of respect for people, benefi cence, and justice, the hallmarks of the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects in Biomedical 
and Behavioral Research ’ s Belmont Report (1979). 5
 The Belmont Report described 
the basic ethical principles on which all biomedical and behavioral research should be 
based. 
 The Belmont Report was not the fi rst to address these important concepts in the 
context of human research. In developing its report, the National Commission looked 
to the principles enunciated in the Nuremberg Code, developed during the Nuremberg 
war crimes trials. These principles were used as a set of standards to judge the conduct 
of physicians and scientists who had conducted biomedical research on imprisoned 
populations and for whom the results of that research took priority over the human 
subjects themselves. 6
 The commission also looked to the Declaration of Helsinki, 
fi rst adopted by the World Medical Assembly in 1964, as recommendations to guide 
medical doctors in biomedical research involving human subjects. The Declaration of 
Helsinki provides the accepted ethical standards for international human subject 
research. 7
 The three basic ethical concepts of the Belmont Report, in addition to the current 
regulations governing research on human subjects, are defi ned in the report as 
follows: 
 Respect for persons: a recognition of the personal dignity and autonomy of individuals and special protection of persons with diminished autonomy; an affi rmative obligation to protect vulnerable populations 
 Benefi cence: an obligation to maximize benefi ts and minimize risks of harm (nonmalefi cence) 
 Justice: a fair distribution of the benefi ts and burdens of research 
 Adherence to these basic ethical concepts ensures that the disadvantaged are not 
used as research subjects for the benefi t of the advantaged and that social progress 
resulting from human research does not justify overriding the rights of the individual 
subject. 8
■
■
■
c08.indd 264 3/2/09 12:19:11 PM
 The Belmont Report distinguished between research and practice in discussing 
which activities require special review. Practice includes interventions that are designed 
to enhance the well - being of a patient through either diagnosis or treatment and have a 
reasonable expectation of success. Per the Belmont Report, research was defi ned as an 
activity designed to test a hypothesis, permit conclusions to be drawn, and thereby to 
develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge (expressed, for example, in theories, 
principles, and statements of relationships). A departure from standard practice or the 
institution of a new treatment was not viewed as research. However, the commission 
recommended that new procedures should fi rst be made part of formal research protocols, to evaluate safety and effi cacy. 
 Following publication of the Belmont Report, both the Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare, now known as the Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) strengthened their human subject protections, increasing but not altering the role of the institutional review boards 
(IRBs). The HHS human research regulations, including IRB requirements, are codifi ed in the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, part 46 (including the federal policy 
or “ Common Rule, ” followed by all federal agencies that sponsor research). FDA regulations on human research are codifi ed in CFR Title 21, parts 50 (on informed 
 consent), 56 (on institutional review boards), 312 (on investigational new drug applications), 812 (on investigational device exemptions), and 860 (on medical device classifi cation procedures). 
 Each health care institution that receives federal funding for human research from 
a department or agency covered by the federal policy or Common Rule or that is subject to FDA regulation must have one or more IRBs with authority to prospectively 
review, require modifi cation of, approve, or disapprove the research. The IRB may be 
established by the institution or, less often, may be an independent entity under contract to the institution to provide IRB services. A document ensuring compliance with 
human subject protections must be negotiated between the institution and HHS before 
HHS - funded research may be conducted. The document, known as an assurance, may 
be for a single project or, more often, may be what is known as a federalwide assurance (FWA). 
 Applicable regulations are codifi ed at 45 CFR 46.103. The HHS and FDA have 
the authority to conduct compliance inspections of institutions engaged in research, 
including the activities of IRBs, and to halt or restrict federally funded research if 
institutions are found to be out of compliance with human subject protections. For 
example, an institution found to be out of compliance may have its assurance restricted 
or revoked. 
 Inspections by the FDA and the Offi ce for Human Research Protections (OHRP) 
may be routine, not - for - cause inspections or may be performed in response to a complaint. In an “ open letter to the human research community, ” dated April 17, 2002, 
Dr. Greg Koski, director of OHRP, announced a new quality improvement program 
that focuses on institutional self - assessment with follow - up “ collegial and constructive ” on - site consultation visits by OHRP staff. OHRP ’ s Division of Assurances and 
Research 265
c08.indd 265 3/2/09 12:19:12 PM
266 Ethics in Patient Care
Quality Improvement (DAQI) would not “ ordinarily ” share information obtained by 
OHRP pursuant to voluntary QI evaluations with its Division of Compliance 
Oversight. 9
 In another open letter, dated September 12, 2002, Koski renewed OHRP ’ s invitation for institutions to participate in the QI program and noted that OHRP will defer 
not - for - cause evaluations of an institution that has participated in or is scheduling a QI 
consultation. In other words, health care organizations are more likely to be subject to 
a not - for - cause inspection if they do not voluntarily participate in the QI program. 
 The federal research requirements are founded on respect for the autonomy of the 
research subject, evidenced by stringent informed consent requirements; the protection of vulnerable populations; the absence of coercion; and the reasonable balance of 
benefi ts and burdens of the proposed research for the individual subject, not for society at large. An individual ’ s decision not to participate in research may not in any way 
affect the ability of the individual to receive medical care or other benefi ts to which the 
individual would otherwise be entitled. It is the role of the IRBs to review and monitor 
the conduct of research and to educate the research community about the proper conduct of research. A discussion of the role of the IRBs and recent regulatory activity in 
this area follows. 
 INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARDS 
 For Dr. Gary B. Ellis, former director of the Offi ce for Protection from Research Risks 
(OPRR), 10 the relationship between subject and researcher is based on trust, and that 
trust must be respected: 
In the fi nal analysis, research investigators, research institutions, and federal regulators are stewards of a trust agreement with the people who are research subjects. For 
research subjects who are safeguarded by the federal regulations, we have a system 
in place that (1) minimizes the potential for harm, (2) enables and protects individual, 
autonomous choice, and (3) promotes the pursuit of new knowledge. By doing so, 
we protect the rights and welfare of our fellow citizens who make a remarkable contribution to the common good by participating in research studies. We owe them our 
best effort. 11
 To Dr. Jordan Cohen of the Association of American Medical Colleges, the successful conduct of medical research in a free society depends on trust between the scientifi c 
enterprise and the public, trust in the integrity of the discovery process, and especially 
trust in the safety of patients and healthy volunteers who participate in the process. 12 
 It is the role of the IRBs to safeguard that trust and to assess research, in terms of 
risks and benefi ts, the adequacy of informed consent, the adequacy of safeguards to 
protect the privacy and confi dentiality of subjects, 13 and the equitable selection of subjects (for example, is inclusion of vulnerable populations appropriate? Are minorities 
and women of childbearing potential adequately represented, or is a clear and 
c08.indd 266 3/2/09 12:19:12 PM
 compelling reason for their exclusion provided?). The IRB must (1) identify risks of 
the research, (2) determine that the risks will be minimized to the extent possible, (3) 
identify probable benefi ts of the research, (4) determine that the risks are reasonable in 
relation to the benefi ts to the subject and the knowledge to be gained, (5) ensure that 
research subjects are provided with an accurate and fair description of the risks, discomforts, and anticipated benefi ts, (6) ensure that research subjects are offered the 
opportunity to voluntarily accept or reject participation in the research or discontinue 
participation without coercion or fear of reprisal or deprivation of treatment to which 
the patient is otherwise entitled, 14 and (7) determine intervals of periodic review and, 
when necessary, determine the adequacy of mechanisms for monitoring data 
collection. 
 Maintaining strong safeguards for the safety of human subjects in medical research 
is a paramount obligation of clinical investigators and their institutions. Institutional 
review boards are the heart of the protection regime; they are responsible for reviewing all clinical and translational research conducted at their respective institutions and 
for making ethical determinations that risks to human subjects have been minimized to 
the greatest extent possible; that risks are reasonable in relation to anticipated benefi ts, 
if any; and that the risks, benefi ts, and alternative options are clearly communicated to 
the potential participants in the informed consent process. 
 In a time of declining clinical revenue, there may be increased pressure from principal investigators and administrators to cut corners and speed up the approval process 
for sponsored research. Such an approach places the welfare of the researcher and the 
research institution ahead of the welfare of the subject and is inconsistent with the ethical foundation of biomedical research and the derivative regulatory framework. The 
results of research, whether in terms of scientifi c recognition or of fi nancial reward, 
may never take priority over the research subject. Furthermore, compliance activities 
of federal regulatory bodies have shown that an approach to research that minimizes 
protection of the subject can ultimately prove to be very costly, in both revenue and 
reputation. 
 At the 2002 Fraud and Compliance Forum sponsored by the American Health 
Lawyers Association and the Health Care Compliance Association, Dr. Melody Lin of 
the OHRP Offi ce of Research Compliance identifi ed common fi ndings and defi ciencies associated with compliance oversight activities: 
 Initial and continuing review issues 
 Inadequate IRB review, particularly with respect to issues affecting vulnerable populations 
 IRB review without suffi cient information 
 Contingent approval with no system for follow - up 
 Inadequate continuing annual review, including failure to review at least once per 
year 
■
■
■
■
 Institutional Review Boards 267
c08.indd 267 3/2/09 12:19:12 PM
268 Ethics in Patient Care
 Informed consent and informed consent documentation issues 
 Language that is too complex 
 Use of impermissible exculpatory language 
 Standard consent forms inadequate for certain procedures 
 Reliance on standard surgical consent form to collect tissue samples 
 Inappropriate boilerplates 
 Failure to minimize possibility of coercion or undue infl uence 
 IRB membership and expertise issues 
 Lack of researcher diversity 
 Lack of IRB expertise for research 
 Lack of IRB expertise for research involving children and prisoners 
 Lack of suffi cient understanding of regulations 
 Designation of an additional IRB without OHRP approval 
 Documentation of IRB activities 
 Inappropriate application of exemption (not in six categories) 
 Inappropriate use of expedited approvals 
 Failure to document consideration of additional safeguards 
 Inadequate minutes (meaning votes not recorded, no summary of important issues, 
inability to reconstruct what was approved) 
 Poorly maintained fi les 
 IRB convened without a quorum 
 Nonscientist absent 
 Majority not present 
 Confl ict - of - interest issues 
 IRB members 
 Offi ce of sponsored research 
 Institutional offi cials 
 Inappropriate waiver of informed consent 
 Lack of written standard operating procedures 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c08.indd 268 3/2/09 12:19:13 PM
 Failure to report unanticipated problems to OHRP 
 Inadequate IRB resources and overburdened IRBs, which is considered the primary problem 
 Government oversight compliance activities have increased signifi cantly since 
1999 and are expected to gain momentum, signaling an increase in public interest in 
the ethical and procedural propriety of biomedical research. OHRP posts its compliance activities on its Web site, including the text of determination letters sent to 
research institutions operating under OHRP assurances. Risk management professionals will fi nd it useful to review the letters posted there to determine OHRP compliance 
priorities. 15
 A review of determination letters posted on the OHRP Web site reveals a similar 
pattern of common defi ciencies: (1) consent form defi ciencies such as language not 
understandable to the public, inadequate explanation of potential risks, failure 
to address all required elements of informed consent, and failure to describe all 
research procedures; (2) IRB procedural and process defi ciencies, such as inadequate 
written policies and procedures; improper use of expedited review for research not 
within permissible categories; inadequate information considered by the IRB to make 
required risk and benefi t determinations, particularly with respect to research involving pediatric subjects for which specifi c documented fi ndings are required; substantive changes to protocols and consent forms without full board re - review; failure of 
documentation of IRB actions, including attendance, specifi c votes on actions taken, 
and summary of IRB discussions; (3) lapsed IRB approval — IRB approval expires 
after one year, and the study administratively terminates; all research activity must 
stop unless the IRB specifi cally fi nds that it is in the best interest of subjects already 
enrolled to continue research activities, 4) failure to report to OHRP unanticipated 
problems involving risks to subjects, serious or continuing noncompliance, suspensions, and terminations. 
 The risk management professional should review the OHRP determination letters, 
informed consent checklist, guidance documents, and decision charts at the OHRP 
Web site ( http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/ ) for a more detailed analysis of and useful tools 
for compliance with the IRB ’ s obligations in each of these areas. Comprehensive, 
 mistake - proof IRB application forms, consent form templates, and IRB reviewer forms 
that elicit all required information, address all necessary informed consent elements, 
and contain required IRB fi ndings are important tools for maximizing the safety of 
human subjects and minimizing institutional liability. 
 The failure of some IRBs to consider whether the investigator has a potential confl ict of interest and to determine how to manage or eliminate that confl ict, along with 
the failure to inform the subject of potential confl icts of interest of the investigator 
or the institution, has resulted in signifi cant public condemnation and increased regulatory scrutiny. It is essential that each research institution establish its own policies 
and procedures for the reporting and managing of investigator and institutional 
 Institutional Review Boards 269
c08.indd 269 3/2/09 12:19:13 PM
270 Ethics in Patient Care
 confl icts of interest. Does an investigator, for example, have an impermissible fi nancial confl ict of interest because of a paid consultancy or an equity interest in the sponsor? Can the confl ict be managed with an independent oversight committee to verify 
the integrity of the data? 16
 It is also the responsibility of each research institution and its IRB to educate 
investigators to monitor the conduct of research and to ensure that the IRB members 
themselves are adequately and continually trained in human research protection. 
Ultimately, the expectation is for increasing institutional support for the research compliance infrastructure, including adequate staff resources that incorporate a research 
compliance offi cer function for implementation and monitoring of research activities 
and for management of research funds. 
 Gene or Recombinant DNAResearch 
 Research involving recombinant DNA or gene therapy that has any federal funding 
requires additional levels of review and approval at the institutional level (Institutional 
Biosafety Committee) and at the federal level (Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee 
[RAC] of the Offi ce of Biotechnology Activities [OBA]). The RAC was established to 
respond to public concerns about the safety of research that involves gene 
manipulation. 17
 Risk Management Implications 
 Each research institution should review its own policies and procedures and its IRB 
records for compliance with federal regulations to determine whether it is vulnerable 
to an adverse action on the basis of the mentioned criteria. For example, does the institution have an internal for - cause and random monitoring or auditing system to verify 
that investigators are complying with research protocols? Do all subjects sign consent 
forms? Do IRB policies and procedures satisfy federal requirements? Are minutes of 
IRB meetings adequate? Does training of IRB members and investigators meet the 
regulatory compliance emphasis on education? The risk management professional 
should assess whether and how to assist the institution in meeting its obligations in the 
area of human biomedical research or how a research compliance offi cer or similar 
offi cial could do it. The risk management professional should also assess coordination 
of the activities of its research regulatory bodies — the IRB, the institutional biosafety 
committee (for recombinant DNA and biohazards), and the radiation safety committee 
(for radiological safety; radiation safety review and approval are required under the 
institution ’ s Nuclear Regulatory Commission license). 
 If compliance is not adequate, the loss to the institution, in terms of funding and 
reputation, could be enormous. Institutions must be vigilant in their review and monitoring of the activities of the IRB and investigators and mindful of their own institutional fi nancial confl icts of interest and those of their researchers. If they are not, they 
can expect that federal oversight, investigative, or prosecutorial bodies will be. 
c08.indd 270 3/2/09 12:19:14 PM
 Risk management professionals should also be mindful of the potential for costly 
civil and criminal litigation growing out of regulatory noncompliance. Numerous 
well - publicized instances of death or serious injury to human subjects in clinical trials 
have given rise to costly litigation against institutions, investigators, and individual 
IRB members. In virtually all instances, civil litigants have cited nondisclosure of 
prior adverse effects experienced by research subjects or nondisclosure of confl icts 
of interest as a basis of their causes of action. It is advised that the risk management 
professional ensure that IRB procedures and audit mechanisms provide for full disclosure to the IRB and research subjects of all potential risks and complications and all 
confl icts of interest associated with the research. It is further advised that the risk management professional investigate whether coverage for personal injury and death arising out of administrative actions (such as actions of IRB chairs and members) is 
included in the institution ’ s insurance portfolio, whether through its professional and 
general liability coverage or its directors ’ and offi cers ’ (D & O) insurance. Keep in mind 
that D & O policies traditionally do not include coverage for personal injury and death. 
 An additional area of potential risk arising out of regulatory noncompliance relates 
to enforcement activities of the HHS Offi ce of the Inspector General (OIG) and the 
U.S. Department of Justice. The risk management professional should be aware that 
obtaining federal funds in a fraudulent manner, for instance, through billing of the federal government for health care services provided pursuant to a clinical trial for which 
billing is not permitted; engaging in scientifi c misconduct in a federally funded research 
proposal; or improper time and effort and cost reporting in federally funded grants can 
all serve as the basis for both civil and criminal charges under the federal fraud and 
abuse laws, including the False Claims Act. In the civil context, the government is entitled to treble damages for successful prosecution. Federal prosecutors have indicated 
that noncompliance with IRB requirements such as false information or a failure to 
provide required information to the IRB regarding adverse events can serve as a basis 
for prosecution under the fraud and abuse laws. 
 Federal enforcement of regulatory requirements as they apply to research has been 
and will continue to be aggressive, whether through agency enforcement activities or 
application of civil or criminal penalties (or both). The cost of noncompliance to the 
institutions and its employees and agents could be high. 
 Medical Record Privacy 
 Under the Common Rule, the IRB must consider whether there are adequate provisions to protect the confi dentiality of human subjects. There are additional regulatory 
requirements for protection of protected health information (PHI), under the privacy provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) that apply to research. 18 These privacy protections became effective April 
14, 2003, and are enforceable by HHS through both civil and criminal penalties. The 
discussion here will focus only on HIPAA and research. 19
 Institutional Review Boards 271
c08.indd 271 3/2/09 12:19:14 PM
272 Ethics in Patient Care
 Use and Disclosure of Protected Health Information
for Research Purposes 
 In general, PHI may be used or disclosed by a covered entity for research purposes 
under the following circumstances: 
 1. If the covered entity obtains an authorization from the individual to use the individual ’ s PHI 
 2. If an IRB or privacy board has approved a waiver of the need for an individual 
authorization based on specifi c criteria set forth in the regulations 
 3. If the researcher reviews the data “ preparatory to research ” and does not remove 
the data from the premises
 4. If there is a “ data use agreement ” between the covered entity and the researcher 
to obtain a “ limited data set ” of data that is facially deidentifi ed 
 Individually identifi able health information relating to either living or deceased persons that is transmitted or maintained by covered entities in any form or medium is considered PHI and is subject to HIPAA protection. However, under the Common Rule, a 
human subject is defi ned as “ a living individual ” about whom an investigator obtains 
data through intervention or interaction or obtains identifi able private information. 
Accordingly, under HIPAA, the IRB or privacy board must review and approve the confi dentiality provisions of research and must require authorizations or waive the requirement for authorizations for research involving PHI of deceased persons that would not 
have been reviewed by the IRB under the Common Rule. Risk management professionals should note that the defi nition of PHI includes the requirement that the information 
be identifi able. Accordingly, information is not PHI if all identifi ers are removed as specifi ed in the privacy regulations or if an expert certifi es that the information used alone or 
in combination with other available information could not identify the individual. 
 Notwithstanding strong objection from the research community, the fi nal rule 
issued by HHS retained the requirements that for information to be deidentifi ed, all of 
the following information must be removed: 
 Names 
 Geographical subdivisions smaller than a state except for the fi rst three digits of 
the ZIP code 
 All elements of dates (except year) for subjects eighty - nine years of age or under 
 Telephone numbers 
 Fax numbers 
 E - mail addresses 
 Social Security numbers 
 Medical record numbers 
c08.indd 272 3/2/09 12:19:14 PM
 Health plan benefi ciary numbers 
 Account numbers 
 Certifi cate or license numbers 
 Vehicle identifi ers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers 
 Device identifi ers and serial numbers 
 World Wide Web universal resource locators (URLs) 
 Internet protocol (IP) addresses 
 Biometric identifi ers, including fi ngerprints and voice prints 
 Full - face photographic images and any comparable images 
 Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, with some exceptions 
 The rules permit use and disclosure of PHI without an authorization for treatment, 
payment, and health care operations. But, because research is not considered a health care 
operation, disclosure without an authorization for research purposes is not permitted, with 
limited exceptions (for example, research on decedents under certain specifi ed circumstances, reviews preparatory to research, and research using a limited data set). 
 Authorization for Use and Disclosure of Protected 
Health Information for Research Purposes 
 To be valid, an authorization for research must include (1) a description of the PHI to 
be used or disclosed (and this must be the minimum necessary for the research); (2) 
the person or class of persons who may use or disclose PHI and to whom use or disclosure may be made; (3) the purposes of the use or disclosure; (4) the possibility of 
redisclosure; (5) an expiration date (end of research study or “ none ” ); (6) signature 
and date; and (7) a right to revoke. Note also that although research may be conditioned on the subject executing an authorization to use and disclose protected health 
information for research purposes, treatment may not be conditioned on a subject ’ s 
agreement to participate in research. Refusal to provide treatment if a subject refused 
to agree to participate in research would be viewed as impermissible coercion. 
 Exceptions from the Authorization Requirements 
 If a researcher requests that authorization be waived for a particular research proposal, 
the IRB or privacy board may waive the authorization only with the following fi ndings: 
 The use or disclosure involves no more than minimal risk to the individual ’ s privacy, based on a plan to protect identifi ers or a plan to destroy identifi ers as soon 
as possible unless there are research or legal reasons not to do so. 
 Assurance is provided that the PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other 
person except as required by the research or law. 
■
■
 Institutional Review Boards 273
c08.indd 273 3/2/09 12:19:15 PM
274 Ethics in Patient Care
 The research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver. 
 The research could not practicably be conducted without the PHI. 
 Risk management professionals should note that this analysis is very similar to the 
analysis currently employed by IRBs when determining whether subject consent for 
research may be waived. IRB templates can be modifi ed to accommodate the new 
requirements. 
 A covered entity may allow access to the PHI of a deceased individual without an 
authorization or waiver if the researcher represents that the information is sought 
solely for research on the PHI of decedents. If requested, the researcher provides documentation of the death of the individuals and documentation that PHI is necessary for 
research purposes. 
 A covered entity may allow use or disclosure of PHI without an authorization or a 
waiver for reviews preparatory to research if the researcher represents that (1) the use 
or disclosure is solely to prepare a research protocol or otherwise preparatory to 
research, (2) no PHI will be removed from the covered entity, and (3) the PHI is necessary for research purposes. 
 Compilation of research databases or manipulation of PHI to create a database or 
to bank tissue also requires an authorization or waiver by an IRB or privacy board. 
This waiver does not eliminate the requirement for either an authorization to use the 
data in research or a waiver. An authorization or waiver is required for referral of a 
patient to a researcher or for a researcher to contact a patient directly. The PHI that the 
researcher may use or disclose must be defi ned in the authorization, or if by waiver, the 
researcher must specify the minimum information necessary to accomplish the research. 
 Researchers are not considered business associates under the privacy rules and 
would not be required to execute business associate agreements with the covered entity 
to access PHI. The authorization for access to PHI for research must describe the 
research for which the PHI is to be used. “ Future research, ” although currently a common description used in consent forms, is not an adequate description under HIPAA. Of 
course, the IRB may waive authorization based on the criteria previously mentioned. 
 Record - Keeping 
 If PHI is accessed pursuant to an authorization, the institution is not required to keep a 
record of that disclosure. If PHI is disclosed pursuant to a waiver, a review preparatory 
to research or research on decedents, the covered entity must keep a record of disclosures and must provide an accounting when requested. This may be accomplished 
either through an annotation of the record, which is then provided to the subject, or by 
providing the subject a list of protocols for which waivers have been granted during 
the time period involved. 
 Summary 
 HIPAA is one more regulatory burden that potentially could delay the review and 
approval process for research, to the chagrin of researchers and research institutions. 
■
■
c08.indd 274 3/2/09 12:19:15 PM
However, once it is determined whether the institution will rely on the IRB to make 
privacy decisions or whether a separate privacy board will make such determinations, 
templates can be developed to facilitate the process and prevent regulatory mistakes. 
 Risk management professionals should be aware that the 2005 work plan of the 
HHS Offi ce of the Inspector General indicated an intent to conduct an assessment of 
the policies and procedures of colleges and universities for protecting the privacy 
of medical records of people participating in NIH - funded clinical trials and other 
research, in compliance with the HIPAA privacy standards. 
 PATIENT SELF - DETERMINATION ACT 
 The federal Patient Self - Determination Act of 1990 (PSDA) requires institutional 
health care providers who receive federal funds, such as hospitals, nursing homes, 
hospices, and home health agencies, to inform patients of their right to make health 
care decisions. 20 This includes the right to accept or refuse treatment and the right to 
formulate advance directives (commonly referred to as living wills and durable powers of attorney). 
 The law requires hospitals to provide written information to each adult patient at 
the time of admission concerning the institution ’ s policies for implementing the 
patient ’ s right to make health care decisions. Advance directives are documents formulated in advance of a period of incapacity in which individuals executing the documents set forth their wishes with respect to treatment options or delineate who should 
serve as surrogate decision makers in the event that the individuals become unable to 
express their own wishes. 
 The PSDA sets forth a mechanism for educating patients about their constitutional 
right to self - determination that was recognized by the U.S. Supreme Court in its fi rst 
 “ right to die ” case, Cruzan v. Director , Missouri Department of Health . 
21 In Cruzan,
the Court held that the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution gives to each person a constitutionally protected liberty interest in refusing unwanted medical treatment, thereby giving constitutional status to the ethical 
principle of respect for patients ’ autonomy. In this context, the right of autonomy and 
the right of self - determination are synonymous. 
 If a person is incapacitated and hence unable to make or express an informed and 
voluntary choice to accept or refuse treatment, that patient does not lose the right. 
Rather, the individual ’ s right to make the treatment choices must be exercised by a surrogate. The durable power of attorney for health care is the mechanism by which an 
individual designates who will serve in that surrogate role. 22
 The PSDA focuses on the right of competent patients to determine and direct the 
future course of their medical treatment. The act seeks to avoid a situation in which 
the wishes of a patient are not clearly known or there is no legally valid surrogate decision maker available to advise the health care provider what the patient would want 
under the circumstances. The PSDA does not alter the common law concept of next of 
kin, nor does it affect substantive state law regarding surrogate decision making. It sets 
 Patient Self - Determination Act 275
c08.indd 275 3/2/09 12:19:15 PM
276 Ethics in Patient Care
forth a mechanism whereby patients learn about their rights under state law to make 
treatment decisions and execute advance directives and are offered the opportunity to 
take advantage of those rights. Under the PSDA, health care institutions must do the 
following: 
 Provide written information to all adult patients upon admission or initial receipt 
of care about their rights to make decisions, including the right to accept or refuse 
treatment and to execute advance directives, and the written policies of the institution that respect these rights 
 Comply with state law regarding the rights of patients to make treatment decisions 
and execute advance directives 
 Educate the staff and the community about these issues 
 Document in the patient ’ s medical records whether the individual has executed an 
advance directive 23
 Not require the execution of an advance directive as a precondition to the provision of care 
 Even when an individual has executed an advance directive that sets forth the 
individual ’ s wishes regarding the acceptance or refusal of treatment, including life -
 sustaining treatment, it is not always clear to the health care provider or the surrogate 
what the individual intended under particular clinical circumstances. For example, 
did the individual who specifi ed that life - sustaining treatment be withdrawn “ in the 
event of a terminal, incurable disease or persistent vegetative state ” intend that 
mechanical ventilation and artifi cial hydration and nutrition be withheld or just the 
respirator? If the individual did not address a persistent vegetative state but addressed 
only a terminal, incurable disease, did that individual intend the treatment choice to 
be applied to the former, and would state law permit the withdrawal of treatment 
under these circumstances? State laws differ on the interpretation of when a person is 
in a terminal, incurable condition so as to invoke the terms of an advance directive. 
State law may require that an advance directive specify its applicability to a persistent 
vegetative state for the treatment options to apply. Advance directives should be 
drafted that specifi cally address treatment options under these different clinical 
presentations. 
 In light of court decisions upholding the rights of pregnant women to refuse invasive medical treatment regardless of the gestational age of the fetus, whether or not the 
treatment is deemed lifesaving or otherwise benefi cial, 24 advance directives that 
address the treatment wishes of pregnant patients should be considered, particularly 
for institutions providing tertiary maternal - fetal medicine or perinatology services. 
The directive should address the provision of life - sustaining treatments for the mother, 
including artifi cial hydration, nutrition, and CPR, both before and after birth of the 
fetus, and whether or not the patient authorizes a cesarean section if it is deemed to be 
in the best interest of the unborn child. The directive should provide for authorization 
■
■
■
■
■
c08.indd 276 3/2/09 12:19:16 PM
or refusal of these treatments and should specify that failure to provide the treatments 
may result in harm to or death of the baby. 
 “ DO NOT RESUSCITATE ” : WITHHOLDING OR 
WITHDRAWING TREATMENT 
 It has been said that the paradox of modern medicine is that treatment intended to save 
life often ends up prolonging the agony of dying. 25 Whether it is due to the clinician ’ s 
or family ’ s refusal to accept defeat, the mistaken belief that the withholding or withdrawing of treatment is ethically abhorrent, or the simple discomfort that accompanies a discussion of the inevitability of death, this issue continues to be one of the most 
diffi cult and most frequent ethical dilemmas health care providers face. It is not a new 
issue. In his treatise The Art, Hippocrates ’ defi nition of the purpose of medicine 
included “ to do away with the sufferings of the sick, to lessen the violence of their diseases, and to refuse to treat those who are over - mastered by their diseases, realizing in 
such cases that medicine is powerless … . Whenever therefore a man suffers an illness 
which is too strong for the means at the disposal of medicine, he surely must not 
expect that it can be overcome by medicine. ” 26
 It is clear from the prior discussions of patient autonomy and self - determination 
that there is a constitutionally protected and ethically sanctioned right to refuse treatment, including life - sustaining treatment. It is important to understand, and to put into 
practice, a process to determine and implement the treatment decision when the patient 
cannot make or communicate the choice. Frameworks for decision making can be 
found in the President ’ s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine 
and Biomedical and Behavioral Research report titled Deciding to Forgo Life -
 Sustaining Treatment (1983) 27 and in the Hastings Center ’ s Guidelines on the 
Termination of Life - Sustaining Treatment and the Care of the Dying (1987). 28
 Health care providers should understand that their patients have the right to make 
health care decisions based on their own values and experiences and to have their decisions respected. The fi rst step is determining the appropriate decision maker. Competent 
adult patients who can understand the signifi cance of their decisions and can communicate those decisions effectively have the right to make the decisions. Patients have 
the right to balance benefi ts and burdens and decide whether to proceed with treatment, based on their own values and personal preferences. As the President ’ s 
Commission noted, “ The moral claim of autonomy supports acting in accord with the 
patient ’ s preference. ” 29 It is ethically appropriate to reject treatment when the burdens 
of treatment outweigh the benefi ts of treatment or when treatment is deemed to be 
futile. 
 If the patient cannot make or communicate the decision, it is the role of the appropriate surrogate decision maker to advise the health care provider what the patient 
would want. This is known as the “ substituted judgment test. ” It is not the role of the 
surrogate to make an independent judgment of what is in the best interest of the patient 
 “ Do Not Resuscitate ” : Withholding or Withdrawing Treatment 277
c08.indd 277 3/2/09 12:19:16 PM
278 Ethics in Patient Care
(the “ best interest test ” ) unless a decision could not otherwise be reached, as is the 
case when the patient has never had the capacity to form a judgment (such as a newborn). In general, unless the health care provider has reason to believe that the treatment choice of a legally valid surrogate is inconsistent with what the patient would 
make or has set forth in an advance directive, the decision of the surrogate should 
prevail. 
 In the event of a disagreement between clinician and surrogate as to the appropriate course of action, internal mechanisms to resolve the matter, including ethics 
 committee consultation, should be attempted. Resorting to a judicial forum to resolve 
disagreements between health care providers and decision makers regarding the appropriate course of treatment for an incapacitated patient is generally unproductive. 
 “ Decision - making about life - sustaining care is rarely improved by resort to the 
courts. ” 30 It is not the role of the court to substitute its own judgment for the informed 
substituted judgment of the surrogate, nor will it substitute its own best - interest determination for that of the surrogate. Unless the health care provider can establish that the 
decision of a surrogate to either require or refuse medical treatment, including a 
“ do not resuscitate” (DNR) order, constitutes either neglect or abuse, thereby invoking 
the authority of the state to protect innocent third parties, 31 courts will not override 
the decisions of legally valid surrogates. 
 Another example is In re Baby K, in which an appeals court affi rmed the district 
court ruling requiring the hospital to provide full pulmonary resuscitation for an anencephalic infant when requested by the mother, even though the care was deemed futile 
and outside the scope of the standard of care. 32 The court of appeals held that a refusal 
by emergency room personnel to provide stabilizing resuscitative measures to the 
infant, if brought to the emergency department in respiratory distress, would constitute 
a violation of the requirements of the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act 
(EMTALA), 33 which provides that all persons seeking emergency medical treatment 
receive an appropriate medical screening and stabilizing treatment. The lower court ruling that it could not substitute its judgment for the judgment of the mother, who was the 
legally valid surrogate, was affi rmed. The court also stated, with respect to the moral 
dilemma facing the health care providers who thought the provision of futile care to 
Baby K was inappropriate “ to the extent that [Virginia law] exempts treating physicians in participating hospitals from providing care they consider medically or ethically inappropriate, it is preempted … it does not allow the physicians treating Baby K 
to refuse to provide her with respiratory support. ” 
 In a decision by the District of Columbia Court of Appeals, the court recognized 
that parents have a fundamental constitutional right to the care, custody, and 
 management of their child that is not absolute but must yield to the best interest and 
well - being of the child. In the case of In re K.I., the parents disagreed as to the appropriateness of resuscitation for their terminally ill child. 34 The medical evidence established that resuscitation would be futile and would result only in pain and discomfort. 
The lower court concluded that the mother ’ s refusal to consent to the issuance of the 
c08.indd 278 3/2/09 12:19:17 PM
DNR order was unreasonably contrary to the child ’ s well - being. In affi rming the 
lower court ruling that a DNR order should be entered, the court of appeals held that 
 “ in cases involving minor respondents who have lacked, and will forever lack, the 
ability to express a preference regarding their course of medical treatment. . . and 
where the parents do not speak with the same voice but disagree as to the proper 
course of action, the best interests of the child standard shall be applied to determine 
whether to issue a DNR. ” 35 
 In a case that reached national prominence and involved state and federal government intervention, the husband of a patient determined to be in a persistent vegetative 
state sought to have life - prolonging procedures terminated, over the objection of her 
parents. Michael Schiavo, the husband of Terri Schiavo, petitioned the guardianship 
court in Florida to authorize termination of artifi cial hydration and nutrition. The court 
found by clear and convincing evidence that Terri Schiavo was in a persistent vegetative state and that she would elect to cease life - prolonging procedures if she were competent to make her own decision. The decisions of the state and federal courts that 
heard and reviewed this case ultimately supported Terri Schiavo ’ s constitutional liberty interest to accept or refuse treatment, without interference by the legislative and 
executive branches of government. There were numerous court proceedings related to 
this matter. 36
 SUMMARY 
 It is recommended that risk management professionals become familiar with the ethical issues discussed in this chapter and promote their dissemination to the health care 
providers who deal with these diffi cult issues on a regular basis. An ethics consultation 
mechanism should be made available anytime it is needed to assist health care providers, patients, and their families reach health care decisions that can be implemented 
with the knowledge that all parties are comfortable with the decision. 37
 KEY TERMS 
 Advance directive 
 Autonomy 
 Belmont Report 
 Benefi cence 
 Declaration of Helsinki 
 Do not resuscitate 
 Ethics committee 
 Health Insurance Portability and
 Accountability Act 
 Informed consent 
 Institutional review board 
 Justice 
 Nonmalefi cence 
 Nuremberg Code 
 Oath of Hippocrates 
 Patient Self - Determination Act 
 Privacy 
 Protected health information 
 Withholding or withdrawing treatment 
 Key Terms 279
c08.indd 279 3/2/09 12:19:17 PM
280 Ethics in Patient Care
 ACRONYMS 
 DNR 
 FDA 
 HHS 
 HIPAA 
 IRB 
 OBA 
 OHRP 
 PHI 
 PSDA 
 RAC 
NOTES 
 1. A surrogate is an individual who is legally authorized to make health care decisions on behalf of a patient who cannot make or communicate decisions due to 
incapacity. The surrogate may be the common - law next - of - kin or an individual 
designated by the patient in a durable power of attorney for health care to make 
health care decisions for the patient in the event of temporary or permanent 
incapacity. 
 2. Fletcher, J. C., and others. “ Clinical Ethics: History, Content, and Resources. ” In 
J. C. Fletcher, Introduction to Clinical Ethics. Hagerstown, Md.: University 
Publishing Group, 1995, pp. 3 – 17. The term autonomy derives from the Greek 
autos, meaning “ self, ” and nomos, meaning “ rule. ” The concept of autonomy
( “ self - rule ” ) is associated with privacy, free choice, and personal responsibility 
for one ’ s choices. Beauchamp, T. L., and L. Walters. Contemporary Issues in 
Bioethics. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1994, p. 22. 
 3. The Hippocratic Oath is available from the National Library of Medicine at http://
www.nlm.nih.gov/hmd/greek/greek_oath.html 
 4. Angell, M. “ The Nazi Hypothermia Experiments and Unethical Research Today. ” 
New England Journal of Medicine, 1990, 322, 1462 – 1464. 
 5. The Belmont Report is available from the National Institutes of Health at http://
ohsr.od.nih.gov/guidelines/belmont.html 
 6. The Nuremberg Code is available from the National Institutes of Health at http://
ohsr.od.nih.gov/guidelines/nuremberg.html 
 7. The Declaration of Helsinki is available from the National Institutes of Health at 
 http://history.nih.gov/laws/pdf/helsinki.pdf 
 8. Jonsen, A. R. “ The Ethics of Research with Human Subjects: A Short History. ” In 
A. R. Jonsen, R. M. Veatch, and L. Walters. Source Book in Bioethics. Washington, 
D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 1998, pp. 5 – 9. 
 9. For more information, see the open letter, program description, and self - a ssessment 
tool on the OHRP Web site at http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/qi/ 
c08.indd 280 3/2/09 12:19:17 PM
10. OPRR is the former federal offi ce with human subject research oversight authority. The offi ce relocated from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to the Offi ce 
of Public Health and Science within HHS and is now called the Offi ce for Human 
Research Protection (OHRP). The move was generally accepted as a means of 
increasing the visibility of federal oversight of human subject protection and 
access to the secretary of HHS. 
11. Ellis, G. “ Protecting the Rights and Welfare of Human Research Subjects. ” 
Academic Medicine, 1999, 74, 1008 – 1009. 
12. Cohen, J. J., and Siegel, E. K. “ Academic Medical Centers and Medical Research. ” 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 2005, 294, 1369. 
13. For particularly sensitive research, such as genetic research when there is a concern that the release of information regarding the research results could lead to 
discrimination in the workplace or in the ability of individuals who are found to be 
carriers of genetic diseases to obtain life or health insurance, there is a mechanism 
for protection of data. The secretary of HHS, or the secretary ’ s designee, may 
issue a Certifi cate of Confi dentiality “ to protect the privacy of research subjects by 
withholding their identities from all persons not connected with the research … . 
Persons so authorized to protect the privacy of such individuals may not be compelled in any Federal, State, or local civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or 
other proceedings to identify such individuals. ” 42 USC 241(d) and Public Health 
Service Act, sec. 301(d). For further information, call the National Institutes of 
Health at (301) 402 - 7221. 
14. For example, is the amount of compensation offered so excessive as to be coercive? Is the subject compensated only at the end of a six - month clinical trial so 
that the subject cannot withdraw during the trial without loss of all compensation? 
Or is the compensation prorated for the amount of time the subject participated? 
15. Offi ce for Human Research Protections, “ Determination Letters, ” http://www.hhs.gov/
ohrp/compliance/letters/index.html 
16. For more information, go to http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/policy/coi/index.htm 
and http://www.aamc.org/research/coi/start.htm 
17. See “ Frequently Asked Questions ” at the OBA Web site at http://www4.od.nih.gov/
oba/RAC/RAC_FAQs.htm 
18. See 45 CFR 160 and 164. 
19. On December 4, 2002, the HHS Offi ce for Civil Rights issued the comprehensive 
 “ Guidance on the National Standards to Protect the Privacy of Personal Health 
Information. ” It can be found at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa ; the section on 
research is on pages 85 – 98 of the document. 
Notes 281
c08.indd 281 3/2/09 12:19:18 PM
282 Ethics in Patient Care
20. Public Law 101 - 508, codifi ed at 42 USC 1395(c)(c) and 1396(a)(a), and § 4206 of 
the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1990. Subsequent to enactment of the PSDA, 
which is enforceable only against institutions that participate in the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs, The Joint Commission amended its accreditation standards to 
require all of its health care organizations to maintain mechanisms for informing 
patients about their rights to self - determination and honoring those rights. 
21. Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261, 110 S.Ct. 2841, 
111 L.Ed. 2nd 224, 58 USLW 4916 (1990). 
22. This chapter focuses on the rights of patients and their surrogates to make treatment decisions. It is important for the risk management professional to understand 
that the law presumes consent for medically necessary medical treatment in a 
medical emergency when consent of the patient cannot be obtained and a surrogate is not available. If the patient ’ s life or future health may be jeopardized if 
treatment is not instituted immediately and the treatment has not been refused by 
the patient, consent will be presumed. 
23. Although not specifi ed in the law, institutional policies should include a mechanism by which the patient ’ s advance directive is included in the medical record so 
that it is readily available and known to the clinicians before implementation is 
needed. An advance directive in a safe at the bank or in a drawer at home is not 
helpful to the health care provider when a decision must be made immediately. 
24. See Baby Boy Doe v. Mother Doe, 260 Ill. App. 3d 392, 632 N.E. 2d 326 (Ill. App. 
1994); In re A.C., 573 A. 2d 1235 (D.C. App. 1990). 
25. Hite, C. A., and others. “ Death and Dying. ” In J. C. Fletcher and others, Introduction 
to Clinical Ethics, pp. 115 – 138. 
26. Hippocrates. The Art. In Hippocrates, vol. 2, W. H. S. Jones (trans.). Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967, p. 193. 
27. President ’ s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and 
Biomedical Research. Deciding to Forgo Life - Sustaining Treatment: A Report on 
the Ethical, Medical, and Legal Issues in Treatment Decisions. Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Offi ce, 1983. Many of the developments during the 
decade subsequent to the issuance of this report that shape the law and ethics of 
patient self - determination, as it is understood today, grew out of the commission ’ s 
recommendations — for example, state enactment of legislation providing for 
advance directives and the growth of institutional ethics committees to provide 
consultation to clinicians and patients and their families on issues that have life -
 or - death consequences for patients. 
28. Hastings Center. Guidelines on the Termination of Life - Sustaining Treatment and 
the Care of the Dying. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1987. An excellent 
c08.indd 282 3/2/09 12:19:18 PM
summary of the decision - making process described in the ethics literature, including reference to the reports by the President ’ s Commission and the Hastings 
Center, can be found in Carol Taylor ’ s article “ Ethics in Health Care and Medical 
Technologies. ” Theoretical Medicine, 1990, 11, 111 – 124. 
29. President ’ s Commission, Deciding, p. 245. 
30. Ibid., p. 247. 
31. For example, courts have traditionally ordered medically necessary and appropriate treatment of children over parental objections. See In the matter of Adam L.,
111 Wash. L. Rep. 25 (D.C. Sup. Ct. 1983). However, in instances when treatment 
is not likely to preserve life or is itself highly risky, judges generally will not substitute their judgment for the judgment of patients or their legal decision makers. 
32. In re Baby K , 16 F. 3d 590 (4th Cir. 1994). 
33. 42 USC 1395(d)(d). 
34. In re K.I., 98 - FS - 1683 and 98 - FS - 1767, 1700 – 1742 (D.C. App. 1999). 
35. The standard for deciding whether and under what circumstances it is legally permissible to forgo life - sustaining treatment for critically ill or handicapped newborns is set forth in the 1984 amendments to the Child Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment and Adoption Reform Act of 1974 (42 USCA 5102 (3)(A) and (3)(B). 
Regulations are found at 45 CFR., part 1340. In general, it is not permissible to 
withhold medically indicated treatment except under certain specifi ed conditions: 
 The infant is chronically and irreversibly comatose. 
 The provision of such treatment would merely prolong dying. 
 Treatment would not be effective in ameliorating or correcting all of the infant ’ s 
life threatening conditions. 
 Treatment would otherwise be futile in terms of the survival of the infant. 
 Treatment would be virtually futile in terms of the survival of the infant and 
the treatment itself would be inhumane. 
 To the extent that the law prohibits the withholding of artifi cial hydration and 
nutrition from these infants, that portion of the law is inconsistent with the 
Supreme Court holding in Cruzan that affords constitutional status to the right 
to withhold medical treatment, including artifi cial hydration and nutrition, 
which was the medical treatment at issue in that case. 
 36. See, in particular, Jeb Bush v. Michael Schiavo, SC 04 - 925 (Sup. Ct. Fla. 2004). 
After fi fteen years in a persistent vegetative state, Terri Schiavo lived another two 
weeks after life support was removed under the court order. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
Notes 283
c08.indd 283 3/2/09 12:19:18 PM
284 Ethics in Patient Care
37. Whether an ethics consult note should be entered in the patient record and what its 
contents should be are the subject of ongoing debate in the ethics literature. I generally favor a consult note placed in the chart that outlines the ethical dilemma and 
sets forth the recommendations regarding whether the various treatment options 
that are available to the practitioner and the patient or surrogate are ethically or 
morally permissible under the clinical circumstances but does not dictate treatment decisions. A record of the consult must be maintained and, in the event of litigation, it is discoverable whether it is in the patient chart or in the records of the 
consult service. In other words, the content of the note (in terms of objectivity and 
recognition that the ultimate decision makers are the physician and the physician ’ s 
patient and surrogate) is more important than its location.
 SUGGESTED READING AND RECOMMENDED WEB SITES 
 American Council on Education. HIPAA information: http://www.acenet.edu/ 
washington/policyanalysis/HIPAA.pdf 
 American Medical Association. “ Current Opinions of the Council on Ethical and 
Judicial Affairs ” : http://www.ama - assn.org/ama/pub/category/2503.html 
 American Medical Association. “ Principles of Medical Ethics ” : http://www.ama - assn
.org/ama/pub/category/2512.html 
 American Nurses Association. “ Code for Nurses with Interpretive Statements, ” “ Position 
Statement on Forgoing Artifi cial Nutrition and Hydration, ” “ Position Statement on 
Nursing and the Patient Self - Determination Act, ” “ Position Statement on Nursing 
Care and Do - Not - Resuscitate Decisions ” : http://www.NursingWorld.org 
 Association of American Medical Colleges. Task force recommendations: http://www
.aamc.org 
 Common Rule: http://www.hss.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/45cfr46htm 
 Electronic investigator training programs: http://cme.nci.nih.gov and http://ohrp.osophs 
.dhhs.gov/humansubjects/guidance/local.htm 
 Food and Drug Administration. “ Guidance for Institutional Review Boards and 
Clinical Investigators ” : http://www.fda.gov/oc/ohrt/irbs/default.htm 
 Hastings Center. Guidelines on the Termination of Life - Sustaining Treatment and the 
Care of the Dying. Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1987. 
Investigator 101 (human subject protection training program CD - ROM) can be 
obtained from Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research at http://www
.PRIMR.org and distributed by OHRP to institutions with federal assurances. 
 National Institutes of Health, Offi ce of Extramural Research. “ Confl ict of Interest 
Information Resources Available on the Web ” : http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/pol
icy/coi/resources.htm 
c08.indd 284 3/2/09 12:19:19 PM
 Offi ce of Human Research Protection. “ Institutional Review Board Guidebook ” : 
 http://ohrp.osophs.dhhs.gov/irb/irb - guidebook.htm 
 Offi ce for Protection from Research Risks. “ Human and Animal Protection ” : http://
grants.nih.gov/grants/oprr/oprr.htm 
 President ’ s Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical 
and Behavioral Research. Deciding to Forgo Life - Sustaining Treatment: A Report 
on the Ethical, Medical, and Legal Issues in Treatment Decisions. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Offi ce, March 1983. 
 Recombinant DNA and gene therapy research information: http://www4.od.nih.gov/
oba/RAC/RAC_FAQs.htm 
 U.S. Agency for International Development. “ Protection of Human Subjects in 
Research Supported by USAID ” : http://www.info.usaid.gov/policy/ads/200/
200mbe.pdf 
 U.S. Department of Energy, Offi ce of Science, Offi ce of Biological and Environmental 
Research. “ Protecting Human Subjects. ” : http://www.science.doe.gov/production/
ober/humsubj 
Suggested Reading and Recommended Web Sites 285
c08.indd 285 3/2/09 12:19:19 PM
c08.indd 286 3/2/09 12:19:19 PM
287
CHAPTER
 9 
DOCUMENTATION AND 
THE MEDICAL RECORD 
 SANDRA K. JOHNSON, LEILANI KICKLIGHTER , PAMELA J. PARA 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to defi ne the purposes of documentation 
■ To be able to describe at least four documentation models 
■ To be able to identify three sources of rules that govern documentation and 
medical record management 
■ To be able to describe the process and procedure for documenting a medical 
error 
■ To be able to list fi ve documentation dos and don ’ ts and explain why they are 
listed 
c09. indd 287 3/2/09 12:20:41 PM
288 Documentation and The Medical Record
 The medical record is important as a tool of effective communication. It facilitates 
continuous performance improvement, supports reimbursement of services provided, 
and supplies clinical data for research and education. The purpose of a medical record 
is to document the course of a patient ’ s care and treatment. Documentation is the 
essence of the medical record, and risk management professionals have a vested interest in preserving the record and in enhancing the quality of documentation. 
 Medical records can take many forms, including paper, electronic, microfi che, and 
fax, depending on the setting and culture of the organization. The health care industry ’ s 
move to electronic medical records is generating new risks. For example, computer 
physician order entry (CPOE) has created challenges related to documentation and 
effi ciency during conversions from paper - based systems to CPOE systems. The health 
care risk management professional ’ s organizational risk assessment should identify the 
methods by which patient care is documented throughout the health care system. 
 It is important for the health care risk management professional to remember that 
although the medical record is the central repository for the documentation of all health 
care delivery segments, it is not the only important business document. The business 
aspects of health care require the same recordkeeping and documentation as other 
businesses. Retention and easy retrieval of any business document is important. 
 Medical records also take various forms in different types of health care settings 
(acute care, long - term care, ambulatory care). Depending on the environment, regulatory 
and accreditation requirements may specify the contents of the medical records as well as 
retention and other requirements. Table 9.1 lists the contents of a typical medical record. 
TABLE 9.1. What Constitutes a Medical Record?
Standard Medical Record Components
Other Components (Depending on the Circumstances)
Admission, identifi cation, or face sheet Electrocardiogram
Vital signs and graphics sheet Imaging and X-ray reports
Physicians’ orders Lab reports
Medical, surgical, and health history and physical condition Emergency department record
Problem list Operative report
Medication record Consultation reports
Progress notes Autopsy report
Discharge notes or summary Transfer records
c09. indd 288 3/2/09 12:20:41 PM
 While there are several types of documents with which health care risk management professionals should be aware, the purpose of this chapter is to emphasize and 
reinforce the role of risk management in the need for proper systems and processes for 
documentation and maintenance of the medical record. The medical record is a well -
 established communication link benefi ting both patients and health care providers in 
any health care setting. For a sampling of documents of interest to the risk management professional, see Table 9.2 . 
Authorization forms (consents for admission, 
treatment, surgery, and release of medical records)
Anesthesia record
Recovery room record
Labor and delivery record
Fetal monitoring strips
Non–stress test reports
TABLE 9.2. Types of Documents of Interest to Health Care Risk Managers
Medical records Financial records
Employee health records Billing records
Corporate and organizational policies and 
procedures
Minutes of board and committee 
meetings
Licenses, certifi cates, and permits Personnel fi les (including documentation 
of competencies and job descriptions)
Incident and occurrence reports OSHA records
Electronic correspondence and backup tapes Insurance policies
Contracts and agreements Fetal monitoring strips
Electrocardiogram reports Radiology fi lms (X-ray, CT, MRI)
Patient logs (surgery, labor and delivery, 
emergency department)
Accreditation and other inspection reports
(Continued)
Learning Objectives 289
c09. indd 289 3/2/09 12:20:42 PM
290 Documentation and The Medical Record
TABLE 9.2. (Continued)
Patient transfer forms Consultation reports
Lab reports Autopsy reports
Credentialing fi les Claims fi les and legal records
Advance directives Consent forms
Medical staff bylaws Equipment maintenance records
Patient education materials Staff training manuals and records
Record of patient’s valuables Discharge reports and forms (with patient’s 
signed understanding of any discharge 
instructions provided; AMA forms)
Checklists (regarding falls, restraints, activity, 
dietary, preoperative, sponge and needle counts)
Non–stress test results
Care plan Medication administration record
KEY CONCEPTS
 ■ The risk management professional should be vigilant in assessing the quality of 
medical record documentation, looking for opportunities to enhance the value and 
quality of the medical record.
 ■ The medical record may be the organization’s best defense in claims alleging medical negligence.
 ■ The medical record contents, supporting policies, procedures and practices, and 
regulatory requirements differ by health care setting.
 ■ Patient care can be compromised by inadequate, incomplete, missing, or illegible 
record keeping.
 ■ Advances in health care technology have affected all aspects of medical record documentation and patient care. However, technological advances are not without 
risk. The risk management professional should be conversant with all aspects of the 
organization’s practices and policies as they relate to documentation as well as 
legal, regulatory, accreditation, and billing rules.
c09. indd 290 3/2/09 12:20:42 PM
 DOCUMENTATION 
 Documentation may be defi ned as the recording of pertinent facts and observations 
about an individual ’ s health history, including past and present illnesses, tests, treatments, and outcomes. Documentation is the basis for reimbursement, establishes a 
medical history, and creates a legal record in the event of a claim. Other purposes of 
documentation include but are not limited to the following: 
 Chronologically documenting the care rendered 
 Planning and evaluating the patient ’ s treatment 
 Facilitating communication among all caregivers 
 Providing continuity of care for the patient 
 Providing evidence of care and treatment in legal actions and for reimbursement 
purposes 
 Meeting the standard of care 
 Meeting accreditation and licensure requirements 
 The challenge of using documentation as a tool of communication across different 
types of health care settings is to connect all entities in an effi cient way. 
 Accreditation, Licensure, and Regulatory Requirements 
 Health care is a highly regulated business that requires documentation to support compliance. Federal regulations affecting documentation, maintenance, and release of 
health information include the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996 (HIPAA). HIPAA affects confi dentiality and authorized access to protected 
health information (PHI). 
 The rules that govern documentation and medical record management come from 
several sources: 
Federal requirements: The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) 
documentation requires the following: 
 Records of a physical examination, including a health history, performed no 
more than seven days before admission or within forty - eight hours after 
admission 
 Admitting diagnosis 
 Results of consultative evaluations of the patient and appropriate fi ndings by 
clinical and other staff involved in the patient ’ s care 
 Documentation of complications, hospital - acquired infections, and adverse 
reactions to drugs and anesthesia 
 Properly executed informed consent forms for procedures and treatments 
specifi ed by the medical staff, or by federal or state law, if applicable, to 
acquire patient consent 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Documentation 291
c09. indd 291 3/2/09 12:20:43 PM
292 Documentation and The Medical Record
 All practitioners ’ orders; nursing notes; medication records; radiology, treatment, and laboratory reports; and vital signs and other information necessary 
to monitor the patient ’ s condition 
 Discharge summary with outcome of hospitalization, disposition of care, 
and provisions for follow - up care 
 Final diagnosis with completion of medical records within thirty days following discharge 
State statutes and licensure requirements: These vary from state to state and 
address such things as content, timeliness, retention procedures, maintenance, 
destruction, and signing of medical records. 
Professional practice standards: Organizations such as the American Nurses 
Association (ANA), American Health Information Management Association 
(AHIMA), Health Information Management Systems Society (HIMSS), Health 
Insurance Association of America (HIAA), and American Medical Association 
(AMA) have specifi c standards for documentation. The ANA offers a tool to 
streamline the documentation process for nurses. 1
Specifi c health care facility protocols: Although not laws, these protocols can be 
used as evidence in civil litigation to establish the facility ’ s acceptable standard 
of practice. 
Insurance companies, managed care organizations, and other third - party organizations: These parties may refuse to pay claims if the care rendered is not properly or thoroughly documented. 
The Joint Commission: The Joint Commission ’ s information management (IM) 
standards focus on hospitalwide information planning and management processes 
to meet the hospital ’ s internal and external information needs. The Joint Commission 
standards are designed to be compatible with paper - based, electronic, and hybrid 
systems. These standards specify the following elements of documentation: 2
 The hospital has a complete and accurate medical record for every individual 
assessed, cared for, treated, or served. 
 The medical record thoroughly documents operative or other high - risk procedures and the use of moderate or deep sedation or anesthesia. 
 For patients receiving continuing ambulatory care services, the medical 
record contains a summary list of all signifi cant diagnoses, procedures, drug 
allergies, and medications. 
 Designated qualifi ed personnel accept and transcribe verbal orders from 
authorized individuals. 
 The hospital can provide access to all relevant information from a patient ’ s 
record when needed for use in patient care, treatment, and services. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c09. indd 292 3/2/09 12:20:43 PM
 Annually, The Joint Commission collects data on accredited organizations ’ compliance with published accreditation standards and the National Patient Safety Goals. 
For calendar year 2007, the following were the non - compliance rates for hospitals 3
 : 
 Goal 2B: Standardize a list of abbreviations, acronyms, symbols, and dose designations that are not to be used throughout the organization. 25 percent of the 
hospitals non - compliant 
 MM3.20: Medication orders are written clearly and transcribed accurately. 20 
percent of hospitals non - compliant 
 IM.6.10: The hospital has complete and accurate medical records for patients 
assessed, cared for, treated, or served. 26 percent of hospitals non - compliant 
 IM 6.50: Designated qualifi ed staff accept and transcribe verbal or telephone 
orders from authorized individuals. 25 percent of hospitals non - compliant 
 Documentation may also be used to demonstrate compliance with The Joint 
Commission ’ s National Patient Safety Goals (NPSG) for handoffs through a continuity of care record. 
 Individual state nursing practice acts 
 Textbooks and articles 
 Charting and Documentation Models 
 Organizational policy should specify the charting style and documentation model to 
meet the specifi c needs of the particular environment. However, some standard charting components apply throughout the health care industry. 
Essential Charting Components Joint Commission Standard IM.6.20 specifi es that 
each medical record should contain, as applicable, the following clinical and case 
information: 
 Emergency care, treatment, and services provided to the patient before the patient ’ s 
arrival, if any 
 Documentation and fi ndings of assessments 
 Conclusions or impressions drawn from medical history and physical examination 
 Diagnosis, diagnostic impression, or conditions 
 Reasons for admission or care, treatment, and services 
 Goals of the treatment and treatment plan 
 Diagnostic and therapeutic orders 
 All diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, tests, and results 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Documentation 293
c09. indd 293 3/2/09 12:20:43 PM
294 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Progress notes made by authorized individuals 
 All reassessments and plan of care revisions, when indicated 
 Relevant observations 
 The response to care, treatment, and services provided 
 Consultation reports 
 Allergies to foods and medicines 
 Every medication ordered or prescribed 
 Every dose of medication administered, including the strength, dose, or rate of 
administration, administration devices used, access site or route, known drug 
allergies, and any adverse drug reaction 
 Every medication dispensed or prescribed on discharge 
 All relevant diagnoses or conditions established during the course of care, treatment, and services 4
 Each medical record contains, as applicable, the following demographic 
information: 
 The patient ’ s name, sex, address, date of birth, and authorized representative, if 
any 
 Legal status of patients receiving behavioral health care services 
 Each medical record contains, as applicable, the following information: 
 Evidence of known advance directives 
 Evidence of informed consent patient care 
 Records of communication with patient regarding care, treatment, and services 
(for example, telephone calls or e - mail), if applicable 
 Patient - generated information (for example, information entered into the record 
over the Web or in previsit computer systems), if applicable 
 For patients receiving continuing ambulatory care services, the medical record 
contains a summary list including the following information: 
 Known signifi cant medical diagnoses and conditions 
 Known signifi cant operative and invasive procedures 
 Known adverse and allergic drug reactions 
 Known long - term medications, including current prescriptions, over - the - counter 
drugs, and herbal preparations 5
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c09. indd 294 3/2/09 12:20:44 PM
 Documentation requirements will differ, depending on the setting — hospital, nursing home, home health care agency, or other community facility. For example, 
 perioperative, critical, and emergency care areas have specialized criteria and forms 
for documenting nursing care. In addition, requirements may change with the patient 
population (for example, requirements in obstetric settings differ from those in geriatric settings). 
Documentation Models There are quite a few documentation models that can be 
used, depending on the culture and needs of the organization. 
Charting by Exception 
 Charting by exception encourages documentation of only abnormal fi ndings, signifi -
cant changes, and unusual occurrences. Although originally intended to reduce the 
length and repetitiveness of the narrative note, it creates the perception that care proceeded from one bad event to another. 6
 Documentation sources have cited Lama v. 
Borras (1994), a case in which the court stated that there was evidence to suggest that 
charting by exception did not regularly record information important to an infection 
diagnosis, such as the changing characteristics of the surgical wound and the patient ’ s 
complaints of postoperative pain. One of the attending nurses conceded that under the 
charting - by - exception policy, she would not report a patient ’ s pain if she did not 
administer medicine or if she gave the patient only over - the - counter - type medication. 
The court also concluded that the intermittent charting of possible signs of infection 
failed to record the sort of continuous danger signals that would most likely spur early 
intervention by a doctor. 7
Narrative Charting 
 Narrative charting involves a chronological account of the patient ’ s status, the interventions performed, and the patient ’ s responses. 8
 Handwritten or computer - generated 
narrative notes summarize information obtained by general observation, the health 
history interview, and a physical examination. The current trend in hospitals and home 
care agencies is to avoid writing long narrative note entries. 9
 Because nursing documentation is judged more for quality than quantity, the narrative note should be concise, pertinent, and relevant, based on patient evaluation. If it is too lengthy, it will 
interfere with effi cient data retrieval. 
Assessment - Intervention - Response ( AIR ) 
 This is a narrative charting format that synthesizes major nursing events while avoiding repetition of information found elsewhere in the medical record. 10
 Flowsheets 
 Also called abbreviated progress notes, fl owsheets have vertical or horizontal columns 
for recording dates, times, and interventions. Data can be inserted quickly and concisely, 
preferably at the time care is given or when a change in the patient ’ s condition is 
Documentation 295
c09. indd 295 3/2/09 12:20:44 PM
296 Documentation and The Medical Record
observed. An advantage of this model is that all members of the health care team can 
compare data and assess the patient ’ s progress over time. However, using fl owsheets 
does not exempt an organization from narrative charting to describe observations, 
patient teaching, patient responses, detailed interventions, and unusual circumstances. 
Checklists 
 Tasks that need to be accomplished by the staff member or the patient are recorded on 
checklists.
 Computerized Charting System 
 This consists of a complex, interconnected set of software applications that process 
and transport data input by the health care team; categorizes the patient ’ s data and 
stores the health care history, including inpatient and outpatient records from various 
facilities; and helps guide the health care team in providing care and identifying patient 
education needs. 11 An effective computerized documentation system must have 
the capacity to record and send data to the appropriate departments, adapt easily to the 
health care facility ’ s needs, display highly selective information on command, and 
provide easy storage access and retrieval for all trained personnel while maintaining 
the highest standards of patient confi dentiality. 12
 Focus Charting 
 Based on patient - centered problems, focus charting tends to rely only on individual 
occurrences or signifi cant changes. This often eliminates positive notes that are useful 
in documenting care that is outcome - based; it works best in acute care settings and on 
units where the same care and procedures are repeated frequently. 13
 Problem - Oriented Medical Record System ( POMR ) 
 The POMR describes specifi c patient problems in multidisciplinary progress notes. It 
is most effective in acute care and long - term care settings. 14
 Problem, Interventions, and Evaluations of Interventions ( PIE ) 
 This approach organizes information according to patients ’ problems and integrates a 
plan of care into the nurses ’ progress notes. 15
 FACT 
FACT consists of fl owsheets individualized to specifi c services; assessment features 
standardized with baseline parameters; concise, integrated progress notes and fl owsheets documenting the patient ’ s condition and responses; and timely entries recorded 
when care is given. FACT documents only exceptions to the norm or signifi cant information about the patient and so incorporates charting - by - exception principles. It was 
developed to help caregivers avoid documentation of irrelevant data, repetitive notes, 
and inconsistencies among departments and to reduce the amount of time spent 
charting. 16
c09. indd 296 3/2/09 12:20:45 PM
 Core Approach 
 The core approach focuses on the nursing process; it is most useful in acute care and 
long - term care facilities. 17
 Critical Pathway Approach 
 The critical pathway approach features an interdisciplinary care plan that describes 
assessment criteria, interventions, treatments, and outcomes for specifi c health - related 
conditions (usually based on a DRG) across a designated timeline; the pathway is usually organized by categories, such as activity, diet, treatments, medications, patient 
teaching, and discharge planning. 18
SOAP 
 A popular method of charting, this method of documentation originated in the 1960s 
from a problem - oriented medical record format. SOAP is now used in acute care, 
long - term care, home care, and ambulatory clinic settings. The problem - oriented medical record defi nes and follows each clinical problem individually and organizes it for 
solutions. The SOAP model is used for the progress notes section of this type of medical record and take the form of either SOAP or SOAPIER: 
 S = Subjective: Principal complaint or history, symptoms, in the patient ’ s own 
words whenever possible 
 O = Objective: Measurable, observable, what the provider observes and inspects; 
may include a physical exam, diagnostic test results, and so on 
 A = Assessment: Diagnostic; includes determination of the problem, interpretation or impression of the current condition, and what the provider thinks is going 
on based on the data 
 P = Plan: Plan of action for each problem 
 I + E = Interventions and Evaluation: Specifi c interventions implemented and 
patient ’ s response to them 
 R = Revision: Any changes from the original care plan (interventions, outcomes, 
or target dates) 
 Table 9.3 lists the advantages and disadvantages of using the SOAP model of 
documentation. 
 Many health care facilities have adapted the source - oriented or problem - oriented 
method to meet their documentation needs. In the home health care setting, for example, nurses have created many documentation forms, including the initial assessment 
form, problem list, day - visit sheet, and discharge summary, to better refl ect the services 
and essential aspects of care they provide. Whichever documentation model is selected, 
policies and procedures should determine the approved method for the individual 
health care organization or system. The use of checklists and fl owsheets also needs to 
Documentation 297
c09. indd 297 3/2/09 12:20:45 PM
298 Documentation and The Medical Record
TABLE 9.3. Advantages and Disadvantages of the SOAP Model of 
Documentation.
Advantages Disadvantages
All of a patient’s problems are considered in 
total context
Requires training and commitment of entire 
professional staff
The record clearly indicates the goals and 
methods of the patient’s treatment
If not implemented in its pure form, format 
modifi cations can diminish the original goal 
of structured and logical entries
Facilitates interdisciplinary communication Potential redundancy among fl owsheets, 
care plans, and SOAP(IER) notes
Easier to track corrective actions for 
purposes of quality improvement 
monitoring
Charting may not meet the needs of 
organizations that are searching for a less 
time-consuming method of documentation
Structure: each entry contains information in 
a predetermined format, which lends consistency to the documentation of patient care
May meet resistance from other health care 
professionals
Refl ects the nursing process by 
encompassing assessment, nursing 
diagnosis, planning, interventions, and 
evaluation of nursing care
Routine care may remain undocumented
Can be used effectively with standard care 
plans
Need to make sure to resolve the problems 
if the format is truly problem-oriented
Can be incorporated into integrated 
medical record documentation to foster 
collaboration and enhance communication 
among health care professionals
Organizes problems into specifi c categories
Promotes continuity of care
Minimizes nonessential data
c09. indd 298 3/2/09 12:20:45 PM
be described in written policies and procedures. Policies and procedures set minimum 
requirements that can be used as a guideline for quality improvement criteria. The 
chosen documentation model must meet documentation needs while complying with 
organizational policies, state and federal laws, and other regulations or accreditation 
requirements. Compliance and consistency are paramount, and staff education is key. 
 Documentation Techniques and Considerations 
 Risk management strategies include several documentation techniques and thought 
processes that can facilitate accurate communication and support the core purposes of 
the medical record. 
Correcting Errors in the Medical Record The acceptable method for correcting an 
error is to draw one line through the entry, initial or sign it, date it, and place the correct information above the drawn - through entry. If space is not available or if the 
 corrected information is too lengthy to place adjacent to the incorrect entry, the corrected note should be placed in the appropriate place on the record (progress notes, 
nursing notes, and so on), and it should be contemporaneous with that date ’ s notes. 
It should be dated and signed with the reason for the correction noted. Incorrect entries 
should not be obliterated, erased, or “ whited out, ” as these correction methods may 
appear to be attempts to conceal the original entry. It is recommended that any medical 
record documentation not contemporaneous with current care or while a patient is still 
hospitalized be thoughtfully reviewed prior to adding any note. This is particularly 
true when adding documentation after the patient has experienced an adverse event or 
complained or after a request for medical records has been received from plaintiff ’ s 
counsel. These notes will be viewed as self - serving and could possibly be considered 
as record tampering. 
 Hearsay The risk management professional should advise staff that hearsay, statements made by persons other than the author of the entry should not be documented as 
if the statements were fact. Instead, how and when the author of the entry heard the 
statement and the fact that it came from a different source should be recorded, with 
the statement itself enclosed in quotation marks. 
Advantages Disadvantages
Is factual
Facilitates follow-up care
Complies with recognized standards and 
accepted formats
Documentation 299
c09. indd 299 3/2/09 12:20:46 PM
300 Documentation and The Medical Record
Telephone Calls and Telephone Advice in Physician Offi ce Practices It is recommended that medical advice not be given over the phone unless the identity of the 
receiving party is known. However, this is a common occurrence for physicians who 
receive calls from patients. All health care organizations should have clearly stated 
policies governing who other than the physician may give what type of advice over the 
phone. In instances when medical advice is provided, documentation is imperative. 
This requirement should be emphasized particularly in organizations or areas that are 
more prone to receive patient calls, such as outpatient clinics, physician offi ces, home 
health agencies, and emergency departments. 
 Patients often call their physicians ’ offi ces during the day or after hours. A duplicate phone message pad (even at the bedside at home) is one way to keep a backup log 
of who called, the date and time, and the reason. In the clinic or offi ce, the original 
copy should go to the physician to return the call, and the conversation should be 
added to the note for fi ling in the patient ’ s medical record. Such documentation should 
refl ect the initial reason for the call, the further description of the problem as described 
to the physician, and the physician ’ s response or recommendation. Documentation of 
this information can prove valuable if the quality of care is ever called into question. 
At a minimum, the date, time, and content of the discussion should be documented. 
All telephone messages must be fi led in the medical record in chronological order. 
Physician Notifi cation The date and time of every call to a physician should be carefully recorded. The record of the conversation itself should include the date and time 
if different from the call and should describe the conversation’s content, including the 
exact signs and symptoms, lab results, and other details conveyed to the physician and 
the response, including additional information requested and given to the physician. 
Responses from the physician need to be similarly recorded. If the situation is serious 
and the physician has not responded in a timely manner, the nurse must follow the 
 chain of command and contact the nursing supervisor or other appropriate person, 
according to facility procedures. In addition, the chief of the physician ’ s specialty 
should be notifi ed. Regardless of setting or reason, when patient care staff needs to 
make contact with a physician, especially in acute care high - risk units, time is of the 
essence. Each health care setting should have policies governing expected response 
time and steps to take if response is not received within policy parameters. 
 Many physicians use an answering service to take calls. The service then pages 
the physician. The answering service should keep a log of the time the call was received 
for the physician and the time the physician returned the call to the service. Staff who 
reach an answering service when calling a physician should record the name 
of the person taking the call and the phone number of the answering service for 
future reference. 
 Countersignatures Countersignatures imply that the health care provider has done 
more than just read and sign an entry or order. The countersignature connotes that the 
c09. indd 300 3/2/09 12:20:46 PM
health care provider agrees with the patient care described or transcribed. Whenever 
a health care provider signs an entry in a medical record, the provider is responsible 
for whatever is contained in the entry. 
 History and physical (H & P) records, operative notes, admission notes, and discharge summaries are often dictated and transcribed. When completing charts, the 
physician signs these transcribed documents, authenticating the contents. As often as 
possible, the risk management professional should emphasize to the medical staff the 
signifi cance of reading, verifying, and correcting transcribed notes before authenticating them with their signatures. 
 Users of electronic medical records should be assigned electronic signatures, 
which should never be given to anyone else to use; for instance, the radiologist should 
not give the electronic signature to the radiology transcriptionist to bypass verifying 
and authenticating the transcription. In some states, this could be construed as fraud, 
which is an offense reportable to the state licensing board. 
 CMS requires that documentation of verbal orders or entries requiring countersignatures be signed as soon as possible. One physician cannot sign for another unless 
they have joint responsibility. Facility policies and medical staff bylaws should defi ne 
whether documentation by house staff and allied health professionals requires countersignatures. In some instances, this is governed by state law. 
 Medical students ’ and nursing students ’ documentation should be countersigned 
by a supervisor. Check state statutes for specifi cs. 
 Abbreviations Abbreviations save time; however, they may easily be misinterpreted 
and are a leading cause of medication errors. Health care providers should have policies and procedures documenting which abbreviations, acronyms, symbols and dose 
designations to avoid using as unsafe practice. This do - not - use list should be circulated to all staff and compliance monitored. Both The Joint Commission and the 
Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) promulgate do - not - use listings that are 
available on their respective Web sites. Medical abbreviations acceptable for use within 
the organization should be standardized, universally accepted and approved by the 
individual health care facility. Abbreviations can vary by setting. Special consideration should be taken to ensure that health care providers not employed by the 
 organization and who may practice at multiple facilities know what abbreviations are 
acceptable for use and what are not. This group may include locum tenens (temporary 
replacement staff), traveling nurses, physicians, and agency nurses. The Joint 
Commission ’ s Sentinel Event Alert 23 and National Patient Safety Goals have 
addressed the use of abbreviations to prevent medication errors. 
 Authentication The Joint Commission requires that entries in medical records be 
made only by individuals explicitly given that right in written facility policies and procedures and medical staff bylaws. All entries should be dated, timed, and signed by the 
author. In a ddition to the full name, the professional title should be indicated (MD for 
Documentation 301
c09. indd 301 3/2/09 12:20:46 PM
302 Documentation and The Medical Record
medical doctor, PA for physician ’ s assistant, APRN for advanced practice registered 
nurse, RN for registered nurse, and so on). It is suggested that policies, procedures, 
and bylaws be reviewed to ensure that there is no confl ict among them. The Joint 
Commission will survey a facility ’ s performance against its own guidelines, and discrepancies can result in conditional or preliminary denial of accreditation. 
Documentation of Termination of Care When dealing with noncompliant patients 
and families (those who fail to follow instructions on diet, medications, or use of safety 
devices or who tamper with medical equipment), the risk management professional 
should advise staff to thoroughly document these issues objectively, including all education and reinforcement provided. If it becomes necessary to “ administratively or 
permanently discharge ” or refuse further care, the usual practice is to advise the patient 
and family of the intent to do so orally, followed immediately by written notice, sent 
by certifi ed mail with return receipt requested. This written notice should set out a 
time frame (usually thirty days) for continued care (sometimes limited to emergency 
care during the notice period). Included should be either prescriptions for the notice 
period or a reference that if a refi ll prescription is needed during the notice period, it 
will be provided. It should also include referrals for continued care, such as several 
names and phone numbers of physicians in the same specialty and the names and 
phone numbers of the local or regional medical and osteopathy societies. A copy of 
correspondence with the patient should be maintained in offi ce fi les and in the medical 
record. It is recommended that the risk management professional check with legal 
counsel to verify that such a termination process complies with specifi c state statutes 
and case law. Prior to termination, consider the health literacy of the patient. Many 
patients who are considered noncompliant have limited or low health literacy skills. 
This at - risk population could benefi t from educational intervention and support 
systems. 
 Documentation Challenges 
 It is the responsibility of each health care professional to comply with the facility ’ s 
documentation policies and procedures. Documentation must be objective and free of 
speculation. 
 Verbiage 
 Plaintiffs ’ attorneys look for gaps in documentation and fl ow and inappropriate language to discredit or cast doubt on the credibility of medical records. Terms such as 
unintentionally, inadvertently, and unexpectedly are not appropriate because they 
refl ect a judgment that something untoward happened. Words such as appeared, apparently, and seems to be are not specifi c and can be used by plaintiffs ’ attorneys to cast 
doubt. In addition, many words can have different meanings or interpretations, and 
misuse could leave the author open to criticism or question. If it is necessary to use 
ambiguous words, supplemental information is needed to provide clarity. 
c09. indd 302 3/2/09 12:20:47 PM
 It is also important not to imply, either inadvertently or intentionally, that a fellow 
provider was negligent. Here are some ways to avoid raising a “ red fl ag ” that might 
make you the target of a lawsuit by another provider: 
 Do not place blame for an unsatisfactory outcome. 
 Empathize, don ’ t apologize. 
 Do not comment before having all the facts. 
 Don ’ t write in the medical record that someone was negligent. 
 Do not prematurely document a corrective action plan. 
 Discuss differences of opinion in a private environment away from patients. 19
 Legibility The biggest documentation challenge is legibility. Records should be able 
to be read without requiring deciphering. In a legal proceeding, jury members will 
need to make a determination based on their interpretation of what they see. Poor 
handwriting leads to misunderstandings among health professionals and patients. 
Studies report that illegible notes also lead to poor communication among specialties. 
 In 1994, the American Medical Association reported that medication error resulting from misinterpreted physicians ’ prescriptions was the second most prevalent and 
expensive claim in ninety thousand malpractice claims over a period of seven years. In 
1994, the average indemnity payment for the 393 most recent medication error claims 
was $ 120,722, with a range of $ 5,000 to $ 2.2 million per claim. 20
 Legibility has likewise affected litigation. In a widely publicized 1999 case in 
Odessa, Texas, a jury awarded $ 450,000 to the widow and children of a patient who 
died after a pharmacist dispensed the wrong drug after misreading the physician ’ s handwriting. 21 Half of the judgment was assigned to the pharmacy, leaving the physician 
responsible for paying the other half. The defense attorney believes that the jury was 
trying to send a message to the medical community that in the computer age, there is no 
reason for doctors to create the potential for error by writing out their prescriptions 
instead of typing or printing them out. On August 12, 2004, a forty - one - year - old man in 
Redwood City, California, received a lethal chemotherapy overdose, ten times the 
proper dosage, allegedly attributed to the doctor ’ s illegible handwritten prescription. 
The family asked the county counsel ’ s offi ce for $ 1 million and a written apology. 22
 There may be regulatory and accreditation implications to illegible handwriting. 
The federal Conditions of Participation for Hospitals: Medical Record Services state 
that “ all entries must be legible and complete, and must be authenticated and dated 
promptly by the person (identifi ed by name and discipline) who is responsible for 
ordering, providing, or evaluating the service furnished. ” 23 Criteria for quality medical 
records at the state level are commonly addressed in state licensing acts. Additional 
sources of handwriting legibility compliance can be found in The Joint Commission ’ s 
Medical Staff Standards, Management of Information Standards, and Performance 
■
■
■
■
■
■
Documentation 303
c09. indd 303 3/2/09 12:20:47 PM
304 Documentation and The Medical Record
Improvement Standards. It is incumbent on the risk management professional to be 
familiar with associated regulatory and accreditation requirements and to facilitate 
compliance throughout the health care organization. 
 In consideration of the real and potential threats to patient safety posed by illegible medical records, experts predict that Joint Commission surveyors will check medical records more thoroughly for compliance with pertinent Joint Commission standards 
and requirements. During a Joint Commission survey, a hospital in Kentucky received 
a citation for illegible handwriting primarily because “ neither the surveyor nor anyone 
in the room could determine [whether] the order for a medication was for 50 mg or 
5.0 mg, ” according to the hospital ’ s director of performance improvement. 
 Poor handwriting has been attributed to time pressure. Another reason is that 
handwriting instruction in Europe and in the United States has used models and teaching methods that do not hold up under any degree of speed. 24
 Three solutions for the problem of illegibility have been proposed. The medical 
staff of Cedars - Sinai Medical Center decided to offer a special class in handwriting for 
members of the medical staff, which they speculated would be “ raising the bar 
for other medical institutions. ” 25 Salem Hospital held a handwriting class for area 
medical professionals by instructors who teach penmanship to doctors and nurses 
around the world, because “ improving handwriting among medical professionals can 
greatly reduce the risk of medical errors. ” 26 Second, studies reveal that transcription 
services are not only faster than writing but also improve physician productivity, satisfaction, and legibility of medical records. 27 Finally, computers already play a major 
role in solving handwriting problems. To minimize the potential for adverse drug reactions and miscommunicated orders, many hospitals are using computers for decision 
support and to order medications. Computers also note potential drug interactions, 
allergies, and side effects and suggest dosage adjustments based on patient data such 
as age, weight, and height. These systems can also provide detailed therapy recommendations from a database of commonly prescribed drugs. 28
 Whereas one of the numerous goals for converting to an electronic medical record 
is to resolve legibility issues, the acute care setting is probably further along in the 
conversion process. Long - term care facilities, home health agencies, outpatient c linics, 
physician offi ces, and other health care settings may not be as far along in that process 
because it is costly, in terms of both fi nancial and human resources. 
Reimbursement Today ’ s health care system includes multiple, complex structures 
with multiple, complex requirements for reimbursement. Caregivers and health care 
organizations are accountable not only to internal quality management teams, case 
managers, and required reimbursement structures but also to federal and state agencies, 
HMOs, preferred provider organizations (PPOs), and independent practice associations (IPAs), among others. Documentation is scrutinized by Medicare, Medicaid, and 
insurance company reviewers, among others, for quality of care, patient outcomes, and 
need for continued treatment. Reviewers from these groups examine the medical record 
for discrepancies. They look for differences in the treatment ordered and the treatment 
c09. indd 304 3/2/09 12:20:47 PM
 provided. If a discrepancy cannot be explained satisfactorily or reconciled reasonably, 
payment may be denied. 
 Payments by Medicare and Medicaid are sources of operating revenue for the health 
care organization. Although both Medicare and Medicaid were established in 1965 under 
the Social Security Act, the two organizations differ in their reimbursement policies, regulations, and documentation guidelines. Under Medicare, documentation is required to support the need for skilled medical and nursing care and its delivery. For example, a record 
for a Medicare Part A skilled facility resident must support not only the direct skilled services provided but also the assessment and oversight that skilled services require. In the 
home care setting, Medicare has tied reimbursement to Outcome Assessment Instrument 
Set (OASIS) regulations that require that nurses complete an assessment and that agencies 
transmit the assessment and other data within strict time frames. Under Medicaid, documentation is required to ensure payment, but essential content varies according to setting. 
Lack of documentation as to the medical necessity of a test, procedure, or service could 
prove troublesome should a claim arise in which this issue is in question. 
 Besides a lack of documentation, especially in the long - term care environment, 
there needs to be congruence among the various documents within the medical record, 
without which the credibility of the care might be compromised, not to mention cause 
for suspicion of fraud and abuse. 
 Documentation discrepancies identifi ed by reviewers can also be red fl ags if the 
medical record becomes evidence in litigation. Inconsistencies in documentation leave 
both the caregiver and the health care organization open to accusations of incompetence and fi nancial irresponsibility. Ultimately, a medical record containing inconsistencies can be diffi cult or impossible to defend in court. Risk and health information 
management professionals must establish a partnership to communicate such fi ndings 
and act on them in an expedient manner. 
Documenting a Medical Error Documentation of patient care and events in the medical record is mandated by state and federal laws, accrediting organizations, professional organizations, and clinical standards of practice. Medical records may be used 
for legal proceedings, including state board disciplinary proceedings and negligence 
actions fi led against the facility or specifi c health care providers when a patient injury 
or death occurs. The assumption is that the testimony following such an event will be 
based on factual documentation in the medical record. 29
 Although it is not appropriate to make the incident report itself a part of the medical record, the facts about the incident and how it was resolved should be documented. 
Neither the completion of an incident report nor reference to risk management should 
be referenced in the medical record because it is considered confi dential and privileged 
under many state laws and might unnecessarily raise a red fl ag. Here are some tips for 
health care professionals who need to document a medical error: 
 Refer to organizational policy about what is classifi ed as a medical error. 
 Document the actual time of the event. 
■
■
Documentation 305
c09. indd 305 3/2/09 12:20:48 PM
306 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Do not refer to the event as a “ medical error. ” 
 Objectively document what happened in the accepted charting model for the 
organization. 
 Document who was notifi ed. 
 Document the response received to notifi cations and any other interventions. 
 Document the patient ’ s, resident ’ s, and family ’ s understanding of the event and 
how questions were answered. 
 Document the outcome and treatment plan as indicated. 
 Document the disclosure discussion. 
Physician and Allied Health Chart Completion Issues Not only do delinquent or 
incomplete medical records compromise reimbursement, but they are also an obstacle to 
providing quality care. The standard is that records are to be completed within thirty 
days after discharge. If the period of completion is longer, those numbers count against 
the facility when surveyed by The Joint Commission, and the physician is not in compliance with the medical staff bylaws and risks being suspended from admitting privileges. 
In addition, should the record be requested by an outside party, such as a third - party 
payer or an attorney, issues could arise from sending an incomplete record, especially if 
additions or changes are made to the record when the chart is fi nally completed. 
 Dictated notes refl ect the date and often the time of dictation and of transcription. 
It is preferable to time the dictation as close as possible to the date of the action (surgical procedure, consultation, history, physical). Dictations dated after the date of a 
request from a third party can be regarded with suspicion. 
 Physicians and others who dictate reports or notes should be reminded that their 
signature is evidence that they have read and agreed that the transcription is correct, 
thereby authenticating the note or report. Notes and reports sometimes have references 
to the wrong side or wrong site, to an antibiotic or other medication that sounds alike 
but is incorrect because the physician did not spell the name of the drug. Further, there 
might be blanks in the transcription because the transcriber could not understand a 
particular word. Sometimes a physician whose fi rst language is not English can dictate 
with an accent that results in transcription errors. In such cases, physicians should take 
extra care to review their transcribed reports and summaries. When physicians sign a 
report or summary that contain blanks or errors, they are confi rming that the contents 
are correct; it exposes both physician and institution to great risk of liability if inaccuracies in the fi les are raised as an issue in a deposition or other legal proceeding. 
 Because turnaround time of the transcribed reports and summaries can be a deterrent to timely chart completion, risk management should work closely with health 
information management to monitor controls. Strategies for encouraging chart completion include the suspension of privileges and imposition of fi nes. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c09. indd 306 3/2/09 12:20:48 PM
 Risk management professionals need to work with organizational and medical 
staff leaders to prepare a fair procedure for enforcing compliance with timely and 
appropriate chart completion. 
Medical Record Alterations If the medical record is altered, intentionally or unintentionally, it can be misleading to others, and documentation as to the actual care provided may be disputed. In Pyle v. Morrison (1986), a malpractice suit was brought 
against doctors for their treatment of a child ’ s fractured arm. The jury decided in favor 
of the plaintiffs — $ 400,000 for the child and $ 15,000 for the father. The deciding factor was the testimony of a nurse who said that she thought a portion of the medical 
record had been altered after the child ’ s surgery. 30 Tampering with the medical record 
is both unethical and illegal. Falsifi cation, including alteration of medical records, can 
also be grounds for a criminal indictment or a civil claim for damages. Even with the 
best of intentions, changing inaccurate information, fi lling in omissions, altering dates 
and times, rewriting text, destroying records, adding to someone else ’ s notes, or correcting or amending notes in violation of the facility ’ s policy can be construed as 
 “ tampering with medical records. ” This can expose the health care organization and 
health care provider to many different types of claims, raise many other issues, 
and may even result in the loss of affi rmative defenses in a negligence claim. Furthermore, 
tampering may be reportable to external agencies and professional licensing boards. All 
known cases of tampering should be reported to the corporate compliance offi cer. 
 In the state of Florida, the Agency for Health Care Administration makes the 
requirements explicit: “ The Board of Nursing shall impose disciplinary penalties upon 
a determination that a licensee . . . (d) Has falsely represented the patient ’ s chart, 
patient fl ow sheets, narcotic records, or nursing progress records, or otherwise misrepresented the facts on records relating directly to the patient. ” 31 Although this illustrates 
a specifi c state ’ s handling of this issue, risk management professionals should be thoroughly familiar with their respective states ’ disciplinary rules, promulgated by professional regulatory and licensing boards. 
 The risk management professional should be notifi ed and should assist in the investigation whenever it is suspected or determined that a record has been altered. Reports 
should be fi led with the external licensing board as appropriate. In addition, the risk management professional can assist in the preservation of records and deter alterations. 
Having a policy and procedure on the early sequestering of medical records after a significant incident will decrease the probability that the records will be released and altered. 
 If a patient experiences a poor or unexpected outcome, the urge to alter the record 
to make the care appear more appropriate can be overwhelming. With this in mind, the 
risk management professional should rely on established policy and procedures (developed in conjunction with legal counsel and the medical records department) to preserve the current record. Table 9.4 lists some documentation “ dos ” and “ don ’ ts. ” 
 One effective way to decrease alterations is to copy the current record that discusses 
the poor outcome for the medical record fi le and put the original in the “ legal fi le ” under 
Documentation 307
c09. indd 307 3/2/09 12:20:49 PM
308 Documentation and The Medical Record
the care and control of the medical records director. The copy on the shelf is available 
for patient care reference. Should the original need to be reviewed or completed, a representative of the medical records department should sit with the individual to prevent 
alterations. It is the medical records department personnel who must testify or sign affi -
davits to the effect that the original record has been in their care, control, and custody. 
Should the original record be sent to risk management or legal counsel for safekeeping, 
the medical records department personnel would not be able to make such statements. If 
this policy is consistently followed for potentially serious incidents and events, the likelihood of alterations should be prevented because no one would have unfettered access 
to the original record. Usually, when a serious incident has occurred, the risk management professional asks for a copy to begin an early investigation, which would be another 
copy available for comparison should alterations after the fact be suspected. 
TABLE 9.4. Documentation Dos and Don’ts
Do: Don’t:
Complete the record as soon as possible Use vague, ambiguous, or subjective terms
Use a ballpoint pen, not pencil or a 
felt-tip pen
Make statements against a colleague
Be neat and write legibly Change a record, postdate an entry, or record 
false information
Record date and time, and sign each 
entry with full name and professional 
designation
Use correction fl uid or erase an entry
Document facts, observations, patient’s 
condition, and complications
Skip lines or leave blank spaces between entries
Show thought process — know what 
you plan to do and why
Use unapproved abbreviations or ones that may 
offend or may be misunderstood
Be accurate—use clear and concise 
language that can be explained later
Criticize another practitioner’s judgment or 
recommendations
Chart both positive and negative 
fi ndings
Refer to incident reports, errors or to risk 
management, quality assurance, and peer 
review activities or meetings
c09. indd 308 3/2/09 12:20:49 PM
Correct errors by lining through them 
once, initialing, and writing in the 
corrected word or statement
Release the original copy of the medical record
Give all information on drugs—name, 
dosage and strength, route, time
Alter, destroy, or otherwise tamper with a 
medical record
Chart anything unusual or unexpected Include subjective statements, other than those 
quoted directly from a patient or resident
Follow an established, accepted method 
of charting
Use only standard abbreviations
Make sure the patient’s name is at the 
top of each new page
Use clear and concise language; avoid 
ambiguous terms and phrases
Make sure that verbal orders are 
documented and cosigned according to 
hospital policy
Record pertinent laboratory results
Record patient responses to medication 
and treatment
Avoid improper corrections, erasures, or 
obliterations
Avoid accusatory language
Avoid time gaps and omissions
Follow protocol for late entries
Document patient and family education
Documentation 309
c09. indd 309 3/2/09 12:20:49 PM
310 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Omissions Entries with the distinction of being the most frequently omitted might be 
some of the most important to the overall record. For example, some of the most frequently omitted entries in the long - term care setting are resident and family education, 
conversations with family, and cues and redirection of the resident. 32
 RECORD RETENTION 
 How long a record should be kept depends on factors such as statutes of limitations, individual state statutes, and various standards and regulations, including the following: 33
 The Joint Commission 
 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS): for hospitals, home health 
agencies, state and long - term care facilities, comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation, organ procurement, rural primary care 
 Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
 The Public Health Services Act: Immunization Program and National Childhood 
Vaccine Injury Act 
 The National Commission on Correctional Health Care for Health Services in Jails 
and Prisons 
 Federal reimbursement requirement guidelines 
 Institutional record retention policies 
 Clear and complete recordkeeping guidelines must be developed and implemented 
for every health care organization. Although most records are maintained in one location, 
recordkeeping guidelines should also address all departments that maintain separate 
fi les. In addition, recordkeeping guidelines must address the review of all medical records 
shortly after the patient or resident is discharged, to ensure that the record is complete. 
Records that are involved in pending or threatened legal action should be segregated. 
 Destruction of patient health information is carried out in accordance with federal 
and state law and pursuant to a proper written retention schedule and destruction policy approved by the health information manager, chief executive offi cer, medical staff, 
and legal counsel. Records involved in any open investigation, audit, or litigation 
should not be destroyed. 34
 RELEASE OF RECORDS 
 Records should be released only as authorized by state and federal laws and by the 
organization ’ s policies and procedures. Policies and procedures for the release of medical records should address all of the following matters: 
 Who may request and secure a copy of a patient ’ s medical record (in the acute care 
setting, it is most often the patient or an authorized representative who requests the 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c09. indd 310 3/2/09 12:20:50 PM
record; in the long - term care setting, it is more often the resident ’ s guardian, surrogate, or holder of power of attorney) 
 Who is authorized to release records and to whom (such as patients, another staff 
member, attorneys, insurance company representatives) 
 How access to medical records is monitored and documented (who checks out and 
returns records and when) 
 Appropriate mechanisms to protect sensitive patient and employee health information (such as information related to HIV results, lifestyle, substance abuse, psychological profi les, or behavioral health records) 
 Failure to follow proper release procedures can result in signifi cant liability. To 
minimize opportunities for liability, records should not be removed from the central 
location. Alternatively, only a copy of the record should be released so that the original 
records are always present in the records retention area. 
 The American Health Information Management Association has defi ned the legal 
health record for disclosure purposes. 35 The legal health record is generated at or for 
a health care organization as its business record, and it is the record that will be disclosed upon request. It does not affect discoverability of other information held by the 
organization. It is imperative that health care organizations defi ne their legal health 
records, because the content is governed by laws and regulations that vary by practice 
setting and state. 
 OWNERSHIP OF MEDICAL RECORDS 
 The medical record is an unusual type of property, as both the patient and the health 
care facility or provider have an ownership interest. The health care facility or provider 
owns the actual record, but the patient owns the information contained therein. 
The record must remain in the facility or doctor ’ s offi ce; therefore, the facility or offi ce 
has the responsibility to exercise control in the release of the document itself or the 
information contained therein. Patients and others who have a vested interest have a 
right to access the information contained in the record; but there are limitations on this 
right, which vary by state. 
 In today ’ s environment, medical record ownership issues arise relative to mergers, 
acquisitions, divestitures, and HMO provider contracts. This is illustrated by a case 
from the Florida Fourth District Court of Appeals in Humana Medical Plan v. 
Fischman, decided in December 1999. Humana terminated an agreement with a physician provider. This decision was based on a contract provision, which stipulated that 
the medical records relating to Humana members, during the term of their enrollment, 
would be the property of Humana. Despite many requests, the physician provided only 
those records for which he had received prior written consent from his patients. The 
physician argued that according to Florida Statute 455.667, governing the disclosure 
of patient medical records, Humana did not qualify as the “ owner ” of the records. 
■
■
■
Ownership of Medical Records 311
c09. indd 311 3/2/09 12:20:50 PM
312 Documentation and The Medical Record
Humana conceded that F.S. 455.667 did not authorize it to obtain these records and 
admitted it did not obtain written authorization from the insured in advance. The 
Florida Appeals Court upheld the lower court ’ s decision in favor of the physician. 
Cases such as this demonstrate the importance of reviewing contract language, in 
advance, regarding the issue of ownership of the medical record. 
 For records that are stored in the medical records department, it is prudent to 
have a policy and procedure on the release or availability of records to requesting 
parties. Depending on the status of an identified event (incident, notice of intent 
to sue, claim being made, lawsuit, and so on), the record could be sequestered 
with the original not being made available unless under direct supervision. This 
policy will prevent the inadvertent alterations or misplacement of the record (see 
Appendix B). 
 MEDICAL RECORD AUDITS 
 Compliance with documentation standards and expectations can be verifi ed through 
regular medical record audits. Typical questions to be answered with a medical record 
audit are presented in Exhibit 9.1 . Medical records may be audited by asking questions 
regarding organizational processes: 
 Is the reason for the patient encounter documented? 
 Is there a process to verify that services that are provided are documented? 
■
■
• If the patient alleged some defi ciently in 
patient care, could the record negate the 
patient’s story?
• Is there a logical process presented in the 
record for coming to a decision about the 
course of treatment?
• Would any reasonable physician be likely to 
come to the same conclusion?
• Were the appropriate tests ordered in a 
timely manner?
• Do test results verify the course of treatment?
• Was appropriate consultation obtained?
• Do the consultants’ reports agree with the 
course of treatment?
• If not, were the differences clearly explained 
and justifi ed in the record?
• Did the physician comment on the interventions and results of treatments provided 
by other professionals (e.g., nurses and 
therapists) that may have affected the condition of the patient or the treatment 
regimen?
EXHIBIT 9.1 Questions for medical record review
c09. indd 312 3/2/09 12:20:50 PM
 Does the record clearly explain why support services, procedures, and supplies 
were provided? 
 Is the assessment of the patient ’ s condition apparent in the record? 
 Does the record contain information on the patient ’ s progress and on the results of 
treatment? 
 Does the record include a plan for care? 
 Does the information in the record describing the patient ’ s condition provide reasonable medical rationale for the services? 
 Does the information in the record support the care given in case another health 
care professional must assume care or perform medical review? 
 Is the documentation in compliance with established policies and procedures with 
and local, state, and federal requirements? 
 DOCUMENTATION AND RISK MANAGEMENT 
 The medical record has historically been a tool of risk management. Appropriate 
 documentation promotes quality of care, preserves the fi nancial integrity of the organization, and maintains competitiveness in the marketplace. Documentation is multidisciplinary and a way for all members of the patient care team to work together for the 
patient ’ s benefi t. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Documentation and Risk Management 313
• Do the progress notes indicate that the 
patient knew about the benefi ts and reasonably expected risks and alternatives 
before giving consent to high-risk or invasive procedures?
• Are the entries accurately timed, dated, 
signed, and above all, legible?
• Do they refl ect professionalism (for example, no evidence of infi ghting with other 
members of the care team)? 
• Is there any evidence of alteration of the 
record? (Even if this was done innocently, 
juries frown on even the appearance of 
fraud or cover-up.)
a) Looked at in its entirety, does the medical 
record present a complete picture of the 
care provided with no ambiguity, no 
unexplainable gaps in time for treatments 
or medications, no illegible entries, and 
so on?
c09. indd 313 3/2/09 12:20:51 PM
314 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Liability Exposures 
 A discussion of legal considerations pertaining to documentation must refl ect the 
changing demands of the health care environment. More elderly people are receiving 
medical care, and medical conditions are more acute. New procedures, drugs, and 
equipment to provide medical care are constantly being introduced. There is more 
emphasis on consumers ’ rights, and the media ’ s heightened interest attracts even further 
attention and scrutiny of the provision and quality of health care services. 
 One only needs to attend a professional liability trial or read a malpractice case 
transcript to realize how much a jury relies on documentation. What the providers document or fail to document will certainly infl uence the outcome of any case. 
 Plaintiffs ’ attorneys have erroneously promoted that an action that is not documented is not performed. Health care providers know that this contention is incorrect, 
as much patient care is rendered that is never documented. However, documentation is 
especially signifi cant in cases of informed consent, medication, treatment entries, and 
also “ routine ” observations. Table 9.5 provides a listing of what plaintiffs ’ attorneys 
look for in the medical record. 
TABLE 9.5. What Plaintiffs’ Attorneys Look for in the Medical Record
Vague, ambiguous, or contradictory statements open to interpretation
Incomplete or sparse records that fail to demonstrate consistent, attentive care
Failure to address discrepancies in observations made by other clinicians
Failure to follow up on recommendations made by other clinicians
Failure to address signs or complaints of distress
Criticisms of the care rendered or perceived mistakes made by other practitioners
References to incident reports, risk management activities, quality assurance meetings, or 
peer review procedures
Omissions, including missing laboratory test results, radiology results, and EKG strips
Erasures, use of correction fl uid, or any other attempt to alter the record
c09. indd 314 3/2/09 12:20:51 PM
 When a continuous record of the patient ’ s status is lacking and deterioration 
occurs, absence of documentation will be used to support a claim of negligence. Other 
ways that medical records can be used adversely in the event of a claim include these: 
 A series of events leading up to a patient ’ s injury in the hospital 
 Failure of the staff to use information available in the patient ’ s record 
 Failure to impart important information from one department to another 
 Failure to write legible medical orders 
 One way for health care providers to evaluate their charting is to view it through 
an attorney ’ s eyes, asking themselves, if this were presented as evidence to a jury, 
would it be thorough and convincing? 
 Liability issues specifi cally concerning medical records include the following: 
 Record authentication 
 Record retention 
 Record destruction 
 Access to medical records 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Inaccuracies or inconsistencies that can be used to infer substandard care
Words and phrases with multiple meanings or interpretations
Any loose ends that can be used to imply negligence or substandard care
Lack of supervision
Alterations
Lack of informed consent documentation
Lack of patient education documentation
Illegible entries or signatures
Time delays and unexpected time gaps
Documentation and Risk Management 315
c09. indd 315 3/2/09 12:20:52 PM
316 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Release of confi dential information 
 Release of information in litigation 
 Electronic record security 
 Documentation issues that help jurors make decisions about cases include these: 
 What is reasonably expected of the health care professional ’ s peers? 
 What is in accordance with the standard of care? 
 How does it refl ect on the quality of care provided? 
 A medical record that can be used in the affi rmative defense of a claim meets the 
following criteria: 
 It documents all relevant medical information. 
 It substantiates the rationale for care provided or not provided. 
 It highlights the interaction between professionals. 
 It presents a timeline for care rendered. 
 It documents the psychosocial needs and concerns of the patient and relevant others. 
 It preserves the medical history of patient care. 
 It is more reliable than personal recollection. 
 It demonstrates good communication. 
 It demonstrates quality medical care. 
 Protecting Privileged Information 
 Documents that can remain protected from discovery in legal proceedings are defi ned 
by each individual state. Risk management professionals should explore state statutes 
for particular information about which documents are considered privileged, confi dential, or protected by attorney client privilege or attorney work - product information. 
The following records may be privileged, along with others: 
 Incident reports 
 Risk and quality management committee minutes 
 Incident investigations 
 Peer review proceeding 
 Corrective action plans 
 Root cause analyses 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c09. indd 316 3/2/09 12:20:53 PM
 The specifi cs of whether or not a particular document remains privileged or confi -
dential should also be explored. For example, if the document is typically protected 
from discovery but is shared with a third party, the privilege or confi dentiality may be 
waived. Risk management professionals and medical records personnel should coordinate efforts to ensure that the proper protections are effective and in compliance with 
federal and state statutes. 
 Forensic Documentation Examination 
 For many years, forensic documentation techniques have been used to analyze handwriting, signatures, and chronology of entries. The techniques have not changed, but 
the scope of the analysis has broadened. The following is a brief list of such forensic 
methods, which can be used in support or defense of a claim. For more information, a 
knowledgeable defense attorney should be contacted. 
Electrostatic Detection Apparatus. This equipment can detect latent impressions 
on the underlying pages of a document that have been amended. The advantage is 
that it provides a hard copy; the disadvantage is that the equipment is not 
portable. 
Ink Analysis. This technique can be used if there is a possibility that the medical 
record was altered. It is the only method to establish identifi ers of the ink type 
used for entry. The advantage is that it may provide conclusive evidence of fabrication if the ink contains certain markers; the disadvantage is that because tiny ink 
samples are lifted from the original document, damage does occur. Many types of 
ink have not been tagged, and there is no standardization. 
Infrared Exams. Infrared tools are used to identify ink types but cannot prove that 
inks are the same. The advantage is that they do not destroy the document. The 
disadvantages are that the equipment is not transportable, so original documents 
must go to a laboratory, and the exams cannot distinguish among all ink types. 
Identifi cation of Date Markers. Date markers can identify most paper copy 
machines, printers, and typewriter ribbons. An advantage is that they are objective 
and reliable; however, the analysis is very time - consuming. 
Handwriting Analysis . If an expert handwriting analysis is undertaken, risk management professionals must ensure the integrity of the chain of custody of evidence. Often this requires hand - carrying the original medical record or documents 
to the analyst and remaining with them until they are returned to the original custodian. The custodian may be called on to testify to the maintenance of this chain 
of custody of evidence. 
 Documentation and Litigation 
 The medical record is a crucial legal document. In a malpractice lawsuit, the patient ’ s 
medical record demonstrates the quality of care provided. It describes (or fails to 
■
■
■
■
■
Documentation and Risk Management 317
c09. indd 317 3/2/09 12:20:54 PM
318 Documentation and The Medical Record
describe) acts, events, conditions, diagnoses, and opinions at or near the time of the 
alleged malpractice event. The following cases illustrate the medical record ’ s importance in the courtroom. 
 In Cruz v. West Volusia Hospital Authority d/b/a West Volusia Memorial 
Hospital, Volusia County, Florida Circuit Court No. 95 – 10313 (1997), 
the nurse failed to inform the obstetrician of fetal distress or document 
it. As a result, the baby suffered hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy. The 
parties reached an out - of - court settlement for $ 2,425,000. 36
 In Cloughly v. St Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company, Washington 
County, Arkansas Circuit Court, Case No. C1V95 – 996 (1997), neither 
the hospital nor the nurse documented how a portable ventilator was set 
up, and there was no record that oxygen saturation readings had been 
taken. A $ 2,125,000 settlement was reached before trial. 37
 In Toinkham, Administrator of Estate of Muncey v. Mount Carmel Health 
d/b/a Mt. Carmel East Hospital, Franklin County, Ohio, Court of 
Common Pleas, Case No. 94CVA - 09 – 6736 (1997), the plaintiff ’ s attorney alleged that the nurses did not properly assess, monitor, and care for 
the patient before and after the injection of morphine because these 
actions were not documented in the medical record. The patient was later 
found in total cardiac arrest and could not be revived. A $ 433,415 verdict was returned at trial. 38
 Table 9.6 identifi es chart components that may be of interest when evaluating 
liability. 
■
■
■
TABLE 9.6. Essential Charting Components of Interest to the Health 
Care Risk Management Professional
Nursing observations and assessments General demeanor or affect
Appearance Activity and restrictions
Height and weight Vital signs
General physical condition Mental state
History of past hospitalizations Medication administration record (MAR)
History of past surgery, anesthesia, and any 
complications
Discharge plan
c09. indd 318 3/2/09 12:20:54 PM
Allergies Dietary restrictions
Reason for admission or presenting 
complaint
Physical or cultural disabilities
Preferred language Skin condition
Instruction provided to patient, resident, 
and family (including opportunities 
for them to ask questions, return 
demonstrations, any specifi c instructional 
materials provided)
Discharge instructions: diet, activity, 
medications, skin care and hygiene, specifi c 
treatments indicated, referrals, follow-up 
appointments
Problem list Consents
Physicians’ orders Ancillary provider notes and consultation 
reports
Relevant health risk factors Patient’s progress, including response to 
treatment, change in treatment, change in 
diagnosis, and patient noncompliance
Intake and output
 In Anticipation of Legal Action 
 The following tips may be useful if legal action is anticipated. 
 Follow the organization ’ s claim reporting procedures. 
 Secure all pertinent records. 
 Release a copy of the record only after receiving a written request and signed 
authorization, in accordance with organizational policy. 
 Before releasing the medical record, seek to obtain the specifi c components of the 
medical record that are needed by the requester, and release only those portions 
that are requested. 
 Never change a record in any way once a copy has been released. 
 Amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) went into effect 
in December 2006. Most medical professional liability suits are brought in state court, 
■
■
■
■
■
Documentation and Risk Management 319
c09. indd 319 3/2/09 12:20:54 PM
320 Documentation and The Medical Record
which are not obligated to follow the FRCP. However, most state courts are adopting 
new rules of civil procedure, many of which are modeled on the FRCP. It is imperative 
that the risk management professional, along with legal counsel and the organization ’ s 
health information offi cer, review and revise as appropriate all policies, procedures, 
protocols, and practices that relate to records (hard copy or electronic) that could be 
requested in civil proceedings. 39
 EMERGING RISK EXPOSURES 
 Although the basic principles of documentation remain the same, new forms of documentation require an examination of related risk exposures. 
 Electronic Recordkeeping 
 President Bush , in his State of the Union Address on January 20, 2004, outlined a program whereby most Americans would have electronic health records within the next 
ten years. This commitment was also refl ected when Department of Health and Human 
Services Secretary Mike Leavitt told the House Appropriations Committee that he 
 “ sees a day when every American can have access to an electronic health record. ” 40
 Electronic medical records reduce costs and improve care. Electronic databases can 
eliminate the need for physicians to repeat certain tests and allow them to fi nd out which 
medications a patient is taking. Nevertheless, hospitals face the challenge of making the 
transition. Cedars - Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles shelved its $ 34 million computerized physician - order entry (CPOE) system after three months, following “ full - blown staff 
rebellion in the fall of 2002. ” Complaints included poor technology ( “ clunky and slow ” ), 
insuffi cient training, resistance to change, and the fact that only a few of the two thousand 
doctors with privileges at the hospital were involved in developing the system. 41
 With the advent of electronic medical records, policies and procedures need to be 
reviewed to accommodate new considerations, such as corrections in the medical 
record. Hospitals must be able to strike a balance between the benefi ts of the technology and the method and pace of implementation, always with an eye on safety. 
 Computerized Physician Order Entry 
 In 2005, about 6 percent of hospitals nationwide had computerized systems for doctors ’ orders. 42 According to the CPOE Digest 2008 from KLAS, (an impartial healthcare technology vendor performance fi rm based in Orem, Utah) that percentage 
increased in 2008 to 17.5. Hospitals that are complying with the Leapfrog Group ’ s 
recommendation that hospitals issue voluntary reports on progress in implementing 
computerized physician order entry (CPOE) systems and other measures to improve 
safety have reported that they have eliminated virtually all transcription errors by 
going to electronic physician ordering. 43
 However, more than 90 percent of prescriptions are still written by hand, and 
researchers have found that computer systems are prone to make twenty - two types of 
c09. indd 320 3/2/09 12:20:55 PM
medication errors (for example, selecting the wrong patient fi le because names and 
drugs are similar or because patients ’ names do not appear on the screen; different 
doctors using the same terminal, so if one fails to log off, a prescription could go to the 
wrong patient). 44
 A study that analyzed the effect of computerized order entry systems on medical 
errors at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Salt Lake City found that the 
VA ’ s CPOE system was able to eliminate mistakes from illegible handwriting and 
could offer simple advice, such as avoiding drug interactions, but it was not “ designed 
to provide more sophisticated advice on drugs, dosages and patient - monitoring strategies that might have averted harm. ” Another study at the University of Pennsylvania 
hospital corroborated these fi ndings. The studies highlighted “ strikingly high numbers 
of adverse drug events ” and “ many potential glitches ” in a CPOE system. 45
 Risk management professionals are cautioned to carefully evaluate the risks and 
fl aws of any CPOE system and encouraged to contribute to contingency solutions. 
 Medical Record Database Privacy Issues 
 In May 2005, California health offi cials notifi ed 21,600 Medi - Cal benefi ciaries that a 
laptop containing their personal information had been stolen. In response, state Sen. 
Jackie Speier (D) vowed to introduce a bill that would require California agencies and 
contractors to encrypt all personal information stored in laptops. 46 By August 11, 2005, 
the California Department of Health (CDHS) had successfully encrypted 1,700 laptops with Encryption Plus Hard Disk positioning the department as a compliance 
model for other state agencies. 
 THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL ’ S ROLE 
 The risk management professional should be vigilant in assessing the quality of medical record documentation, looking for opportunities to enhance the value and quality 
of the medical record. 
 The following are some suggestions to the risk management professional for 
addressing documentation issues: 
 Review incident patterns and trends for documentation issues and problems 
throughout the organization. 
 Evaluate on a regular basis the effectiveness of the organization ’ s documentation 
style and format. 
 Review annually all forms, policies, procedures, protocols, and standards relating 
to documentation in the medical record. 
 Review the minutes of the medical records committee and closed records review 
proceedings to assess the response to previously identifi ed concerns. 
■
■
■
■
The Risk Management Professional’s Role 321
c09. indd 321 3/2/09 12:20:55 PM
322 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Contact defense counsel for advice on documentation issues that have been identifi ed in claims, and obtain a copy of pertinent documentation case law. 
 Review the protocol for handling inappropriate documentation. 
 Familiarize yourself with current federal and state statutes, Medicare Conditions 
of Participation, and other standards regarding documentation. 
 Develop a collaborative relationship with the medical records department personnel responsible for coding medical records and for responding to subpoenas and 
requests for records. 
 Incorporate risk management and documentation issues as part of the general orientation for all new employees. 
 Conduct random audits of medical records to identify documentation issues. 
 Develop a collaborative relationship with transcription services and include them 
in the auditing process. 
 With the increased pressure to be cost - effi cient, the necessity for real - time access 
to information, the advent of telemedicine, and the development of the electronic medical record, all coupled with an increasing array of delivery sites, the risk management 
professional is required to maintain an understanding of evolving documentation risks 
and challenges. 
 SUMMARY 
 As one of many health care business documents, the medical record can be the organization ’ s strongest ally in providing quality care. It can also be its worst enemy if improperly prepared or maintained. Ensuring the appropriateness, thoroughness, and timeliness of medical record documentation is a signifi cant loss prevention activity that should 
be undertaken by the risk management professional. The medical record is the one lasting documentation of patient care. It is the primary document in which health care 
information about a patient is recorded. 
 Proper documentation enhances good health outcomes. Patients and residents 
receive quality nursing and medical care based on a documented assessment of their 
needs. Medical records can be more than the sum of their parts. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
 KEY TERMS 
 Abbreviations 
 Alterations 
 Authentication 
 Computerized physician order entry
 system 
 Countersignatures 
 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 
 Forensic documentation examination 
 Hearsay 
 Legibility 
 National Patient Safety Goals 
 Reimbursement 
c09. indd 322 3/2/09 12:20:55 PM
 ACRONYMS 
 AHIMA 
 ANA 
 CMS 
 CPOE 
 FACT 
 HIAA 
 HIMSS 
 HIPAA 
 HMO 
 IM 
 NPSG 
 OSHA 
 PIE 
 PHI 
 POMR 
 SOAP 
 SOAPIER
 NOTES 
 1. American Nurses Association. Principles for Documentation. Silver Spring, Md.: 
American Nurses Association, 2005. 
 2. Joint Commission. Hospital Accreditation Standards. Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.: Joint 
Commission Resources, published annually. 
 3. 2007 Most Challenging Standards. The Joint Commission. This Month, September 
2008 
 4. Joint Commission. Hospital Accreditation Standards, 2005 ed., I.M.6.20. 
 5. Ibid., Standards IM.6.10, IM.6.20, IM.6.30, IM.6.40, IM.6.50, and IM.6.60. 
 6. Beicher, T. Defensive Documentation for Long - Term Care: Strategies for Creating 
a More Lawsuit - Proof Resident Record. Marblehead, Mass.: HCPro, 2003, p. 10. 
 7. Beverage, D., and others. Charting Made Incredibly Easy, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006, p. 137. 
 8. Holmes, H. N., and others. Documentation, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Springhouse, 
1999, p. 67. 
 9. Ibid., p. 107. 
 10. Ibid., p. 70. 
 11. Beverage and others, Charting, p. 97. 
 12. Holmes and others, Documentation, p. 11. 
 13. Beverage and others, Charting, p. 70. 
 14. Ibid., p. 63. 
 15. Holmes and others, Documentation, p. 74. 
Notes 323
c09. indd 323 3/2/09 12:20:56 PM
324 Documentation and The Medical Record
 16. Beverage and others, Charting, p. 81. 
 17. Ibid., p. 85. 
 18. Ibid., p. 50. 
 19. Worsley, B. “ Pointing Fingers Is Risky Business. ” Medical Liability Monitor,
2004, 29 (11), 8. 
 20. Cabral, J. D. “ Poor Physician Penmanship. ” Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 1997, 278, 1116 – 1117. 
 21. Vasquez et al. v. Kolluru, A - 103 Tex. 042 (2000). 
 22. Friedland, N. “ Chemo Overdose Result of Illegible Prescription. ” San Francisco 
Examiner, April 26, 2005. The case was eventually settled for $ 160,000. Durand, M. 
 “ Chemo Death Case Settled. ” San Mateo Daily Journal, Dec. 20, 2006. 
 23. 42 CFR 482.24(c)[1]. 
 24. “ Back to the Blackboard: Physicians Must Improve Handwriting Skills. ” HCPro, 
2002, http://www.msleader.com 
 25. “ Handwriting Challenged ’ Doctors to Take Penmanship Class at Cedars - Sinai 
Medical Center. ” Science Daily Magazine, Apr. 27, 2000, http://www.science
daily.com/releases/2000/04/000426155803.htm 
 26. Monaghan, M. “ Physicians Get Help with Poor Pen Skills. ” Statesman Journal,
Mar. 16, 2005. 
 27. “ Back to the Blackboard. ” 
 28. Cabral, “ Poor Physician Penmanship. ” 
 29. Brent, N. J. “ How Should I Document a Med Error? ” Nursing Spectrum — Career 
Fitness Online, Mar. 3, 2005. 
 30. Pyle v. Morrison, 716 S.W. 2d 930 (Tenn. Ct. App. 1986). 
 31. Florida Administrative Code 59S - 8.005. 
 32. Beicher, T. “ Common Medical Record Omissions and Pitfalls of the Pen. ” In 
Defensive Documentation, pp. 81 – 94. 
 33. Fletcher, D. M., and Rhodes, H. B. Retention of Health Information (Updated). 
American Health Information Management Association, 2002, http://library.
ahima.org/xpedio/groups/public/documents/ahima/bok1_012545.hcsp?dDoc 
Name=bok1_012545 
 34. Ibid. 
 35. AHIMA e - HIM Work Group on the Legal Health Record. Update: Guidelines for 
Defi ning the Legal Health Record for Disclosure Purposes. American Health 
c09. indd 324 3/2/09 12:20:56 PM
Information Management Association, 2005, http://library.ahima.org/xpedio/
groups/public/documents/ahima/bok1_027921.hcsp 
 36. Cruz v. West Volusia Hospital Authority d/b/a West Volusia Memorial Hospital,
Volusia Co., Fla. Circ. Ct. 95 - 10313 (1997). 
 37. Cloughly v. Saint Paul Fire and Marine Insurance Company, Washington Co., 
Ark. Circ. Ct. C1V95 - 996 (1997). 
 38. Toinkham, Administrator of Estate of Muncey, v. Mt. Carmel Health d/b/a Mt. Carmel 
East Hospital, Franklin Co., Ohio, Ct. of Common Pleas 94CVA - 09 - 6736 (1997). 
 39. Amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure available at [ http://www
.uscourts.gov/rules/EDiscovery_w_Notes.pdf ] 
40. “E-Health:Health.” National Journal, Mar. 3, 2005, [http://www.nationaljournal
.com/pubs/ techdaily/pmedition/ 2005/tp050303.htm]
 41. “ HHS Secretary Touts EHRs, Telemedicine. ” California HealthCare Foundation, 
Mar. 4, 2005, http://www.ihealthbeat.org/ index.cfm?Action5dspItem & itemID5 
109414 42. 
 42. Connolly, C. “ Cedars - Sinai Doctors Cling to Pen and Paper. ” Washington Post,
Mar. 21, 2005. 
 43. Ibid. 
44. Ritter, J. “Docs’ Scrawl Can Endanger Patients.” Chicago Sun-Times, May 8, 2005.
 45. “ Wall Street Journal Examines Impact of Computerized Physician Order Entry 
Systems on Medical Error Rate. ” Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Daily 
Reports, June 1, 2005, http://www.kaisernetwork.org/daily_reports/rep_index
.cfm?DR_ID530456 
 46. “ Stolen Laptop Contains Information on Medi - Cal Benefi ciaries. ” California 
Healthline, California Healthcare Foundation, May 31, 2005, http://www.califor
niahealthline.org/articles/2005/5/31/Stolen - Laptop - Contains - Information - for -
 MediCal - Benefi ciaries.aspx?topicID=40 
 SUGGESTED READING AND RECOMMENDED WEB SITES 
 American Health Information Management Association: http://www.ahima.org 
 American Hospital Association: http://www.aha.org 
 American Medical Association: http://www.ama - assn.org 
 American Nurses Association: http://www.nursingworld.org 
 Beicher, T. Defensive Documentation for Long - Term Care: Strategies for Creating a 
More Lawsuit - Proof Resident Record . Marblehead, Mass.: HCPro, 2003. 
Suggested Reading and Recommended Web Sites 325
c09. indd 325 3/2/09 12:20:56 PM
326 Documentation and The Medical Record
 Beverage, D., and others. Charting Made Incredibly Easy, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006. 
 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/default.asp 
 Getty, B., and others. “ Rx for Handwriting Success: A Handwriting Seminar for Medical Professionals, ” http://www.handwritingsuccess.com 
 Health Insurance Association of America: http://www.hiaa.org 
 Holmes, H. N., and others. Documentation, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Springhouse, 1999. 
 Institute for Safe Medication Practice: http://www.ismp.org 
 The Joint Commission: http://www.jointcommission.org 
 NSO Risk Advisor: http://www.nso.com 
 Offi ce of Inspector General: http://www.oig.gov 
c09. indd 326 3/2/09 12:20:57 PM
327
CHAPTER
10
STATUTES, STANDARDS, 
AND REGULATIONS 
 MARK COHEN 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify critical laws and regulations that require close monitoring for changes or interpretations 
■ To be able to describe risk management techniques to reduce exposure to 
loss due to noncompliance 
■ To be able to recognize resources to enhance or acquire relevant knowledge 
of statutes, standards, and regulations that affect health care organizations 
■ To be able to develop policies, procedures, protocols, and guidelines to assist 
in organizational compliance with statutes, standards, and regulations 
c10.indd 327 3/2/09 12:28:33 PM
328 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
It will be of little avail to the people . . . if the laws be so voluminous 
that they cannot be read, or so incoherent that they cannot be 
understood; if they be repealed or revised before they are promulgated, or 
undergo such incessant changes that no (one) who knows what the law is today 
can guess what it will be tomorrow. 
 JAMES MADISON, FEDERALIST, NO. 62 (1788) 
 It should not be much of a surprise to risk management professionals that health care is 
one of the most heavily regulated of all sectors of commerce. Much of these regulations, 
such as federal and state laws, are legislative mandates; others refl ect regulatory requirements imposed by government - sponsored programs — Medicare chief among them. Others 
are more or less self - imposed to conform with other government and private initiatives. 
Irrespective of the source, the number and variety of rules that govern how health care is 
delivered are staggering. Because of the broad civil liability, and criminal and administrative sanctions that may result from deliberate or accidental violations, risk management 
professionals should familiarize themselves with at least the basic elements of key statutes 
and regulations. Keeping up to date on a regular basis will help the risk management professional identify and, if necessary, correct defects in compliance. Use of available 
resources (including corporate counsel, compliance offi cers, federal and state agency representatives, and professional journals) will help broaden the risk management professional ’ s understanding of both the letter and the spirit of the law. 
 Space permits a brief review of a small fraction of the laws, regulations, and rules 
that affect health care delivery. The discussions in this chapter are meant to provide an 
introductory overview of selected laws and regulations only and should not be considered a comprehensive review of the entire scope of the law or the fi nal word on 
 compliance. As laws, regulations, and regulatory guidance are subject to amendment, 
 revision, court interpretation, suspension, or repeal at any time, the reader is cautioned 
to refer always to the most current version of the law. 
 Note that for the sake of brevity, the word law may be used to refer collectively to 
statutory laws, regulations, interpretive guidelines, conditions of participation, and 
other stipulations, even though the matter being addressed may not actually be a law 
per se. In addition, references to a “ patient ” include any lawful surrogate decision 
makers, conservators, guardians, agents under a power of attorney for health care, 
advance health care directives, and similar parties. 
 PATIENT CARE 
 The following laws relate to various aspects of direct patient care. Readers are strongly 
advised to familiarize themselves with these and related laws that may be found in 
their own state ’ s body of statutes and regulations. 
c10.indd 328 3/2/09 12:28:33 PM
 Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act 
 The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), 1
 once referred to 
as COBRA or the “ antidumping law, ” is one of many pieces of legislation contained 
in the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986. EMTALA is essentially a nondiscrimination statute, enacted in response to the then common practice 
among hospital emergency departments to refuse service to patients who lacked the 
ability to pay. These patients were often transferred or referred ( “ dumped ” ) to already 
crowded public hospitals for care. At the time EMTALA was enacted, such dumping 
was legal in about half the states, often causing or contributing to patient injury or 
death. In response, California Representative Pete Stark drafted this law, cosponsored 
in the Senate by Kansas Senator Bob Dole. 
 EMTALA, compliance with which is a condition of a hospital ’ s Medicare “ supplier agreement, ” provides that people who come to a hospital seeking assessment or 
treatment for what they believe may be a medical condition must be provided all available diagnostic and therapeutic services necessary to (1) determine if an “ emergency 
medical condition ” exists; (2) clinically stabilize any medical condition that poses an 
immediate threat to the health of the patient, subject to the availability of resources; 
and (3) if the necessary clinical resources are not available, be transferred to a hospital 
that has them. Everything in this law serves to support these few basic requirements. 
To be certain that patients understand their rights, hospitals are required to post 
EMTALA information signs “ conspicuously … in a place or places likely to be noticed 
by all individuals entering. ” 2
 Although patients are guaranteed access to screening and stabilizing services 
without fi rst having to establish their ability to pay, hospitals and their treating physicians are fully entitled to bill patients, or their health plan, for any care provided. The 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Health care is one of the most highly regulated sectors of commerce. 
■ Accidental or intentional violations or failure to comply with legislative mandates, 
governmental program requirements, accreditation standards, and enrollment in 
voluntary programs may result in civil and criminal actions, sanctions and fi nes, loss 
of provider status, loss of licensure, loss of accreditation, reduced reimbursement, 
diminished quality of outcomes, and loss of reputation. 
■ The risk management professional must develop a process for disseminating information regarding changes to existing statutes, standards, or regulations or the imposition of new ones in a timely manner. 
■ Identifi cation, analysis, and compliance with applicable rules, regulations, statutes, 
and standards should be conducted on an enterprisewide risk management basis. 
Patient Care 329
c10.indd 329 3/2/09 12:28:34 PM
330 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
law does not provide for free care, just unimpeded access to a rather narrowly defi ned 
level of care. Financial screening is permitted if it does not delay the medical examination or access to other services. Some state laws may be more restrictive as to when 
fi nancial screening can take place, so you should consult your state ’ s statutes for clarifi cation. In response to “ prior authorization ” requirements of some managed care 
organizations, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) made it 
clear in a Special Advisory Bulletin that a hospital should not attempt to obtain treatment authorization from the patient ’ s primary caregiver or health plan before providing a medical screening examination (MSE), any needed “ stabilizing ” treatment, or 
arranging an EMTALA transfer to a higher level of care. 3
 Patients who require specialized treatment or resources that the hospital does not 
have must be transferred without delay to someplace that does. However, under no circumstances may such transfers be based on fi nancial considerations alone. Patient 
consent, hospital notifi cation, transfer certifi cation, and other elements of the transfer 
process are defi ned in the regulations and interpretive guidelines. 
 Hospitals must keep a “ central log ” of everyone who comes to the facility and 
requests assessment and care. 4
 Logs must also be maintained by departments, whether 
on or off the premises, that offer nonscheduled primary care access, such as labor and 
delivery units that provide walk - in labor checks, psychiatric departments, and urgent 
or primary care clinics, if they meet any one of the three criteria for a dedicated 
 emergency department (DED): (1) it is licensed as an emergency department, (2) it 
advertises itself as providing emergency care, or (3) one - third or more of its walk - in 
patients are seen for conditions that meet the threshold of an “ emergency medical condition ” as defi ned by the statute. 
 Emergency departments must also keep a roster of physician specialists and subspecialists who are available “ on call ” to provide consultation or care for EMTALA 
patients who need their special expertise. 5
 Although round - the - clock on - call coverage 
for every service represented by the medical staff would be ideal, CMS recognizes that 
this is neither realistic nor required. If full - time on - call coverage is not possible, hospitals must make, and document, efforts to arrange for such coverage to the best of their 
ability — for example, through transfer agreements or contracts with specialty medical 
groups. Medical staff bylaws or rules and regulations must refl ect the obligations of 
medical staff to participate in the on - call rotation and to provide time frames within 
which the physicians serving on call must respond to consultation requests. The Final 
Rule for FY 2009 Inpatient Prospective Payment System released on July 31, 2008 by 
CMS allows hospitals to meet their EMTALA on - call obligations through participation in a “ community - call plan ” . It is thought that these plans, through the pooling of 
resources within a community, will ease the burden on hospitals to provide round - the -
 clock physician on - call coverage. So while the on - call mandate (with civil monetary 
penalties of up to $ 50,000 per violation, as well as loss or suspension of Medicare or 
Medicaid provider status 6
 ) remains unpopular among physicians it is anticipated that 
the potential for penalties on noncompliant physicians will be reduced with approval 
of these plans. 
c10.indd 330 3/2/09 12:28:35 PM
 EMTALA also requires hospitals to make every reasonable effort to advise patients 
about the medical risks of leaving before completing their screening assessment or 
treatment. Efforts must be documented, and whenever possible, the patient should be 
asked to sign a form that confi rms any decision to leave “ against medical advice. ” 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Noncompliance with just about any element of EMTALA may result in investigation 
by the state licensing authority (SA), state quality improvement organization (QIO), 
CMS, the Offi ce of the Inspector General (OIG), and when discrimination is alleged, 
the Offi ce of Civil Rights (OCR). In addition to the prospect of steep civil monetary 
penalties, the fi nancial consequences of forfeiting one ’ s Medicare provider agreement 
should make a believer of everyone. Further adding to the cost of noncompliance is the 
often large legal expense incurred when responding to EMTALA investigations. 
Embedded in the law is a self - policing mandate imposed on hospitals, which requires 
them to report other hospitals (and in narrowly prescribed circumstances, physicians) 
that they suspect of having violated provisions of the law, either to their state licensing 
authority or directly to the CMS regional offi ce. Failure to fi le such a required report 
can itself result in the assessment of fi nes of up to $ 50,000 per violation. These penalties also apply to individuals or organizations that retaliate against (1) a physician or 
other “ qualifi ed ” individual who refused to authorize an unsafe or other improper transfer or (2) anyone who reported a suspected EMTALA violation to the SA or CMS. 
 Many hospitals continue to struggle with EMTALA compliance. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has ventured into this arena only once, 7
 but the primary issue under 
review (a requirement found in some jurisdictions that a so - called improper motive 
was necessary to establish an EMTALA violation) was dismissed. Under provisions of 
the Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of 2002, 
and the Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems Final Rules for FY 2008 and 2009, the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) may waive certain elements of 
EMTALA during emergency situations. 
 Hospitals and physicians must remember that this law is primarily process -
 oriented, not outcome - oriented. EMTALA is not a malpractice statute. This point has 
been restated in numerous court decisions. However, regulators do focus on whether 
the hospital has complied with the individual mandates of the law in a uniform, nondiscriminatory manner. If a hospital focuses on doing what ’ s right for its emergency 
patients clinically and upholds the administrative requirements of the law, compliance 
will be easy to achieve. 
 MEDICARE MODERNIZATION ACT 
 Section 1011 ( “ Federal Reimbursement of Emergency Health Services Furnished to 
Undocumented Aliens ” ) of the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and 
Modernization Act of 2003, commonly known as the Medicare Modernization Act 
(MMA), established the government ’ s fi rst program to compensate hospitals for 
Medicare Modernization Act 331
c10.indd 331 3/2/09 12:28:35 PM
332 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 providing services under EMTALA. 8
 The provisions require the development of new 
policies and processes for the business offi ce and the registration staff to pursue these 
funds. A fund of $ 250 million was set aside for this purpose through 2008, two - thirds 
divided among all fi fty states and the remaining third divided among the six states with 
the estimated largest number of undocumented aliens. Allotted funds are paid directly 
to eligible providers of EMTALA - related services. However, to be eligible for reimbursement, a provider must fi rst exhaust efforts to obtain payment from any other 
sources, including the patient, state, county, and municipal alternative payment plans, 
low - income health care insurance programs, and emergency services funds. 
 Reimbursement may be obtained for services provided to (1) undocumented 
aliens; (2) aliens who have been paroled, that is, granted special permission by the secretary of the Department of Homeland Security to enter the United States for humanitarian or “ public benefi t ” purposes; and (3) Mexican citizens who enter the United 
States under a restricted “ laser visa. ” Eligible providers must fi rst submit a “ provider 
enrollment application ” to the designated contractor retained by the CMS to administer the enrollment and payment process. Other forms are designed to submit requests 
for reimbursement to the contractor and help determine whether a patient meets the 
criteria that will allow the provider to receive payments from the fund. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Although the prospect of “ free ” money is attractive, the devil is in the details. The section stresses the need for providers to identify undocumented aliens and other qualifi ed individuals without giving the appearance of discrimination. This process must be 
undertaken by trained staff so as to avoid unintentionally discouraging the patient from 
being seen, which, if this should occur, would represent a violation of EMTALA. If 
considering participation, based on best “ guesstimates, ” try to determine approximately how many individuals representing the identifi ed groups have been seen 
recently for emergency services. If you see a sizable number and other funding is 
absolutely not available, consider enrolling in the program. If the numbers are relatively low or if state or regional funding already exists for reimbursing providers for 
uncompensated care, weigh the possibly limited fi nancial benefi ts against the cost in 
time, energy, and labor in developing detailed policies and procedures and the staff 
training needed to implement this program. The choice is yours. 
 MEDICAL STAFF 
 The Health Care Quality Improvement Act (HCQIA) 9
 went into effect on November 
14, 1986. Congress enacted the law in response to a variety of areas of concern, including a nationwide upward trend in the number of medical malpractice claims, an apparent need to improve the overall quality of care provided through effective peer review, 
and the lack of any nationwide infrastructure within which to track the movement of 
inept physicians from state to state without discovery or disclosure of their track record 
of negligence or incompetence. 
c10.indd 332 3/2/09 12:28:35 PM
 Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986: Peer Review 
 The HCQIA encourages hospitals, state licensing boards, and professional societies to 
identify and discipline physicians, dentists, and other health care providers who, after 
adequate, nondiscriminatory peer review, were found to have engaged in negligent or 
unprofessional conduct. In support of these objectives, Congress established a broad 
legal immunity from civil liability to physicians and others who actively engage in or 
contribute to the peer review process, provided that the review was performed to further high - quality health care, after a reasonable effort had been made to establish the 
facts of the matter, after required “ notice ” and “ fair - hearing ” opportunities have been 
provided, and in the reasonable belief that the action is supported by the facts. This 
element of the law was enacted in part in response to the “ malicious ” peer review 
memorialized in the landmark Patrick v. Burget decision. 10 The court found that efforts 
by Columbia Memorial Hospital ’ s peer review committee to drive Dr. Patrick off of 
the medical staff constituted a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. The damages 
awarded by the jury trebled as a consequence. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 The peer review process also had its basis in other well - publicized court decisions from 
the 1970s and 1980s. Typical of these fi ndings was that in the case of Elam v. College Park 
Hospital, in which the court found that “ a hospital is accountable, under the doctrine of 
corporate negligence, for negligently screening the competency of its medical staff to 
insure the adequacy of care rendered to its patients. Furthermore the hospital itself had a 
direct and independent responsibility to its patients of insuring the quality of care provided. ” 11 The objective of peer review is to promote patient safety through the continual 
monitoring of physician performance. This obligation is generally vested in an organization ’ s board of directors, which in turn delegates operational elements to the medical 
staff. To encourage physician involvement in this process, several states have enacted 
laws that provide protection from civil liability for individuals who participate in peer 
review activities. At the federal level, the HCQIA provides similar protections. 
 Sometimes confi dentiality is provided through the application of a legal privilege to 
committee records. In others, protection is afforded by way of immunity from discovery 
arising out of civil litigation. Consequently, both hospital and medical staff should be 
reminded periodically that such protections are important in preserving the integrity of 
the peer review process and that these often fragile, narrowly defi ned safeguards may be 
relinquished if the protected information is accidentally (or deliberately) waived through 
improper release or when used for purposes for which it was not intended. Depending 
on the nature of the applicable state laws, consider having peer review participants sign 
a confi dentiality statement. Doing so will help reinforce the confi dentiality provisions of 
the process and provide some measure of liability protection. 
 National Practitioner Data Bank 
 The HCQIA also established the National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) 
for the reporting of adverse actions against physicians and other health care 
Medical Staff 333
c10.indd 333 3/2/09 12:28:36 PM
334 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
practitioners — commonly known as simply the Data Bank. The Data Bank acquires 
information from several sources in connection with claims of professional negligence 
that were resolved with either a judgment found against the practitioner or a settlement 
made on his or her behalf, regardless of the amount. 
 Hospitals must report to their state board of medical examiners or state licensing 
board any action taken that (1) adversely affects a practitioner ’ s medical staff membership or clinical privileges for a period exceeding thirty days or (2) a physician ’ s voluntary relinquishment of medical staff privileges (or an application for such privileges) 
submitted to avoid disciplinary action. Health care entities may also report actions 
taken against other health care practitioners (such as nurse midwives) but are not 
required to do so. The board of medical examiners or state licensing board must in turn 
report to the Data Bank any actions taken against a practitioner ’ s license. Time frames 
within which reports must be made to the Data Bank are specifi cally defi ned by the 
law and must be adhered to. 
 Hospitals are required to query the Data Bank about all applicants for medical 
staff membership and at least once every two years thereafter in connection with the 
renewal of their clinical privileges. A hospital may voluntarily query the Data Bank at 
any time in support of its peer review activities. Although there is no provision for 
imposing civil monetary penalties against facilities that fail to query the Data Bank as 
required, hospitals that do not do so put the confi dentiality of the Data Bank records of 
their medical staff at risk by providing an opportunity for access to them by plaintiffs ’ 
attorneys. 
 Physicians, dentists, and other practitioners may query the Data Bank about themselves at any time. However, the Data Bank is prohibited from disclosing information 
to a medical malpractice insurer, defense attorney, or member of the general public. 
Nonetheless, as noted previously, if a plaintiff ’ s attorney can establish that the hospital 
failed to query the Data Bank as required by law, the attorney can gain access to otherwise confi dential Data Bank information about the defendant physician. 
 The Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank 
 The Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data Bank (HIPDB) was established by the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) as a clearinghouse for the reporting and disclosure of certain fi nal “ adverse actions ” taken against 
health care practitioners, suppliers, and other providers. To avoid duplication of effort for 
entities that must report to or query both the HIPDB and NPDB, the Integrated Querying 
and Reporting System (IQRS) was established to allow simultaneous reporting to and 
querying of both systems. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Complying with the reporting and Data Bank inquiry elements of this law is essential. 
The immunity provisions of this law support peer review by providing desirable protection for participants in the process. The confi dentiality provisions of the law must 
also be observed closely, as civil monetary penalties of up to $ 11,000 may be levied 
c10.indd 334 3/2/09 12:28:36 PM
for improper disclosure of confi dential information obtained from the Data Bank. 
Penalties of up to $ 11,000 may also be imposed for the failure to report to the Data 
Bank any judgments and settlement dollars paid on behalf of a practitioner. 
 The Bureau of Health Professions of the Health Resources Service Administration 
(HRSA) believes that hospitals signifi cantly underreport to the Data Bank. 
Unfortunately, there is probably a strong basis for such suspicions. Consequently, the 
HRSA has advocated for increasing penalties for violators. At the state level, for 
example, California has signifi cantly increased the penalties levied against hospitals 
for not fi ling required reports. Make every effort to ensure that your organization 
remains compliant with all HCQIA requirements. 
 Patient Self - Determination Act of 1990 
 The Patient Self - Determination Act (PSDA) was enacted as part of the Omnibus 
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. Even though the PSDA was effective December 1, 
1991, fi nal regulations were not released until July 27, 1995. 12 The tragic case of accident victim Nancy Cruzan and the exhaustive efforts of her parents to gain the right to 
make end - of - life decisions on her behalf spurred Congress to address these issues in 
this landmark statute. More recently, the controversy surrounding the decision by Terri 
Schiavo ’ s husband to discontinue her nutrition and hydration once again riveted the 
public ’ s attention on this sensitive and highly personal topic. The PSDA establishes 
the right of competent patients to make binding, legally enforceable decisions about 
their health care preferences that are to be followed should they later become unable to 
express them. The law imposes compliance on a broad range of providers: hospitals, 
skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), home health care or personal care services, hospice 
programs, and health maintenance organizations (HMOs). Freestanding outpatient 
clinics and private physicians ’ offi ces are not covered by the law. Obligated providers 
must furnish their patients, clients, or insurance plan enrollees with written information about their right to prepare an advance directive and also, where required, inquire 
whether the patient has completed one. 
 The law defi nes an advance directive as a lawful written instruction, such as a living will, power of attorney for health care, or advance health care directive that 
describes an individual ’ s preferences for health care should that individual become 
unable to express them later on. By requiring health care providers to furnish information about “ self - determination ” to their patients, it was hoped that more people would 
be encouraged to consider their options in this regard. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Develop, implement, and monitor compliance with policies and procedures that 
address each element of the law. It ’ s a good idea to retain copies of advisory materials 
distributed to patients for later reference, if necessary to help establish compliance. 
Familiarize yourself with the specifi cs of your own state ’ s laws, if any, relating to 
advance directives. Responding to critical clinical and end - of - life treatment issues for 
patients who have left neither directions nor evidence of treatment preferences can be 
Medical Staff 335
c10.indd 335 3/2/09 12:28:37 PM
336 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
a highly charged and very diffi cult emotional and legal process for everyone involved. 
Although advance directives are a good idea and their use should be encouraged, 
patients are not required to complete them, nor should access to care be withheld 
because they have not done so. 
 Patients ’ Rights 
 This Medicare condition of participation (CoP) for hospitals was proposed as a rule 
in 1997 and enacted in 1999. 13 It establishes six standards relating to patients ’ rights 
issues that must be complied with by acute care hospitals, psychiatric treatment units 
within acute care hospitals, psychiatric hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities. 
Notice of Rights Hospitals must inform each patient or, when applicable, the patient ’ s 
representative, of that patient ’ s rights “ in advance of furnishing or discontinuing patient 
care whenever possible. ” As CMS has not specifi ed precisely how to accomplish this, 
a compliant policy should refl ect at a minimum how, when, and where to provide 
patients with this information. Hospitals are also directed to establish a formal process 
for investigating and resolving patient grievances. The law delegates to the hospital ’ s 
governing body the responsibility of overseeing this process, although the responsibility may be redelegated to an individual or to a committee established for this purpose. 
Upon completion of grievance review, patients must be provided with a written notice 
of its fi ndings, including (1) the name of the hospital contact person, (2) the steps taken 
to investigate the complaint, (3) the actual results or fi ndings, and (4) the date of completion. CMS also expects that issues of consequence that arise during the investigation be referred to the applicable quality improvement, utilization, or peer review 
groups. CMS has also not defi ned the term grievance, nor has it made a distinction 
between a “ grievance ” and a “ complaint ” (if in fact one exists). Thus each facility must 
develop a reasonable means of compliance of its own. 
Exercise of Rights Patients must be advised of their rights to (1) participate in developing and implementing their plan of care, (2) make informed decisions regarding 
their course of treatment, (3) be continually informed of the status of their health 
by their providers, and (4) formulate advance directives and have them complied with. 
Privacy and Safety Patients are entitled to personal privacy and to receive care in a 
safe environment without the threat of harm, abuse, or harassment. 
 Confi dentiality of Patient Records This standard reiterates patients ’ rights refl ected 
within both the federal HIPAA statutes and state law. These requirements were developed in response to concerns that patient confi dentiality protections were steadily 
eroding as a result of the increasing volume of personal health care information (PHI) 
available electronically to a broad range of individuals and organizations allowed 
access to it. The HIPAA privacy rule was subsequently enacted to further strengthen 
these confi dentiality provisions and should be referred to for compliance guidance. 
This CoP also entitles patients to have access to their medical records in a reasonable 
c10.indd 336 3/2/09 12:28:37 PM
period of time. As there might be some restrictions imposed on such access, the records 
should be reviewed carefully, before they are released, by qualifi ed health information 
management staff. 
Restraints in Acute Medical and Surgical Care This is the fi rst of two standards relating to the use of restraints. This standard defi nes what constitutes a restraint and the 
conditions under which its use is permitted. The standard generally, but not exclusively, 
applies to the acute care and surgical settings. Hospitals are required to provide ongoing 
staff education regarding restraint use. Don ’ t forget to keep the attendance sheets in case 
you are ever asked to show evidence of compliance with the training requirements. 
Seclusion and Restraint for Behavior Management This second restraint standard 
was enacted in response to a series of articles published in 1998 in the Connecticut ’ s 
Hartford Courant about injuries and deaths occurring in psychiatric care settings and 
resulting from apparent misuse and sometimes abuse of restraints and seclusion. 
Requirements relating to issuing and monitoring restraint orders are specifi ed, including requiring a “ licensed independent practitioner ” to see the patient in person and 
evaluate the need for continued restraint or seclusion within one hour after initiating 
its use. Risk management professionals are advised to see the one - hour issue as only 
one element of the standard and remember to comply with the remainder. Finally, 
patient deaths occurring in conjunction with the use of restraints or seclusion must be 
reported to CMS prior to the close of business on the business day following the day of 
the patient ’ s death. 
Risk Management Implications 
 To be confi dent that everyone is aware of and compliant with the rules, the principles 
of this CoP should be reinforced periodically with the entire staff. Federal and state -
 mandated patients ’ rights must be posted conspicuously in specifi ed public areas or 
made available to patients as otherwise required. As there are often many different 
(and sometimes redundant) rights prescribed by law, be sure to address them all. For 
the sake of convenience, consider developing a consolidated list of patients ’ rights —
 each right with its corresponding citation — in a single posting. Check with legal counsel and the state licensing authority to see if this is permissible (it generally is). 
Implement a policy that addresses posting and other means of notifying patients of 
their rights. 
 Medicare Conditions of Participation 
 The three distinct sets of CoPs found within these Medicare regulations apply to home 
health agencies (42 CFR 484), comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facilities 
(CORFs, 42 CFR 485), and hospitals (42 CFR 482). These regulations are precisely 
what they are labeled as: conditions that must be met by service “ suppliers ” to bill for 
services to Medicare enrollees. Although space precludes an in - depth review of all of 
the CoPs, two have been selected from those covering acute care hospitals for purposes of illustration. 
Medical Staff 337
c10.indd 337 3/2/09 12:28:37 PM
338 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
Infection Control This CoP (42 CFR 482.42) establishes a mandate for hospital infection control programs, specifi c requirements of which include (1) the designation of an 
infection control offi cer and development of relevant policies that address the identifi -
cation and control of infections and communicable diseases, (2) the development and 
maintenance of a log system to track such conditions, and (3) the imposition of responsibility and accountability onto the hospital CEO, the medical staff, and director of 
nursing services for ensuring that hospitalwide quality improvement and training programs are implemented to address issues identifi ed by the infection control offi cer and 
implementing corrective action plans in problem areas. 
Nursing Services This one (42 CFR 482.23) defi nes the operational elements of a 
nursing service. Among the issues covered are requirements governing staffi ng and 
staff supervision, the development and implementation of nursing care plans, staff 
competency assessment, medication administration, and reporting blood transfusion 
reactions, adverse drug reactions, and medication errors. 
 It is strongly recommended that you familiarize yourself with the requirements of 
each of the other hospital CoPs; providing emergency services at nonparticipating hospitals (482.2), compliance (482.11), obligations of the governing body (482.12), quality 
assessment and performance improvement (482.21), medical staff (482.22), medical 
records (482.24), pharmacy services (482.25), radiology (482.26), laboratory services 
(482.27), food and dietetic services (482.28), utilization review (482.30), physical environment (482.41), discharge planning (482.43), organ, tissue, and eye procurement 
(482.45), surgical services (482.51), anesthesia services (482.52), nuclear medicine 
(482.53), outpatient services (482.54), emergency services (482.55), rehabilitation services (482.56), respiratory care (482.57), “ swing - bed ” requirements for long - term care 
providers (482.66), and, for psychiatric hospitals alone, special conditions (482.60), 
medical records (482.61), and staff requirements (482.62). 
 Many other conditions of participation and conditions for coverage (CfCs) exist 
for a broad range of entities and programs. Space precludes a detailed analysis or even 
a listing of all of them. However, one list that risk management professionals should 
be certain to review is found at 42 CFR 410 — Supplementary Medical Insurance 
Benefi ts. A sampling of some of its requirements are included in the following abbreviated list. Look for sections that might apply to you, and become familiar with their 
requirements. 
 Advance Directives (42 CFR 489.102) 
 Ambulatory Surgery Services (42 CFR 416.40 – 49) 
 Comprehensive Outpatient Rehabilitation Facilities (CORFs) (42 CFR 
485.50 – 74) 
 Critical Access Hospitals (42 CFR 485.601 – 645) 
 Diabetes Self - Management Training (42 CFR 410.10 – 146) 
c10.indd 338 3/2/09 12:28:38 PM
 Durable Medical Equipment (42 CFR 410.38) 
 End - Stage Renal Disease Services (42 CFR 405.2100 – 2184) 
 Home Health Services (42 CFR 484.10 – 55) 
 Hospice Care (42 CFR 418.50 – 100) 
 Immunization Standards for Hospitals, Long - Term Care Facilities, and Home 
Health Agencies (42 CFR 482.22, 483.40, and 484.18) 
 Intermediate Care Facilities for the Mentally Retarded (42 CFR 483.400 – 480) 
 Long - Term Care Facilities (42 CFR 483.1 – 75) 
 Managed Care (42 CFR 417.400 – 418) 
 Medical Nutrition Therapy (42 CFR 410.130 – 134) 
 Medicare Advantage (42 CFR 422.100 – 132 and 152 – 158) 
 Organ Procurement and Transplantation (42 CFR 405) 
 Outpatient Physical Therapy (42 CFR 485.701 – 729, 486.150 – 163) 
 Programs for All - Inclusive Care for the Elderly (42 CFR 460.60 – 140) 
 Psychiatric Hospitals and Units (42 CFR 482.60 – 62, 42 CFR 412.20 – 30) 
 Rehabilitation Hospitals and Units (42 CFR 482.56) 
 Religious Nonmedical Health Care Institutions (42 CFR 403.730 – 746) 
 Rural Health Clinics and Federally Qualifi ed Health Centers (42 CFR 491.1 – 11) 
 Telemedicine 42 CFR 410.78 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Although nothing can substitute for a complete review of each CoP and CfC, the size 
of such an undertaking is likely more than most risk management professionals can 
possibly accommodate. However, it is of genuine benefi t to at least familiarize yourself with their key measures. Remember, ignorance of the law remains no defense for 
noncompliance. The CMS and OIG have left the development of the means of meeting 
these requirements mostly up to program participants, so home health agencies, 
CORFs, long - term care, hospitals, and other providers have much leeway to develop 
compliance measures that will work best for them. Due to the unclear and occasionally 
ambiguous nature of some of the CoP and CfC standards, advice from legal counsel 
regarding interpretation and application is strongly suggested. Full compliance with 
all applicable CoPs and CfCs is essential, as failure to do so could result in termination 
of the facility ’ s Medicare provider agreement. 
Medical Staff 339
c10.indd 339 3/2/09 12:28:38 PM
340 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990 
 The objective of the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to protect the 
public health by regulating commerce that involves food, drugs, medical devices, and 
the like. As part of the Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990 (SMDA), Medical Device 
Amendments of 1992, 14 the FDA is authorized to gather information regarding the 
safety of medical devices, including adverse incidents attributed to their use. In 1984, 
under authority granted by the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 and the 
1976 Medical Device Amendments, the FDA issued reporting regulations for medical 
device manufacturers. Subsequently, the agency determined that the number of device -
 related incidents that resulted in injury or death was underreported, especially incidents that occurred in hospitals. In response, the FDA sought congressional support 
for a more stringent set of reporting requirements. As a result of the enactment of the 
SMDA, fi nal device - tracking regulations went into effect on August 16, 1993, with 
fi nal reporting regulations following in 1996. An excellent overview of the reporting 
requirements ( “ Reporting Problems with Medical Devices ” ) is available through the 
Offi ce of Surveillance and Biometrics of the FDA ’ s Center for Devices and Radiological 
Health (CDRH) and can be found on its Web site ( http://www.fda.gov/cdrh ). This law 
applies to hospitals, ambulatory surgical facilities, nursing homes, home health care 
agencies, ambulance providers, rescue squads, rehabilitation facilities, psychiatric 
facilities, and all outpatient diagnostic and treatment facilities that are not physicians ’ 
offi ces. Physicians, chiropractors, optometrists, nurse practitioners, employee health 
clinics, dental offi ces, and freestanding care units are exempt from these reporting 
requirements. 
 To preserve any confi dentiality or immunity protections that may be afforded by 
state law, investigations that involve potential SMDA reportable events should occur 
under the auspices of a protected peer review, quality improvement, or other related 
program. The team of investigators may be brought together on an ad hoc basis to conduct the investigation; prepare (or direct the preparation of) a report to the FDA, if one 
is warranted; and submit their fi ndings to their board or other responsible body through 
their primary committee. 
Reporting Using the MedWatch form, device users must notify manufacturers (or the 
FDA if the manufacturer ’ s identity is not known) within ten days of becoming aware of 
an event involving a serious patient injury or death (the FDA - sponsored MedWatch 
form is shown in Exhibit 10.1 ). The FDA must also be notifi ed in the same time frame 
in cases where a death is involved. A facility “ becomes aware ” when clinical personnel 
employed by or affi liated with a user facility learn that a potentially reportable event 
has occurred. In addition, facilities are required to report to the FDA on January 1 of 
each year a summary of MDR reports made during the previous year. Report forms, 
instructions, and event code books are available from the FDA. Online submissions 
also are acceptable with prior approval from the agency. Although facilities are obligated to maintain copies of these reports for a minimum of two years, risk management 
professionals are advised to keep them for at least fi ve years (or longer) in recognition 
c10.indd 340 3/2/09 12:28:38 PM
Medical Staff 341
EXHIBIT 10.1. MedWatch Form for Reporting Serious Patient Injury 
or Death
c10.indd 341 3/2/09 12:28:39 PM
342 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
of statute of limitations and related liability and compliance provisions. Consult legal 
counsel, your insurer, and the state hospital association for further guidance. Upon 
learning of a “ reportable ” incident that involves the use of their product or device, 
manufacturers are also required to submit an MDR to the FDA. At the FDA ’ s request, 
a “ fi ve - day ” report must be submitted by a manufacturer when the FDA believes that 
immediate intervention is necessary to prevent risk of harm to the public health. 
Medical Device Tracking Rules The SMDA was amended in 1993 to require device 
manufacturers to track products that are (1) permanently implantable, (2) life -
 sustaining or life - supporting and intended to be used outside of device user facilities, 
or (3) otherwise designated by the FDA. A complete list of these devices can be found 
in 42 CFR 821.20. These tracking requirements were later expanded by the FDA 
Modernization Act of 1997, with new rules adopted in 2002. 
 As a requirement of the device tracking protocol, the fi nal distributor (such as the 
hospital) is required to collect the personal identifying information of each patient 
who receives a tracked device and to submit this information to the manufacturer. New 
rules that went into effect in May 2002 revised the scope of the regulation and added 
certain patient confi dentiality requirements. Patients who fall under the new rules may 
refuse to release identifying information such as Social Security number, name, 
address, and telephone number to manufacturers. When faced with such a refusal, the 
provider should counsel the patients about the risk they face of not being contacted by 
the manufacturer if problems with the device are identifi ed, or a recall is initiated, later 
on. This discussion, as usual, should be documented in the patient ’ s record. 
Reusable Single - Use Devices On August 14, 2000, the FDA issued “ Guidance on 
Enforcement Priorities for Single - Use Devices Reprocessed by Third Parties and 
Hospitals. ” 15 This Guidance was published in response to earlier FDA efforts to map 
out a strategy for addressing the reprocessing of single - use devices (SUDs), items 
characterized by their manufacturers as being intended for single use only. The new 
requirements were established to be phased in over time and include the following: 
■ Registering and listing the devices. Companies that reprocess SUDs must register 
with the FDA and submit a list of the devices they reprocess. 
■ Medical device reporting and tracking requirements. Hospitals and independent 
reprocessors are instructed to adhere to the same device tracking requirements as 
the manufacturers. 
■ Device corrections and removals. The FDA requires that a report be submitted 
about specifi ed types of device repairs, modifi cations, or recalls, if the purpose of 
the “ correction ” or “ removal ” was to reduce a health risk posed by the device or to 
correct violations of the act. 
■ Quality system regulations. These regulations govern oversight of the methods 
and controls used in the design, manufacture, packaging, labeling, storage, 
c10.indd 342 3/2/09 12:28:41 PM
 installation, and servicing of devices. These requirements, known collectively as 
good manufacturing practices (GMPs), must be followed closely. 
■ Labeling. These requirements mandate that device packages bear the name of the 
product, the manufacturer, the place of manufacture, and directions for use. 
■ Premarket requirements. The FDA has specifi ed three classes of SUDs. Depending 
on the classifi cation of the device, a premarket notifi cation is required to be submitted to the FDA to allow it to assess whether the device is safe and effective as 
a legally marketed “ predicate device, ” that is, the original device from which the 
SUD is derived or patterned. Upon completion of the assessment, marketing clearance will be either approved or rejected. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Identifying factors that directly or indirectly contribute to patient endangerment is a 
fundamental objective of health care risk management. Complying with the reporting 
requirements of this law compels providers to actively participate in an important oversight process. The Manufacturers and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) 
database ( http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/maude.html ) is an excellent source of information 
relating to the FDA ’ s adverse event tracking efforts. From a Medicare compliance 
standpoint, each facility must carefully consider how to develop a reasonable cost process when using SUDs in combination with new devices. The compliance offi cer should 
be consulted to discuss how such charges can be properly refl ected in cost reports. 
 Mammography Quality Standards Act of 1992 
 The Mammography Quality Standards Act of 1992 (MQSA) 16 was later amended by 
Congress with the Mammography Quality Standards Reauthorization Acts of 1998 and 
2004 (MQSRA). 17 Enacted in response to the public ’ s increasing awareness and concern about breast cancer screening and treatment, the law focuses primarily on issues 
related to improving the diagnostic and technical standards of mammography, although 
the proper reporting of study results to referring practitioners and their patients also is 
addressed. More than ten thousand facilities in the United States and its territories are 
certifi ed under the act to provide mammography services. If an organization is certifi ed 
or intends to become certifi ed, a close review of this complex law is necessary. 
 The act applies to facilities, practitioners, and specifi ed personnel involved in providing breast cancer screening, diagnosis, and treatment and covers a variety of areas, 
including the following: 
■ Ensuring the competency and qualifi cations of interpreting physicians, medical 
physicists, and radiological technicians 
■ Maintaining facility accreditation in connection with annual facility compliance 
inspections performed by the FDA or any one of fi ve FDA - approved accrediting 
bodies 18
Medical Staff 343
c10.indd 343 3/2/09 12:28:42 PM
344 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
■ Adhering to specifi ed equipment testing and maintenance protocols 
■ Developing and implementing quality assurance and quality control programs 
■ Reporting mammogram results to the referring health care provider and to the 
patient in a prescribed manner 
 Risk Management Implications 
 The FDA has published an MQSA guidance document that is an excellent resource for 
facilities and practitioners in understanding the many facets of this complex law. 19 As is 
the case with virtually every law, the risk management professional is not expected to 
be an expert on each of its constituent elements but rather to understand its basic tenets, 
including the penalties or other risks of not complying. If the facility falls within the 
application of this law, an in - depth review of all required elements of compliance should 
be carried out, including ongoing review to identify additions or other changes. 
 The Newborns ’ and Mothers ’ Health Protection Act of 1996 
 In the face of the increasing incidence of “ drive - through ” short - stay deliveries, 
Congress enacted the Newborns ’ and Mothers ’ Health Protection Act of 1996. 20 The 
law provides protections for mothers and their newborns from restrictions that may be 
imposed by managed care organizations (MCOs) and health plans on hospital lengths 
of stay permitted following childbirth. 
 The law applies to group health plans, other health insurance issuers in the group 
and individual markets, obstetricians, and facilities that provide obstetrical services. In 
a nutshell, health plans and health insurance issuers may not restrict covered hospital 
benefi ts for a mother and her newborn to less than forty - eight hours following a vaginal delivery or ninety - six hours following a cesarean section. Although discharging a 
patient within a shorter period of time provided for by this law is permitted only with 
the mutual agreement of the attending provider and mother, a group health plan or 
other health insurance issuer is not required to extend coverage for these time periods 
if the attending provider, after speaking with the patient, determines that it is safe to 
discharge either the mother or the infant earlier. 
 Health plans and other insurers are prohibited from coercing or otherwise pressuring a mother, or her health care provider, to agree to an early discharge. In addition, 
providers are not required to obtain prior authorization for these prescribed lengths of 
stay. State laws that address this issue may supersede this federal statute if they meet 
one or more of the following requirements: 
■ Minimum allowable lengths of stay meet or exceed the forty - eight - or ninety - six -
 hour requirements. 
■ Coverage provided by health plans and insurers complies with guidelines established by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the 
American Academy of Pediatrics, or any other established professional medical 
association. 
c10.indd 344 3/2/09 12:28:42 PM
■ Although decisions regarding the postpartum length of stay are left exclusively up 
to the provider in consultation with the mother, insurance coverage may not be 
extended for such care based on the assessment of need by the attending provider. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Violation of these requirements might result in the suspension or termination of a 
health plan or health insurer ’ s license. Physicians, nurse midwives, or other licensed 
providers who fail to comply with this law run the risk of being accused of unprofessional conduct, fraud, or professional negligence. Hospitals, insurance companies, and 
HMOs are not considered “ providers ” under this act. 
 Organ Transplantation 
 Before the enactment of the National Organ Transplant Act of 1984 (NOTA), the system for allocating and distributing organs for transplant in the United States was fragmented. With the enactment of NOTA, Congress established a set of unifi ed standards to 
be followed by organ procurement organizations (OPOs) throughout the country. To 
implement the act, the Organ Procurement Transplant Network (OPTN) was established and is currently operated under contract with the Division of Transplantation of 
the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) by the United Network for 
Organ Sharing (UNOS). 21 In 1997, the National Organ and Tissue Donation Initiative 
was also launched in support of this general program. CMS later enacted regulations 
that require hospitals to work collaboratively with local OPOs to improve access to 
potential donors. Amendments to the Final Rule relating to the management and oversight of the OPTN were released by the HHS on October 20, 1999. 22 These amendments 
were the result of a study performed by the National Academy of Science ’ s Institute of 
Medicine (IOM). The amendments established greater accountability of the OPTN to 
develop and implement improved criteria for organ allocation, mandated the establishment of an advisory committee on organ transplantation, revised and clarifi ed oversight 
responsibility for program enforcement, developed specifi c performance criteria, and 
made changes with respect to the composition of the OPTN board of directors. 
 This law (42 CFR 482.45), a Medicare CoP, applies to hospitals, transplant centers, and organ procurement organizations. Member hospitals of the OPTN and eye 
and tissue banks are required to do the following: 
■ Implement a working agreement with the OPO by which it will notify them of 
individuals either whose deaths are imminent or who have died. Responsibility 
for determining whether a patient is a suitable donor candidate rests with the OPO, 
not the hospital. 
■ Develop a similar agreement with at least one tissue bank and one eye bank. 
■ Collaborate with the OPO to inform families of potential donors of their options 
with respect to organ donation. Although this activity is mandated to hospitals by 
law, it should always be carried out in a manner that is sensitive to the circumstances and to the cultural or religious beliefs of the family. 
Medical Staff 345
c10.indd 345 3/2/09 12:28:42 PM
346 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
■ Work with the OPO to educate the hospital staff on identifying and reporting 
potential donors, tissue testing, and so on. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 As noted, these regulations are conditions of participation in Medicare. Noncompliance 
might result not only in loss of the facility ’ s Medicare or Medicaid provider agreement 
but in loss of participation in the OPTN as well. 
 The Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988 
 Congress enacted the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) to 
establish quality standards for clinical laboratories. 23 Among the driving concerns behind 
the law were increasing reports of misread Pap smears, the absence of workload limits for 
technologists, and an apparent proliferation of unregulated laboratories. As the act ’ s regulations undergo continual revision and updating, risk management professionals are 
advised to keep abreast of changes by referring to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention ’ s Division of Laboratory Systems Web site ( http://www.phppo.cdc.gov/dls/
default.asp ). This law established three categories of covered tests: waived complexity, 
moderate complexity, and high complexity. In effect, the more complicated the test, the 
more stringent the CLIA requirements. CLIA specifi es quality standards for profi ciency 
testing (PT), patient test management, quality control, personnel qualifi cations, and quality assurance for laboratories that perform moderate - or high - complexity tests. Recently 
enacted regulations require laboratories that perform gynecological cytology testing to 
ensure that each cytotechnologist or pathologist who participates in such screening must 
enroll annually in a CMS - approved cytology PT program. The CMS, the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the FDA have responsibility for overseeing 
compliance with different elements of CLIA. To enroll in the CLIA program, laboratories 
must register by completing an application, paying the required fees, undergoing a survey, 
and, if applicable, completing the certifi cation. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Data released by the CMS indicates that quality defi ciencies decreased approximately 
40 percent from their fi rst laboratory survey to their second and even further on subsequent surveys. 24 Given risk management ’ s efforts at promoting patient safety, the 
apparent successes of the CLIA program dovetails perfectly with this objective. 
 Human Research Subjects 
Protection of Human Subjects regulations (45 CFR 46 et seq.) set the groundwork for 
human subject protections by defi ning the interrelationship between researchers, the 
institution ’ s research oversight committee, the sponsoring organization, and the 
research subject. 
Institutional Review Board The institutional review board (IRB) is required to review 
proposed research at formal meetings of the board where the majority of members are 
c10.indd 346 3/2/09 12:28:43 PM
present. Approval of research may occur only with the authorization of the majority of 
the IRB members present. Each IRB must have at least fi ve members, one of whom 
must be an individual “ whose primary concerns are in nonscientifi c areas ” and another 
 “ who is not otherwise affi liated with the institution and who is not part of the immediate 
family of a person who is affi liated with the institution. ” The characteristics of the membership must refl ect expertise, experience, and diversity. Outside experts may be called 
on by the IRB for consultation and advice, but they have no vote in the proceedings. 
Sponsoring Institution Research approved by the IRB may be subject to further 
review and approval — or disapproval — by the “ offi cials of the institution. ” Institutions 
may not, on their own, approve research; that authority rests exclusively with the IRB. 
Informed Consent No investigator may engage the participation of an individual in 
research without having obtained, in advance, the person ’ s informed consent. The 
basic elements of such consent include (1) a statement that the study involves research 
and an explanation of the purpose and anticipated duration of the study; (2) a description of the study, specifi cally identifying those elements that are experimental; (3) a 
description of reasonably foreseeable risks or discomforts; (4) an explanation of the 
anticipated benefi ts to the subject or others that might reasonably be expected from 
the research; (5) disclosure of alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if any, 
that may be available; (6) a statement that refl ects the confi dentiality provisions of the 
research records; (7) for research involving more than minimal risk, an explanation of 
whether compensation or medical treatment may be provided in the presence of injury 
occurs; (8) identifi cation of whom to contact if questions about the study or the subject ’ s rights later arise; and (9) a statement that participation is voluntary and that 
refusal to participate will not result in penalties or loss of benefi ts to which the subject 
is otherwise entitled. Other disclosures are also required under circumstances that are 
defi ned in the regulation. These additional disclosure requirements should be reviewed 
to ensure that they are applied as circumstances dictate. Requirements that govern the 
content and timing of the informed consent disclosure may, under narrowly defi ned 
circumstances, be suspended in whole or in part. 
Consent Documentation Consent must be documented in writing and signed by the 
subject or the subject ’ s legally authorized representative, and a copy of the form must be 
given to the person who signed it. Subjects or their representatives must be given adequate 
opportunity to read the form before it is signed. Under narrowly defi ned circumstances 
that relate to either a potential breach of confi dentiality or the absence of any notable risk 
to the subject, the requirement for obtaining a signed consent form may be waived. 
 The Offi ce for Human Research Protections (OHRP) of HHS has primary 
oversight responsibility for human subject research - related programs and activities. 
The OHRP ’ s Division of Assurances and Quality Improvement provides liaison, guidance, and regulatory interpretation to researchers, the federal government, and the 
public. The division operates and maintains a registration system for IRBs and performs a variety of related oversight and education services. The OHRP ’ s Division of 
Medical Staff 347
c10.indd 347 3/2/09 12:28:43 PM
348 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
Policy Planning and Special Projects develops and publishes guidance regarding regulatory and ethical issues for biomedical and behavioral research, provides staff support 
to both the National Human Research Protections Advisory Committee and the Human 
Subjects Research Subcommittee, and coordinates responses to requests for information from both inside and outside the government. 
 Additional regulations (21 CFR 50, 56, 312, and 812) address issues relating primarily to research performed under the guidance of the FDA. Among the many issues 
addressed are those relating to obtaining a research subject ’ s informed consent, mandatory reporting of known or suspected procedural violations, the investigational use 
of new drugs and devices, and a delineation of penalties that may be imposed for failing to comply with the law, including disqualifi cation of the IRB from further FDA -
 approved research activities and exposure of both the research investigator and the 
research institution to civil liability.
 Risk Management Implications 
 Because liability issues related to human subject research activities are wide - ranging 
and complex, the prudent risk management professional must remain on the lookout 
for changes in regulations and developments in case law. Risk management professionals of facilities that carry out research protocols must become familiar with these 
regulations, as they may be asked to serve on or consult with IRBs. Members of IRBs 
should also develop an in - depth understanding of human subject informed consent and 
research - related recordkeeping requirements. Risk and liability issues commonly 
associated with human subject research include research performed without proper 
IRB review and approval, inadequate IRB review of proposed research, inadequate 
continuing review, confl icts of interest among members of the IRB panel, and general 
noncompliance with administrative procedures. (See Chapter 8 on ethics in patient 
care for more information on clinical research.) 
 Medicare Regulations for Long - Term Care Facilities 
 Since the original legislation and regulations 25 were enacted, long - term care has 
received increasing attention from federal and state authorities. In 1998, CMS ’ s Offi ce 
of the Inspector General (OIG) published “ Quality of Care in Nursing Homes: An 
Overview, ” 26 which refl ected that although the overall number of defi ciencies found 
during nursing facility surveys was decreasing, the number of “ quality of care ” and 
other serious defi ciencies was increasing. Long - term care facilities, along with the rest 
of the health care industry, came under increasing surveillance by the OIG with respect 
to allegations of Medicare billing irregularities. The OIG ’ s “ Compliance Program 
Guidance for Nursing Facilities ” delineates expectations with respect to efforts by 
facilities to curb fraud and abuse. 27 The CMS has called upon states to crack down on 
facilities that are found to have repeatedly violated health and safety requirements. 
The CMS Web site ( http://www.cms.hhs.gov ) provides consumers with information 
regarding residents ’ health status (including the prevalence of bedsores, incontinence, 
and other conditions) at every Medicare - or Medicaid - certifi ed nursing facility. 
c10.indd 348 3/2/09 12:28:44 PM
 In brief, nursing facilities have been ordered as a condition of maintaining their 
Medicare provider agreements to (1) develop initiatives to improve the overall level of 
care provided (including special focus on reducing the use of restraints whenever possible), (2) reduce the incidence of bedsores and malnutrition, and (3) ensure that all rights 
entitled to by patients are recognized and supported in practice and not just relegated to 
a sign posted in the front offi ce. Among the rights afforded to patients are the following: 
■ Information about their physical condition, medical benefi ts, and the costs of 
treatment 
■ Access to a physician and the identity, specialty, and means of contacting that 
individual 
■ Obtaining copies of their medical records 
■ Active participation in their own treatment decisions, including refusal of recommended treatment and the right to prepare advance directives 
■ Freedom from physical restraints and psychoactive drugs that are not required as 
part of the medical plan of care 
■ The ability to fi le formal complaints about suspected infractions of any of these 
rights 
 The rules also impose staffi ng requirements on facilities, such as nursing coverage, 
physician examinations, and follow - up visits. Facilities are required to provide formal 
training and certifi cation of nursing assistants. To extend relief to understaffed facilities, regulations were enacted in 2003 that permit providers to employ “ feeding assistants ” to help patients with eating and drinking. In response to a series of tragic nursing 
home fi res in 2003, CMS has ordered that nursing homes that do not have sprinkler 
systems or hard - wired smoke detectors must install battery - operated smoke detectors 
in all patient rooms and public areas. Facilities are also directed to establish a quality 
assurance committee that meets at least quarterly. 
 Implementing a comprehensive compliance program that addresses identifi cation 
and prevention of fraud should be a key priority. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Recent enforcement actions have made headlines across the country. Enforcement regulations enacted in 1995 empower survey agencies (either state agencies or the CMS) to 
impose a wide range of sanctions on noncompliant providers, including civil monetary 
penalties or fi nes of up to $ 10,000 per day, denial of payment for new admissions, and 
termination from the Medicare program. Sanctions imposed by the regulators depend 
on how the agency characterizes the level and pervasiveness of harm. As not all survey 
actions are subject to appeal, it is important for providers of long - term care services and 
their risk management professionals to (1) understand the regulations, (2) participate 
actively in the survey process, and (3) maintain an ongoing dialogue with reviewers. 
Medical Staff 349
c10.indd 349 3/2/09 12:28:44 PM
350 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 Above all, providers must be prepared. State inspectors, employing up - to - date 
inspection protocols, have been told by the CMS that they must stagger surveys and 
conduct visits on weekends, in the early morning, and in the evening, times when 
quality, safety, and staffi ng problems are most likely to be apparent. 
 Risk managers should become familiar with The Joint Commission ’ s current standards as refl ected in the Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Long - Term Care
(CAMLTC). 28 Although all elements of the standards are important, risk management 
professionals should focus on the sections that refl ect the “ dimensions of performance ” —
 that is, the nature and extent of services provided residents and the effectiveness of 
 service delivery. Credentialing practices associated with all licensed “ independent practitioners ” should also be reviewed to ensure that they are carried out thoroughly and 
consistently. Finally, allegations of elder abuse and neglect, especially with respect to 
the development of pressure ulcers, has led to a notable increase in civil litigation and 
occasionally even criminal prosecution fi led against nursing facilities. Risk management professionals should ensure that effective treatment protocols for the protection 
of the elderly are in place and closely adhered to. 
 LIFE SAFETY CODE 
 The Life Safety Code (LSC) (29 CFR 1910.35) is a compilation of fi re safety requirements established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and adopted in 
part by CMS. Compliance with the 2000 edition of the NFPA ’ s Life Safety Code is 
required under the fi nal rule adopted by the CMS in 2003 of all Medicare - participating 
facilities, unless granted a waiver. The LSC is a dominant component of the overall 
 “ environment of care ” standards established by The Joint Commission and other 
accrediting organizations. The NPFA recognizes and permits the use of alcohol - based 
hand rub (ABHR) solutions in patient rooms, corridors, and suites of healthcare facilities through amendment of the 2000 and 2003 editions of the life safety codes (LSC).
As there were signifi cant other changes made as well with the new amendment, it is 
crucial to understand these changes, which govern such things as emergency alarm 
systems, standards for rooftop heliports, and emergency lighting. Also important are 
other provisions of the fi nal rule that provide for case - by - case program waivers, and 
clarifi cation of the application of LSC, to ambulatory surgery centers and hospices. 
 A statement of conditions (SOC) must be completed for all buildings that contain 
housing or treatment facilities, with the exception of specifi ed “ business occupancies ” 
defi ned in the code. Completing an SOC, seen by The Joint Commission as an ongoing 
activity, is an involved, cumbersome process that must be overseen by someone with an 
in - depth understanding of the LSC and the organization ’ s buildings. This process is generally a team effort delegated among the facility ’ s engineers, safety offi cer, and others. 
 Basic building information (BBI) forms must be completed for each building that 
provides the designated patient or resident services. Current fl oor plans or layouts of 
each story must be attached to the BBI. A life safety assessment (LSA) should be carried 
out on an ongoing basis to identify any LSC defi ciencies (violations). For defi ciencies 
c10.indd 350 3/2/09 12:28:45 PM
that can ’ t be promptly corrected, plans for improvement (PFIs) must be developed that 
contain (1) a description of the defi ciencies, (2) actions undertaken to correct them, (3) 
identifi cation of funding sources for the corrections, and (4) a schedule of the correction 
actions. PFI forms, whether the short or long versions (depending on the nature and 
scope of the defi ciencies), are reviewable by surveyors. If an organization fails to make 
suffi cient progress in complying with the corrective actions that it establishes for itself, 
the surveyor may recommend conditional accreditation. The Building Maintenance 
Program allows for establishing routine maintenance schedules to deal with some types 
of LSC defi ciencies instead of placing them on PFIs. This program extends only to hospitals and long - term care facilities. Examples of building maintenance items that can be 
included in this program are specifi ed door latches and closing devices, exit signs, and 
maintenance of certain grease control and disposal systems. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Although oversight of compliance with the LSC is generally the responsibility of the 
organization ’ s engineers, safety offi cers, and others, the foundation of the LSC is an 
example of the basic principles of risk management at work, an ongoing process of 
risk identifi cation and control, loss prevention, and follow - up assessment. Evidence 
of LSC compliance may be looked for by the organization ’ s property insurance administrators, real estate and leasing services, and property insurance underwriters. 
 Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
 Established under the auspices of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, the federal Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission (NRC) established rules and NRC oversight authority for 
handling, storage, and use of radioactive substances. 29 A detailed set of instructions is 
provided for the management of such material. 30 Types of medical use of nuclear materials regulated by the NRC include (1) radioactive uptake, dilution, excretion, imaging, or local diagnostic clinical or research procedures; (2) the delivery of palliative or 
therapeutic doses to specifi c tissues or anatomical areas; and (3) research involving 
human subjects. 
 Among the many issues covered by the regulations are mandatory reporting to the 
local NRC regional offi ce within fi fteen days of discovery of any misadministration of 
nuclear by - product material, extensive staff training requirements, the establishment 
of a quality management program, and the provision of penalties for violations. The 
role of the facility ’ s radiation safety offi cer is defi ned, as is the facility ’ s detailed 
recordkeeping responsibilities. Due to the enormous risk attendant to these services, 
continual monitoring of these services is essential. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Risk management professionals of facilities that provide diagnostic or therapeutic services 
that use radioactive substances are advised to familiarize themselves with the basics 
of the applicable regulations. The rigorous monitoring and reporting requirements 
in the regulations must be adhered to, or the facility might face the loss of its NRC license. 
Life Safety Code 351
c10.indd 351 3/2/09 12:28:45 PM
352 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 Violations of the regulations generally invite a quick response by the NRC. In 
1999, a facility in Michigan was the focus of an NRC investigation arising from the 
misadministration of iodine - 131 used in the treatment of a patient with thyroid carcinoma. Instead of receiving 150 millicuries as ordered, the patient was administered 
100 millicuries. After realizing his mistake, the technician deliberately altered the prescribing physician ’ s written order to cover up the error. Subsequently, the physician 
discovered the alteration and notifi ed the hospital administration, which in turn notifi ed the NRC ’ s regional offi ce as required by regulation. The NRC ’ s Offi ce of 
Investigations responded within two weeks and found that the technician had committed deliberate misconduct. In another instance, a nuclear medicine technologist was 
found to have administered technetium - 99, an NRC - licensed material, to a relative 
without a doctor ’ s order. During the ensuing investigation, the NRC also determined 
that NRC - mandated training was out of compliance with the regulations. Although no 
civil fi nes were assessed in this case, the hospital was let off with a warning to get its 
compliance program into shape. Finally, the NRC found a deliberate failure by a hospital ’ s chief nuclear medicine technologist to obtain confi rmation of a dosage of I - 131, 
which resulted in the administration of 6.6 millicuries for the patient ’ s thyroid scan, an 
amount signifi cantly greater that the 100 microcuries ordered. Civil fi nes were imposed 
in this situation because the technologist had deliberately refused to engage in basic 
patient safety protections — and as this individual was also the hospital ’ s radiation 
safety offi cer, he should have known better. 
 Child Abuse and Neglect 
 According to the HHS ’ s report from the Administration for Children and Families 
titled “ Child Maltreatment 2006 ” children were abuses or neglected at a rate of 12.1 
per thousand children in the population resulting in an estimated 905,000 victims. The 
rate and number of children who received an investigation or assessment was 47.8 
children per thousand in the population resulting in an estimated 3,573,999 children. 
During federal fi scal year 2006, 3.3 million referrals concerning the welfare of approximately 6 million children were made to Child Protective Service (CPS) agencies 
throughout the United States. Professionals such as physicians, teachers, police offi -
cers, social service staff, and lawyers made 56.3 percent of all reports made. Nationally 
905,000 victims were identifi ed characterized by neglect (64.2 percent), physical abuse 
(16 percent), sexual abuse (8.8 percent), and psychological maltreatment (6.6 percent). 
Nearly 80 (79.9 percent) percent of perpetrators were parents. For 2006, it is estimated 
that 1,530 died of abuse or neglect. More than three quarters (78 percent) of the victims were under four years old, with infant boys (under 1 year of age) representing the 
highest rate of fatalities with 18.5 deaths per 100,000 boys followed closely by infant 
girls (under 1 year of age) with 14.7 deaths per 100,000 girls. For the sake of perspective, the overall death rate among children in general during 2006 was 2.04 deaths per 
100,000 children in the national population. 31
 The key federal initiatives in this area are the 1974 Child Abuse Prevention and 
Treatment Act (CAPTA), subsequent amendments, 32 and the Keeping Children 
c10.indd 352 3/2/09 12:28:45 PM
and Families Safe Act of 2003, which defi ned child abuse and neglect as any recent act 
or failure to act on the part of a parent or caretaker that results in death, serious physical or emotional harm, sexual abuse, or exploitation or any act or failure to act that 
presents an imminent risk of serious harm. 33 Every state has enacted, to one degree or 
another, mandatory reporting requirements relating to suspected child abuse and 
neglect. Although state statutes often differ in their defi nition of terms, most defi ne 
abuse as representing harm or threatened harm to a child ’ s health or welfare. Abuse is 
characterized as four major types: neglect, physical abuse, sexual abuse, and emotional abuse. Neglect is generally defi ned in terms of the deprivation of adequate food, 
clothing, shelter, or medical care. Exceptions to such reporting do exist and often, but 
not always, relate to children who are under treatment by spiritual means. 
 Elder Abuse 
 The National Elder Abuse Incidence Study, conducted in 1996 by the National Center 
on Elder Abuse, and the discussion sponsored by Attorney General Janet Reno in 2000 
titled “ Elder Justice Roundtable: Medical Forensic Issues Concerning Abuse and 
Neglect, ” 34 explored a wide range of issues relating to elder abuse and neglect in this 
country. Because the legislative mandate limited the incidence study to the assessment 
and preservation of violence in domestic settings only, elders living in nursing homes, 
assisted living facilities, and other institutional or group facilities were not included in 
the study. Information on substantiated cases of abuse or neglect was gathered from 
Adult Protective Service (APS) agencies and other sources from twenty counties in fi fteen states. The study confi rmed that reported cases of abuse and neglect (including 
self - neglect) represent only the tip of the iceberg. An estimated 551,000 elderly persons, aged sixty years and over, were the victims of abuse or neglect in domestic settings in 1996. The study further estimated that only approximately 21 percent of these 
cases were ever reported and substantiated by state APS agencies. 
 Elder abuse is often categorized according to the following major types: physical 
abuse; sexual abuse; psychological or emotional abuse; neglect; fi nancial exploitation; 
abandonment; self - neglect, or the intentional decision by a competent individual to 
refuse or fail to obtain adequate food, water, clothing, shelter or who engages in acts 
that threaten his or her own welfare; and abduction by family members. The National 
Center on Elder Abuse ( http://www.elderabusecenter.org ) is one of several excellent 
resources for information about the incidence of elder abuse in the nation and about 
the efforts under way to engage the general population in learning how to identify and 
report suspected cases. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Risk management professionals must become familiar with all mandatory reporting 
requirements, including permitted statutory exceptions relating to child, elder, and 
dependent adult abuse and neglect. Hospital staffs, including medical staffs, must be 
advised (and reminded periodically) of their individual reporting obligations under 
state laws. To encourage reporting, many states have enacted immunity provisions that 
Life Safety Code 353
c10.indd 353 3/2/09 12:28:46 PM
354 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
protect reporters from civil liability. Even the laws that regulate disclosure of patients ’ 
records related to federally funded substance abuse treatment programs expressly permit reporting suspected child abuse to state agencies. Signifi cant penalties up to and 
including the loss of licensure, allegations of unprofessional conduct, and exposure to 
civil litigation are possible for individuals or facilities that fail to comply with these 
important reporting obligations. 
 FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE LAWS AND REGULATIONS 
 Risk management professionals should be thoroughly familiar with the risk implications of federal Medicare, Medicaid, and Employee Retirement and Income Security 
Act regulations. 
 Medicare 
 Medicare is the nation ’ s largest health insurance program. It provides benefi ts for 
more than forty - two million enrollees with an additional forty - three million covered 
under Medicaid (including about six million covered under both programs) and more 
than six million children covered under the State Children ’ s Health Insurance 
Program (SCHIP). The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services of the 
Department of Health and Human Services administers this program and works in 
partnership with the states to provide Medicaid and SCHIP benefi ts. The Congressional 
Budget Offi ce (CBO) estimates outlays for FY 2008 at $ 1.1 billion. 35 Enacted in 
1965 under Title 18 of the Social Security Act, Medicare was originally established 
to provide access to health services for the elderly, a segment of society that was considered vulnerable and often least able to afford necessary care. In 1972, Medicare 
eligibility was extended to individuals under age sixty - fi ve with specifi ed long - term 
disabilities or who had end - stage renal disease. The fee - for - service Medicare program consists of two parts: hospital insurance, also known as Part A, covers inpatient 
hospital services, short - term care in skilled nursing facilities, home health care, and 
hospice care, and supplementary medical insurance, known as Part B, covers outpatient services, physician services, home health care not covered under Part A, durable 
 medical equipment, ambulance, and a variety of other medical services. The CMS 
contracts with private companies, known as fi scal intermediaries, to administer payments to hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, certain home health services, and hospices for their Part A and some Part B bills. A carrier is a private company that is 
likewise contracted to CMS to provide similar services to physicians and others for 
their Part B bills. In 1983, the Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) was 
introduced, in which a predetermined rate was applied for services provided to inpatients with similar diagnoses. This method of reimbursement, called a diagnosis 
related group (DRG), replaced the fee - for - service system of reimbursement that had 
been the standard of the Medicare payment model since its inception. Although the 
transition to this payment system was diffi cult for hospitals, the new method was so 
c10.indd 354 3/2/09 12:28:46 PM
successful in reducing Medicare program costs that Congress demanded similar cost -
 saving initiatives in the outpatient setting. In May 2000, Medicare, through the 
Outpatient Prospective Payment System (OPPS), adopted a new, fi xed reimbursement amount that, like the DRG model, is based on groupings of outpatient health 
care services with similar cost and clinical characteristics. This new “ unit of payment, ” called ambulatory payment classifi cations (APCs), is only one element of a 
complex system of reimbursement enacted by the CMS. The 2003 Medicare 
Modernization Act made sweeping changes to the program. The MMA created a discount drug card until a new Part D outpatient prescription drug benefi t went into 
effect in 2006. In addition, the MMA replaced the old Medicare+Choice program 
under Part C with Medicare Advantage. Another element of the MMA provides for 
payment for EMTALA - related care provided to undocumented aliens and a select 
few others, as noted earlier in this chapter. 
 Limitations preclude an in - depth review of all aspects of the enormously complex 
and ever - changing Medicare program. However, risk management professionals are 
advised to familiarize themselves with the program ’ s basic structure, as noncompliance can result in civil monetary sanctions being levied or, in a worst - case scenario, 
disenrollment from the program altogether. Increasingly, individuals are being held 
criminally liable for misappropriation of Medicare funds, with jail time and hefty 
fi nancial penalties being assessed. With the addition of new programs and other 
changes in the system actively under way, “ situational awareness ” is strongly 
advised. 
 Compliance oversight of Medicare programs rests with the CMS and is delegated 
to the CMS ’ s nine regional offi ces. The hands - on certifi cation survey process is delegated to state licensing and regulatory agencies. To ensure a reasonable standard for 
these state agencies throughout the nation, the CMS developed the State Operations 
Manual (SOM), a massive, detailed guide to all aspects of Medicare program compliance. 36 Risk management professionals are strongly encouraged to identify the applicable sections of the SOM, especially the surveyor guidance in its appendixes. 
Defi ciencies (violations) of program compliance are identifi ed by the regional offi ces 
in conjunction with the state agency surveyors and are submitted to the institution on 
a “ statement of defi ciency ” form (CMS - 2567). The facility is given ten days to develop 
and submit a credible plan of correction (PoC) for each identifi ed defi ciency. The 
 “ statement of defi ciency ” form, including the accepted PoC, is accessible to the public 
under the federal Freedom of Information Act. 
 Medicaid 
 Medicaid was established in 1965 as a jointly funded program whereby the federal 
government matches state spending for medical services for qualifi ed enrollees. 
Medicaid programs provide coverage to individuals who fall into one or more of 
twenty - fi ve different eligibility categories, including pregnant women, children, the 
elderly, and individuals who are disabled or blind. The contribution by CMS to each 
Federal Health Insurance Laws and Regulations 355
c10.indd 355 3/2/09 12:28:46 PM
356 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
state ’ s program is called the federal medical assistance percentage. It is reassessed 
annually using a standard formula. Because states are given broad latitude on how to 
organize their programs, determine eligibility standards, set payment rates, and so on, 
there is considerable variability in program content from state to state. Medicare 
 benefi ciaries who have limited income or resources may apply for supplemental coverage from their state ’ s Medicaid program for services and for supplies that are available through the program. 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
 Risk management professionals with responsibility for managed care – related risks or 
employee benefi t programs should become intimately familiar with this 1974 federal 
statute, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA). 37 Although the purpose of ERISA was to establish a nationwide standard for administrative functions of 
employee welfare benefi t plans, ERISA also established a federal preemption of state 
laws that cover plan benefi ts. The practical effect of the ERISA preemption was the 
removal of lawsuits fi led in connection with the provision of plan benefi ts from state 
courts to federal courts, thereby limiting the few remedies available to plaintiffs under 
this law. Although there have been several high - profi le, high - dollar lawsuits involving 
managed care plans, they have usually involved health plan enrollees who were 
employees of governmental agencies, whose health care plans are not covered under 
ERISA. However, several important court decisions throughout the United States have 
eroded some of the MCOs ’ protections afforded by ERISA. Texas and California are 
among a growing number of states that have enacted legislation that now permits 
health plan enrollees to sue their MCOs, in defi ance of the ERISA preemption. 
Although court challenges have been fi led to overturn some of these new laws, it 
appears that MCOs may fi nd themselves more accountable for treatment decisions 
than ever before as the plaintiffs ’ attorneys try out new theories of liability to penetrate 
the shield of the ERISA preemption. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Although health plans may deny payment for services, they are not in a position to actually deny a patient access to the service itself. To help lessen an organization ’ s liability 
exposure in this area of law, ensure that the staff understand their independent duty of 
care to patients as health care providers and patient advocates. A misunderstanding of 
this issue has been the source of innumerable violations of EMTALA when patients 
have been denied access to services based on insurance considerations. The staff should 
document all their efforts in contesting what they reasonably believe to be improper 
treatment denials. Such documentation should include a description of the information 
provided to support the appeal and the subsequent response by the MCO or plan representative. The staff must advise patients of treatment denials made by their health 
plans and review reasonable alternative courses of treatment that might be available, 
irrespective of whether the health plan may cover the treatment. Again, these discussions should be thoroughly documented in the patient record. 
c10.indd 356 3/2/09 12:28:47 PM
 TORT REFORM 
 Since the professional liability insurance crisis of the 1970s, malpractice litigation has 
proliferated. In fact, the genesis of today ’ s health care risk management profession 
can be traced directly to industry efforts to address the alarming rise in the frequency 
(number) and severity (cost) of hospital and professional liability lawsuits. From the 
beginning, risk management professionals, insurers, and health care industry leaders 
have tried to control the growth of this litigation. These efforts have generally taken 
the form of statutory controls. California ’ s landmark Medical Injury Compensation 
Reform Act (MICRA) has served as a benchmark for other states ’ tort reform efforts. 
Enacted in 1975 as emergency legislation, MICRA established several basic tenets 
that infl uenced similar efforts throughout the country: (1) a cap (limit) of $ 250,000 
was set for noneconomic ( “ pain and suffering ” ) damages; (2) periodic payments of 
future damages in excess of $ 50,000 were permitted to ensure that a steady source of 
money remained in place to cover costs over time; (3) juries were allowed to have 
information on collateral sources of payment made to the patient or plaintiff to ensure 
that the plaintiff did not benefi t from excessive fi nancial remuneration from multiple 
sources; and (4) the rates of attorneys ’ contingency fees were fi xed by statute to ensure 
that plaintiffs were not taken advantage of by unscrupulous lawyers. Many states have 
established tort reforms based on this model. A 2003 report by the Government 
Accountability Offi ce found that insurance premiums for certain medical specialties, 
such as surgery, obstetrics and gynecology, and internal medicine, rose by an average 
of 15 percent during 2001 and 2002, and in some cases by 100 percent. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 The road to meaningful tort reform has been a rocky one. Several state courts have 
overturned or curtailed all or part of many tort reform efforts. However, the tort reform 
movement has been picking up steam, with increasing numbers of state legislatures 
tackling the issue. 
 Risk managers should become familiar with tort reform initiatives in their states. 
To further the objective of reducing the costs associated with runaway litigation, risk 
management professionals should support efforts to establish reasonable and balanced means of dispute resolution, such as mediation, arbitration, and private judicial 
review. Sound risk management loss control techniques demand that institutions and 
providers work closely with injured patients and their representatives to reach an 
equitable and mutually satisfactory resolution to disputes whenever possible. 
Although nonmeritorious lawsuits should be defended whenever necessary, the many 
claims that refl ect gray areas of liability should be addressed proactively and creatively. By so doing, the risk management professional contributes to the successful 
loss control efforts of the program. 
 Professional Practice Acts 
 Risk managers are often called on during an investigation to consider “ scope of practice ” issues. For example, a question might arise as to whether a nurse, therapist, or 
Tort Reform 357
c10.indd 357 3/2/09 12:28:47 PM
358 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
other licensed health care professional performed an act that, under state statute, was 
outside the scope of professional practice as defi ned by the particular licensing board or 
agency. The state ’ s pertinent professional practice act should be reviewed under such 
circumstances. From an insurance standpoint, coverage determinations are often dependent on such fi ndings. For each group of health care professionals licensed by the state, 
laws and regulations defi ne the scope of practice and outline the oversight authority 
vested in their professional regulatory boards. Professional practice regulatory boards 
are established by statute. Specifi c requirements regarding professional practice are 
generally found in state laws and regulations. They detail the process of licensure, 
including the state ’ s requirements, if any, for mandatory continuing education, the defi -
nition of “ unprofessional conduct ” (such as unlawful use of controlled substances), and 
mandatory reporting requirements. For example, many states require a medical professional to report a colleague to the licensing board if there is a reasonable belief that the 
public welfare might be compromised as a result of the colleague ’ s substance abuse. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 A risk management professional cannot completely assess the full extent of regulatory 
compliance or professional liability exposure without understanding the standards of 
professional practice that might apply. From a regulatory standpoint, an example of a 
federal standard of practice is the authority granted to nonphysician “ qualifi ed medical 
personnel ” involved in performing medical screening examinations pursuant to the 
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act. An understanding of professional practices is a key element of the review of professional liability exposures, as it relates to 
the establishment of so - called standards of care. Identifying such standards, which can 
vary on a case - by - case basis, remains a primary focus of malpractice litigation. In addition, knowledge of such standards is crucial in controlling risk during the development 
and implementation of new and alternative treatment regimens. From an employment 
liability standpoint, state - imposed disciplinary and licensure mandates should be clearly 
understood by risk management professionals and human resource personnel alike. 
 Risk Management Regulation 
 Risk managers in a few states have their professional practice regulated under specifi c 
risk management laws. In 1987, the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management 
(ASHRM) developed and published a model risk management program. Although 
ASHRM does not endorse a state legislative scheme for health care risk management, 
its model prescribes the elements of an acceptable health care risk management program. Those elements include a system for identifying, evaluating, and handling risk 
exposures; employment of a qualifi ed risk management professional; data sharing and 
continuing education; and most important, commitment from the governing body to 
the risk management effort. (A board resolution example is presented in Exhibit 10.2 .) 
In addition, ASHRM developed sample statutory language for confi dentiality of all 
risk management – related documents and immunity for participants in risk management activities. As the states overhaul their medical malpractice statutory schemes, 
these concepts are gradually being incorporated into state code books. 
c10.indd 358 3/2/09 12:28:48 PM
 POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUALS 
 Policy and procedures establish an organization ’ s internal regulatory practices. They are 
viewed by regulatory and accreditation agencies as evidence of the organization ’ s 
acknowledgment of and compliance with established standards. Plaintiffs ’ attorneys 
routinely demand access to individual policies and procedures to assess whether professional or operational standards were breached. Unfortunately for many organizations, 
policies, procedures, medical staff bylaws, best - practice guidelines, and other such measures are often neglected. Out - of - date policies or those that no longer comply with 
Policy and Procedure Manuals 359
EXHIBIT 10.2. Sample Board Resolution
Mt. St. Elsewhere Medical Center
RESOLUTION
WHEREAS, The Board of Directors of [name of facility] acknowledges its responsibility 
to provide for the safe and professional care of patients and the safety of the organization’s employees, visitors and affi liated personnel, and furthermore, the Board 
of Directors recognizes that the organization’s future fi scal strength will be greatly 
enhanced by its ability to minimize its risks and liabilities across the entire spectrum of 
its services and operations,
NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved:
1. That in accordance with the ongoing commitment to provide for the safe and 
professional care of all patients, visitors, and affi liated personnel, The Board of 
Directors directs the Chief Executive Offi cer to take appropriate action necessary 
in accordance with the organization’s established Bylaws, Rules and Regulations, 
to support a comprehensive Risk Management Program to include, but not be 
limited to, all initiatives and activities necessary to identify and reduce the possibility, and extent of, unintended loss to the entire organization.
2. That this resolution shall go into full force and effect from the date of its 
 passage.
Passed on this _________ day of ______________________, 2009.
_____________________________
Chair—Board of Directors
c10.indd 359 3/2/09 12:28:48 PM
360 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
changes in the law serve little practical purpose from an operational standpoint and pose 
a signifi cant risk to the organization. Policies must be reviewed periodically to ensure 
that they refl ect key regulatory and practice requirements. Individual departments should 
be given the fl exibility to establish and modify guidelines and procedures on an ongoing 
basis to ensure that they represent current practices. As the function of such manuals is 
to provide a resource to optimize the quality of care and operations of the facility, attention should be paid to their development and ongoing review and maintenance. 
 Risk Management Implications 
 Policies, procedures, and guidelines must remain “ works in progress ” and consequently be subject to change as circumstances dictate. Input from risk management 
professionals and legal counsel during the creation and review of such manuals is 
encouraged so that reasonable and achievable standards are developed. 
 Risk managers should recognize the value of maintaining obsolete policies, manuals, and similar materials. This effort has signifi cant risk management implications as 
it allows the organization to establish what its standard of care was at a given time, 
should it become an issue during litigation. Whether in paper form or online, modifi ed 
policies and protocols should be afforded the same consideration as any noncurrent 
business records. Store them so that they can be accessed should the need arise. 
 CASE LAW 
 Statutes and regulations enacted by Congress and the states do not address every possible situation in which they might apply. Under certain circumstances, litigants may 
ask appellate courts at both the state and federal level to review unfavorable decisions. 
When a court renders a decision in the form of a written opinion, the opinion becomes 
part of the body of law and should be recognized and given the same consideration as 
enacted legislation. Decisions by these courts should be routinely monitored by risk 
management professionals. Several resources are available to help risk management 
professionals achieve this objective — for example, regulatory updates published by 
state health care organizations, law fi rm advisories, the courts ’ own Web pages, and 
the American Society for Healthcare Risk Management. Exhibit 10.3 presents an 
example of an internal legislative update. 
EXHIBIT 10.3. Sample Legislative Update
{PRIVATE} LEGISLATIVE UPDATE
SUTTER HEALTH RISK SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Offi ce of the General Counsel
Prepared by Mark Cohen, ARM, RPLU, CPHQ, CPHRM, DFASHRM 
Risk Management Consultant
c10.indd 360 3/2/09 12:28:48 PM
{PRIVATE}
December, 2002
SB 1301: Reproductive Privacy Act
SUMMARY: This bill, sponsored by Planned Parenthood, replaces California’s 35-year 
old Therapeutic Abortion Act and the many confl icting and outdated elements of that 
law that have remained on the books since it was enacted. The original Act has long 
been superseded by newer legislation and case law, including the United States Supreme 
Court’s 1973 opinion in Roe v. Wade. Passages deleted from the original law include 
those that stipulated that abortions may only be performed with the pre-approval of a 
medical staff committee, specifi c gestational time frames within which abortions may 
or may not be performed, i.e. “. . . after the 20th week of pregnancy” and all abortions 
must be reported to the state.
In their place, the Reproductive Privacy Act (the Act) establishes a new set of provisions governing women’s reproductive rights. The foundation of the Act is defi ned 
within the following State public policy positions:
 1. Every individual has the fundamental right to choose or refuse birth control.
 2. Every woman has the fundamental right to choose to bear a child or choose to 
 obtain an abortion, except as specifi cally prohibited.
 3. The state shall not deny or interfere with a woman’s fundamental right to choose to 
bear a child, or to choose and obtain an abortion prior to the viability of the fetus, 
or when the abortion is necessary to protect the life or health of the woman. 
COMMENT: Minors. Although statutory language remains that requires the written 
permission of a parent or legal guardian before an abortion may be performed upon 
an unemancipated minor, an Appellate court concluded, in the 1997 case American 
Academy of Pediatrics, et al v. Lundgren, that this requirement violated the privacy 
rights of pregnant minors. Consequently, parental consent is no longer required.
Limitation on when abortions may be performed: Abortions may not be performed if, in the good faith medical judgment of the physician, 1) the fetus is viable 
and 2) continuation of the pregnancy poses no risk to the life or health of the pregnant woman. “Viability” is defi ned as “. . . on the particular facts of the case before 
[the] physician, there is reasonable likelihood of the fetus’s sustained survival outside 
the uterus without the application of extraordinary medical measures.”
COMMENT: The previous “20-week” rule has been replaced by the more subjective “good faith judgement of the physician” and “viability” standards which now 
become the new legal benchmarks in these cases.
Who may participate in the abortion process: Previous law provided that only 
Case Law 361
(Continued)
c10.indd 361 3/2/09 12:28:49 PM
362 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 SUMMARY 
 Risk managers should be prepared to help their organizations understand and comply 
with the entire spectrum of laws and regulations. If the issue at hand is beyond their 
expertise, risk management professionals should be able at the least to identify the 
required resources. As regulatory noncompliance exposes both the organization and, in 
EXHIBIT 10.3. (Continued)
physicians were authorized to perform an abortion or aid or assist in the process. The 
new Act removes this restriction and permits the active involvement of nurses and 
physicians assistants with a “. . . valid, unrevoked, and unsuspended license or certifi cate obtained in accordance with some other provision of law that authorizes him 
or her to perform the functions necessary [to assist in performing either a surgical or 
non-surgical (i.e. pharmacological) abortion].” 
COMMENT: The new Act does not revoke existing law that permits physicians, nurses, 
and other staff to refuse — without fear of discipline or penalty—to participate in an 
abortion if they have fi led a written statement with their employer that establishes “. . . 
a moral, ethical, or religious basis for such refusal.”
WHO NEEDS TO KNOW: Administrator, Patient Care Executives, Chief of Staff, 
Obstetrics Department medical staff, Family Practice medical staff, Labor and Delivery 
Manager, Social Services Manager, Human Resources Director, Bioethics Committee.
WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE: Revise present policies relating to the provision of abortions to eliminate references to any deleted elements of the law, and re-defi ne all 
relevant clinical elements, including guidelines refl ecting the physician’s authority to 
establish fetal viability. NOTE: With the new authority given physicians to exercise their 
discretion when assessing fetal viability, medical staffs may wish to consider adopting 
guidelines to ensure the application of recognized clinical standards in this regards. 
As nurses, physician’s assistants, and other specifi ed licensed personnel may now 
actively participate in this procedure—as provided for under the law and subject only 
to any limitations that may imposed under their license—a review of current practice 
is suggested to provide an opportunity to update job descriptions and functions. Be 
certain to thoroughly educate all L&D, OB/Gyn, Family Practice, and other involved 
clinical and non-clinical staff alike, on the new parameters of the law. Doing so will 
help minimize any confusion or questions that may arise about the revised law, as well 
as ensure that advice given patients is accurate. 
To access the complete bill on the internet, go to www.leginfo.ca.gov/bilinfo.
html and enter the requested information. This bill was passed during last year’s legislative session.
c10.indd 362 3/2/09 12:28:49 PM
Acronyms 363
some cases, individuals to a wide range of fi nancial or criminal penalties, persistent 
efforts by risk management professionals in providing guidance to constituents is 
essential. Complying with laws and regulations is somewhat like playing a game whose 
rules are constantly changing. Ideally, subscribing to newsletters or other resources 
will help identify issues in the ever - changing legal and regulatory landscape. As virtually all federal and state regulatory agencies are well represented on the Internet, risk 
management professionals should develop the habit of periodically reviewing these 
Web sites for news of upcoming changes in rules or regulations or important guidance 
information. Web sites of law fi rms that specialize in health law are another promising 
resource, as they are often among the fi rst to publish assessments of new or pending 
legislation, regulations, and case law. Ensure that everyone in the organization with a 
need to know is apprised of additions or signifi cant modifi cations of the law. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
 Services 
 Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment 
 Act 
 Child Protective Service agencies 
 Civil monetary penalties 
 Clinical Laboratory Improvement 
 Amendments 
 Conditions for coverage 
 Conditions of participation 
 Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
 Reconciliation Act 
 Dedicated emergency department 
 Emergency Medical Treatment and 
 Labor Act 
 Employee Retirement and Income 
 Security Act 
 Healthcare Integrity and Protection Data 
 Bank 
 Health Care Quality Improvement Act 
 Institutional review board 
 Life Safety Code 
 ACRONYMS 
 CAPTA 
 CDC 
 CDRH 
 CfC 
 COBRA 
 CoP 
 Mammography Quality
 Standards Act 
 Manufacturers and User Facility 
Device Experience database 
 Medical screening exam 
 Medicare Modernization Act 
 Medical Injury Compensation 
 Reform Act 
 National Organ Transplant Act 
 National Practitioner Data Bank 
 Organ Procurement Transplant 
 Network 
 Offi ce for Human Research 
 Protections 
Offi ce of Civil Rights 
 Offi ce of Inspector General 
 Patient Self - Determination Act 
 Safe Medical Device Act 
 Single - use device 
 United Network for Organ 
 Sharing 
c10.indd 363 3/2/09 12:28:50 PM
364 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 CORF 
 CLIA 
 CMS 
 CPS 
 DED 
 EMTALA 
 ERISA 
 FDA 
 GMPs 
 HCQIA 
 HIPAA 
 HIPDB 
 IPPS 
 IRB 
 LSC 
 MAUDE 
 MCO 
 MICRA 
 MMA 
 MQSA 
 MQSRA 
 MSE 
 NOTA 
 NPDB 
 OCR 
 OHRP 
 OIG 
 OPO 
 OPPS 
 OPTN 
 PoC 
 PSDA 
 QIO 
 SCHIP 
 SMDA 
 SNF 
 SOM 
 SUD 
 UNOS 
NOTES 
 1. Social Security Act of 1867, codifi ed as 42 USC 1395dd, 42 CFR 489, and others. 
 2. 42 CFR 489.20.q.(1 – 2). 
 3. Department of Health and Human Services, Offi ce of the Inspector General and 
the Health Care Financing Administration. “ EMTALA Special Advisory Bulletin, ” 
1998, http://www.emtala.com/oblig.txt 
 4. 42 CFR 489.20.r(3). 
 5. 42 CFR 489.20. 
 6. 42 USC 1395dd(d)(1). 
 7. Roberts v. Galen of Virginia, Inc., 525 U.S. 249 (1999). 
 8. “ Federal Reimbursement of Emergency Health Services Furnished to Undocumented Aliens, ” http://www.cms.hhs.gov/providers/section1011/ 
 9. 42 USC 42, 11101; 45 CFR 60, P.L. 99 - 660. 
 10. Patrick v. Burget, 486 U.S. 94, 96 (Ore. 1988). 
 11. Elam v. College Park Hosp., 132 Cal. App. 3d 332, 183 Cal. Rptr. 156, 164 
(1982). 
c10.indd 364 3/2/09 12:28:50 PM
 12. 42 USC 1395cc. 
 13. 42 CFR 482.13. 
 14. 21 USC 360i(a); 21 CFR 803. 
 15. Available at the CDRH Reuse of Single - Use Devices home page, http://www.fda
.gov/cdrh/reuse . 
 16. 42 USC 263b; 21 CFR 16, 900, 1308, and 1312; 42 CFR 498. 
 17. P.L. 105 - 248. 
 18. The American College of Radiology and designated state agencies under contract 
with the FDA are the Arkansas Department of Health, Iowa Department of Health, 
and Texas Department of Health. 
 19. “ The Mammography Quality Standards Act Final Regulations, Modifi cations and 
Additions to Policy Guidance Help System No. 5: Guidance for Industry and 
FDA, ” July 2000, http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/mammography/index.html 
 20. 42 USC 300gg – 63, 91, and 92; 42 CFR 144.101 and 146.130. 
 21. See the United Network for Organ Sharing home page, http://www.unos.org 
 22. 42 CFR 21; see Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network, http://www
.unos.org.pdf 
 23. PL 100 - 578. 
 24. For details, see the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ’ CLIA General 
Program Description, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/clia/progdesc.asp 
 25. 42 CFR 483 and 488; 42 USC 1395i - 3. 
 26. Department of Health and Human Services, Offi ce of the Inspector General. 
 “ Quality of Care in Nursing Homes: An Overview, ” 1999, http://www.oig.hhs.gov/
oei/reports/oei - 02 - 99 - 00060.pdf 
 27. “ Compliance Program Guidance for Nursing Facilities, ” Federal Register, vol. 65, 
no. 52, Thursday, March 16, 2000, notices page 14289. http://www.oig.hhs.gov/
authorities/docs/cpgnf.pdf 
 28. Joint Commission. Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Long - Term Care.
Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.: Joint Commission, published annually. 
 29. 42 USC 2011 et seq.; 10 CFR 35. 
 30. 10 CFR 35. 
 31. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Administration on Children, Youth 
and Families. Child Maltreatment 2006 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Offi ce, 2008) Available at: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/pubs/cm06/ 
cm06.pdf 
Notes 365
c10.indd 365 3/2/09 12:28:50 PM
366 Statutes, Standards, and Regulations
 32. PL 93 - 247, amended by P.L. 104 - 235. 
 33. PL 108 - 36. 
 34. National Institute of Justice. “ Elder Justice Roundtable: Medical Forensic Issues 
Concerning Abuse and Neglect, ” 2000, http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij/topics/crime/
elder - abuse/roundtable/welcome.htm 
 35. CBO Estimates of Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Extension Act of 2007 
(GOE07D03) available at: http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/88xx/doc8898/SFC_MMS
_ExtensionGOE07D03.pdf . 
 36. Available from http://www.cms.hhs.gov/Manuals 
 37. Employee Retirement Income Security Act (29 USC 1001), http://www.dol.gov/
dol/topic/health - plans/erisa.htm 
c10.indd 366 3/2/09 12:28:51 PM
367
CHAPTER
11
BASIC CLAIMS 
ADMINISTRATION 
 ELLEN L. BARTON 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to understand the current claims environment and its impact on 
the health care industry 
■ To be able to describe the essential claims management functions 
■ To be able to identify the steps in the claim process and explain the importance of each 
■ To be able to outline the risk management professional ’ s responsibilities 
■ To be able to defi ne alternative dispute resolution mechanisms 
c11.indd 367 3/2/09 12:34:54 PM
368 Basic Claims Administration
 “ There is always a great deal at stake in a health care professional liability claim: large 
sums of money, of course, but also professional reputations and even individual careers. 
With the crisis in medical malpractice and health care liability growing more severe 
daily, the stakes have never been higher and the need for professionalism in claim 
management has never been greater. ” 1
 Given this environment, it is incumbent on new risk management professionals to 
understand basic claims administration, because they are likely to be involved, at least 
to some degree, in the process. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the principles of claims administration and highlight best practices for risk managers new to the 
process. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Although the health care industry is working hard to ensure the delivery of safe 
care, we must continue to deal with claims of patient injury due to the alleged 
negligence of a health care provider or delivery system. 
■ When a facility is commercially insured for medical professional and general liability, 
the insurance company generally provides complete claims management services. 
■ When a facility is self - insured for health care professional and general liability, it is 
the facility ’ s responsibility to provide the services necessary to manage such claims. 
■ The fi rst step in the claims process is a coverage determination. 
■ The risk management professional ’ s responsibilities in managing claims will 
depend on a variety of factors, including whether the facility is commercially 
insured or self - insured, whether the facility chooses to outsource the claims management function, or whether the facility has assigned responsibility for the claims 
process to the legal department. 
 THE CLAIMS ENVIRONMENT 
 One has only to read the local newspaper on a regular basis to understand that our 
society has adopted what some would call a “ lottery mentality. ” Some buy lottery tickets in hopes of winning big money, and others sue whomever they can for whatever 
 “ wrong ” they have incurred in hopes of winning big money. Unfortunately, the latter 
behavior dramatically affects the health care industry. Although the industry is working hard to ensure the delivery of safe care (see Chapter 3 ), we must continue to deal 
with claims of patient injury due to the alleged negligence of a health care provider or 
delivery system. 
c11.indd 368 3/2/09 12:34:55 PM
 Commercial Insurance 
 When a facility is commercially insured for medical professional and general liability, 
the insurance company ordinarily provides complete claims management services. 
Such services may include claims investigation, assignment of a claims adjuster, medical records production, claims management (including the strategy for handling a 
claim), setting reserves, assignment of legal counsel, settlement discussions, and litigation management (if, after suit has been fi led, a decision is made to defend the 
claim). Even if the company retains an outside claims service, it is still the company ’ s 
responsibility to provide these services. Although it is likely that the risk management 
professional will be involved in various aspects of the process, the insurance company 
manages the process. 
 Self - Insurance 
 When a facility is self - insured for health care professional and general liability, it 
is the facility ’ s responsibility to provide the services necessary to manage such claims. 
The facility may decide to retain a third - party administrator (TPA) to perform some 
or all of a set of identifi ed services. For instance, the facility may decide to hire a TPA 
to investigate and manage the claim, including settlement discussions until a lawsuit is 
fi led. Then the facility may assign the case to legal counsel with the TPA having no 
further responsibility. TPAs generally employ trained individuals who are qualifi ed to 
investigate claims, review medical records, engage in settlement discussions, and 
maintain appropriate documentation. Another facility may decide to outsource the 
entire claims process to a law fi rm or TPA, and yet another facility may decide to manage the entire claims process internally with appropriately trained personnel. Whatever 
approach is adopted, it is important for the facility to employ effective claims management practices. 
 THE CLAIMS PROCESS 
 The fi rst step in the claims process is a coverage determination. Just as the owner of 
a new automobile buys an auto insurance policy to provide coverage for accidents 
involving injuries to third parties, a health care organization buys medical professional 
and general liability insurance to provide coverage for medical incidents involving 
injuries to patients. However, after an auto accident, a determination must be made 
that the auto accident was indeed covered under the policy. Likewise, when a patient is 
injured at a health care facility and a claim is reported, it is fi rst necessary to determine 
that there is coverage. If the facility is commercially insured, the insurance company 
will make the determination. If the facility is self - insured (through a trust fund, a captive insurance company, or designated operating funds), an appropriately designated 
individual will determine coverage in accordance with the facility ’ s policies and procedures. Coverage determinations are important for several reasons: fi rst, to ensure the 
integrity of the policy language (commercial insurance or captive insurance company), 
The Claims Process 369
c11.indd 369 3/2/09 12:34:55 PM
370 Basic Claims Administration
the trust document (self - insurance), or other specifi ed parameters when operating 
funds are used; and second, to comply with the terms of the facility ’ s or insurance 
company ’ s excess carriers or reinsurers (see Chapter 12 ). It cannot be emphasized 
enough that understanding coverage and reporting requirements is crucial to a successful claims management program. The following questions must be answered to 
determine whether a loss is covered: 
Is the person involved covered? Is the physician employed and thus covered 
under the facility ’ s medical professional liability policy, or is the nurse working for an 
agency whose contract requires the agency to provide coverage? 
Is the time of the loss within the policy period? This is particularly critical 
with “ claims - made ” professional liability policies, especially where the policy requires 
that the date when the loss occurred and the date when the claim was made fall within 
a particular time period for coverage to apply. (For further discussion on coverage 
forms, see Chapter 13 .) 
Is the cause of the loss covered? For instance, was the injury caused by medical negligence (a “ covered loss ” ) or assault and battery, an intentional tort excluded 
from coverage? 
Are the types and amounts of damages covered? This specifi cally refers to 
compensatory and punitive damages. Many insurance policies exclude punitive damages. Others are silent on the issue, thus allowing state law to allow or deny punitive 
damage coverage. Compensatory damages are those that compensate claimants for 
injuries and might include such items as lost wages, medical bills, expected future 
medical costs, and pain and suffering. The policy, however, will not pay more than the 
stated limit under any circumstance. 
Is the location covered? Most medical professional liability policies will provide coverage anywhere in the world as long as the activities of the covered individuals are within the scope of their employment. However, there might be situations 
where an employed resident physician moonlights at a nonaffi liated, competing hospital in a neighboring community and the policy does not extend coverage to such 
situations. 
Do any exclusions apply? For example, most if not all professional liability 
insurance policies exclude assault and battery as mentioned previously, sexual abuse 
(or even allegations of sexual abuse), and other defi ned causes of loss. 
Is there other insurance that would apply to the loss?2
 This question is important to answer because many health care professionals purchase their own medical 
professional liability insurance regardless of their employment situation. Nurses often 
subscribe through a state or national association program for medical professional liability coverage and might have limits of coverage available separate and apart from the 
facility ’ s policy. Because of potential coverage confl icts, it is “ best practice ” for a risk 
management professional to review specifi c medical professional liability policy and 
coverage language with respect to the section on other insurance. In most instances, 
this section will dictate how other policies or coverages will be treated for the claim in 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c11.indd 370 3/2/09 12:34:56 PM
question. Risk management professionals should develop a complementary policy and 
procedure addressing how such personal (other) coverage will be treated. Within the 
facility, the primary question to answer is, “ Will the personal coverage be considered 
primary or excess to the facility ’ s coverage, or will both carriers share in the loss proportionally? ” The thought of having additional limits available to pay the claim might 
be appealing to the risk management professional, but senior management needs to 
make this clarifi cation known to avoid causing a serious employee relations issue. The 
facility ’ s policy on personal coverage should be clearly articulated to avoid any misunderstanding or potential confl icts in the management of the claim. 
 If a facility is commercially insured and the insurer makes a preliminary determination that there is likely no coverage, the carrier will often undertake to investigate 
and defend the claim but issue a “ reservation of rights ” letter in an attempt to preserve the company ’ s right to deny coverage at a later date. 
 THE RISK MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL ’ S RESPONSIBILITIES 
 The risk management professional ’ s responsibilities in managing claims will depend 
on a variety of factors, including whether the facility is commercially insured or self -
 insured, whether the facility chooses to outsource the claims management function, or 
whether the facility has assigned responsibility for the claims process to the legal 
department. Regardless of the specifi c responsibilities, the risk management professional should have a thorough understanding of the entire process to ensure that claims 
are resolved appropriately. The risk management professional therefore needs to 
ensure that the following fi ve functions are appropriately performed: 
 1. Claims reporting 
 Primary insurer, if commercially insured 
 Internal mechanism, if self - insured 
 Excess carrier or reinsurer, if applicable 
 2. Claims investigation 
 Medical record review 
 Interviews (coordinate with legal counsel to interview patient, health care 
provider, witness, and others) 
 Expert review of case 
 Initial assessment 
 Reserve setting 
 3. Claims management strategy 
 Liability determination 
 Decision to settle or defend 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
The Risk Management Professional ’ s Responsibilities 371
c11.indd 371 3/2/09 12:34:56 PM
372 Basic Claims Administration
 Claims committee review (such review can serve as a quality control mechanism to be certain that the liability determination is accurate and that the 
decision to settle or defend is prudent) 
 4. Settlement 
 Documentation (supporting the payment amount) 
 Documentation that the approval process was followed 
 5. Litigation 
 Pretrial and trial strategy 
 Coordination on public relations concerns 
 Witness preparation 
 Decisions and information exchanged during trial 
 Posttrial strategy 
 Claims Adjuster ’ s Responsibilities 
 Just as risk management professionals ’ responsibilities vary, so do claims adjusters ’ 
responsibilities, depending on the service agreement between the adjusters and either 
the insurance company or the health care facility. In most cases, however, if claims 
adjusters have been assigned to handle claims, their responsibilities will include the 
same fi ve functions just outlined. 
 Claims Identifi cation and Investigation 
 The organization ’ s risk management plan will include mechanisms to identify and 
report potential and actual claims and a method as to how those claims will be investigated and managed. Identifi cation mechanisms include formal systems such as the 
incident reporting system or informal mechanisms such as information received 
from surveys, questionnaires, and other sources. The initial investigation is an important aspect of claims handling. Regardless of the risk fi nancing mechanism chosen, the 
risk management professional plays an important role in the investigative process. 
Reporting of Claims The reporting of claims is the single most important step in the 
process of ensuring coverage for any payments that may be required. This reporting 
happens on multiple levels. First, there is the report of a potential claim from within 
the facility to the risk management professional. Next, if the facility is commercially 
insured, there is the report from the facility to its insurance carrier. This reporting 
requirement and its timing are critical to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the insurance policy. Similarly, there may also be instances when reporting to 
excess carriers or reinsurers (for captive insurance companies) is necessary. Risk management professionals must fi rst understand the facility ’ s risk fi nancing program and 
then design a process that facilitates the facility ’ s ability to adhere to various reporting 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c11.indd 372 3/2/09 12:34:57 PM
requirements. Insurance policies specify the circumstances that require reporting. 
Unfortunately, the policy wording in the insurance policy that specifi es the circumstances for which reporting is required is not always clear or easy to understand. 
Therefore, the risk management professional, in conjunction with the insurance agent 
or broker, should clarify the reporting requirements to avoid situations that could result 
in a lack of coverage for failure to report or late reporting. Finally, there is the reporting of a claim that is in the form of a written demand for compensation from a claimant or the claimant ’ s attorney. To avoid these surprises, the facility needs an early 
warning claim reporting system that provides the risk management professional 
with immediate information regarding facts and circumstances that have caused or are 
likely to cause injury to a patient and may likely lead to payment of money. A facility ’ s 
incident reporting system may also serve as the claims reporting system. (For more 
information, see Chapter 6 ). The best results occur when the risk management professional has the trust and confi dence of the health care facility and its medical staff and 
employees regardless of the reporting system. It is generally a phone call or e - mail 
from within the facility that will signal the need for a formal investigation. Regardless 
of how the information is relayed, the key is to establish a communication link with 
the medical and nursing staff and all ancillary personnel. Once the risk management 
professional has been alerted to an incident or a situation that needs further attention, 
there is a need for a greater formality in communication. 
Initial Investigation If the risk management professional is going to conduct the initial investigation, it is important for any such investigation to be done at legal counsel ’ s 
direction in order to provide the greatest protection possible for the information gathered. Generally, TPAs working either for insurance companies or for health care facilities will instruct claims adjusters to operate under the direction of legal counsel to gain 
protection afforded by the attorney - client privilege. Initial investigations play a critical 
role in determining liability and the anticipated amount of damages. Such investigations should be done as soon as practicable after notice of an occurrence or a claim. 
That is when the most information will be available regarding the facts and circumstances surrounding the injury or potential for injury. This reinforces the importance of 
timely internal notice—notice simultaneous with the occurrence itself, which will provide the best opportunity for a thorough investigation. Witnesses, patients, the medical 
records, and other necessary documentation are more likely to be available near the 
time of the occurrence rather than days, months, or even years later. 
Interviews and Evidence “ Investigation means assembling, with maximum accuracy 
and minimum effort, the information and evidence on which the insurer (commercial 
company or self - insurance trust fund) can determine the position it should take in 
respect to its legal obligation— or to put it in practical terms, whether to settle, compromise, or deny the claim. ” 3
 Probably the most common technique to gather information and evidence is 
 interviewing, a skill that can be learned. It is incumbent on the risk management 
The Risk Management Professional ’ s Responsibilities 373
c11.indd 373 3/2/09 12:34:57 PM
374 Basic Claims Administration
professional to learn it well, given what is at stake for those involved in the claim. All 
witnesses — meaning all who are in a position to provide information that is both relevant and material to the claim — should be interviewed. Thus the fi rst task is to identify 
all possible witnesses and obtain contact information. Contact information should 
include name, address, age, sex, name and address of an emergency contact (someone 
who will always know the witness ’ s whereabouts), nationality, phone number, Social 
Security number, occupation, and current employment. It is also best practice to inform 
witnesses who are also insureds as to the status of the coverage determination and 
their rights and responsibilities as insureds. Finally, all insureds should be cautioned 
not to discuss the facts and circumstances of the case with anyone without prior authorization from the risk management professional or legal counsel. Because a claim ’ s 
life is generally at least several years, it is also best practice to update the involved parties as to the status of the case on a regular basis. Doing so also allows the risk management professional or claims adjuster to update contact information that might be 
needed later. 
 If an interview is undertaken at the direction of legal counsel, it is important to 
preserve the information in the most authentic manner possible. The use of an outline 
or guidelines on questions to ask may prove helpful. The use of signed or recorded 
statements, routine in adjusting auto claims, is rare in the context of health care professional liability claims. In interviewing witnesses, the goal is to understand what happened from the witness ’ s perspective. When documenting an interview, it is important 
for the risk management professional or adjuster to document the witness ’ s view as 
objectively as possible and without drawing conclusions. This is particularly important because negligence in a health care setting involves the applicability of various 
standards of care that are usually determined by expert testimony. When interviewing 
witnesses, the risk management professional or adjuster can take witnesses through 
the preliminary information by asking a series of questions. Then the interviewer 
should allow the witness to tell what happened in the witness ’ s own words. As the witness relates the information, the interviewer can clarify various aspects by asking 
 “ why ” questions. For example, if the claim involves a medication overdose and the 
nurse who administered the overdose is being interviewed, it is important to understand why the nurse failed to adhere to the appropriate protocol. The gentle use of 
 “ why ” questions is the best method for getting the full explanation. Often initial interviews in health care professional liability claims are not documented simply because 
many defense attorneys do not want to create a record at this time. Thus documentation should be undertaken carefully. 
Evidence generally refers to medical records, pathology slides, X - rays, and other 
radiographic images. It would also include photographs, diaries or journals, employment records, income tax returns, and physical objects (such as the piece of equipment 
that is suspected of having malfunctioned). Gathering evidence is particularly important for several reasons: it will help determine liability, it may also help evaluate damages, and it will provide the basis for an expert opinion. All evidence in a medical 
 professional liability claim should be sequestered by the risk management professional 
c11.indd 374 3/2/09 12:34:58 PM
and accessed only by authorized personnel. Although interviews with the claimant 
will produce information regarding the injury (and hence damages), it will also be necessary to have medical reports written by care providers that defi ne in more objective 
terms the extent and permanency of injuries and what, if any, additional treatment 
might be necessary. 
 Should a lawsuit be fi led involving a claim that was previously fi led, reported, and 
investigated, it is incumbent on those supervising the claims management process to 
give all appropriate materials from the initial investigation to defense counsel so that 
duplication of effort is avoided and confl icting information does not impede the evaluation of the claim. 
 Claims File Management 
 Regardless of whether a health care organization is commercially insured or self -
 insured, it is important for the organization to maintain a claims fi le. If the organization is commercially insured, there should be agreements about what documents will 
be kept in which fi le. For example, if a case is in litigation, the decision might be that 
all depositions will be maintained by defense counsel and copies of deposition summaries will be maintained by the risk management professional and the insurance 
company. There should be a system for naming and numbering the fi les for easy access 
for several reasons, including claim audits and auditors ’ reports. 
 Contents It will be helpful to maintain a sense of order in the fi le. Regardless of how 
the claims fi le is organized, there are distinct general categories of materials that should 
be maintained, as follows: 
 Correspondence 
 Investigation documentation 
 Medical records 
 Expert reports 
 Medical research 
 Damages 
 Legal papers 
 Expenses 
 Reserve history 
 The manner in which the materials are fi led should be consistent for all claims 
fi les, to facilitate retrieval and review. In addition, it might be helpful to prepare a 
cover sheet for each claim that contains up - to - date information regarding what the 
claim is about, the status of the claim or litigation, and expense and indemnity history, 
including payouts, remaining reserves, and reserve dollar change with dates. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
The Risk Management Professional ’ s Responsibilities 375
c11.indd 375 3/2/09 12:34:58 PM
376 Basic Claims Administration
 Documentation 
 All documentation maintained in a claim fi le should be legible and clearly identifi ed. 
If a risk management professional is uncertain about exactly what materials should be 
maintained in the claim fi le, a review with defense counsel should provide the necessary guidance. 
 Claims Reserving 
 A loss reserve is simply an estimate of how much it will cost to pay the claim. In addition, reserves need to be calculated for loss adjustment expenses (LAE)— the amount 
of money it will cost to “ adjust the claim, ” conduct the investigation, review medical 
records, hire a TPA, pay legal fees, and so on. There is no real science to reserving, 
and although many insurance companies and TPAs have developed worksheets in an 
attempt to make the process somewhat objective, there is no defi nitive method to 
reserving losses. Most often health care facilities use the individual case method: the 
claims adjuster, insurance company, or risk management professional sets a dollar 
amount based on the facts and circumstances of the particular claim. In such cases, the 
following should be considered: 
Demographics: What is the claimant ’ s age, gender, occupation, level of education, 
number of dependents? 
Nature and extent of injury: Is it permanent? Was there signifi cant pain and 
suffering? 
Damages: What are the total medical bills? What type of care or treatment might 
be needed in the future? Were there any lost wages? 
Representation: Is the claimant represented by legal counsel? Does the attorney 
have a good reputation? 
Liability factors: Was the standard of care breached? If so, do the actions go 
beyond negligence? Would the facts support a claim for punitive damages? Did 
the claimant contribute to the injury? 
Precedents: Have any comparable verdicts been handed down? Are there any 
legal limits to recovery, such as a cap on pain and suffering? 4
 Obviously, it is important to place some monetary value on a claim so as to reserve 
those funds for when payment is due. However, there is another equally important reason to reserve claims: to allow actuaries for both the commercially insured and the 
self - insured to predict losses into the future and thereby set premiums or funding contributions for alternative risk fi nancing arrangements. 
“Stair stepping” is a practice in which loss reserves are periodically increased by 
set amounts in the absence of any circumstance that would support such an increase. 
This practice should be discouraged because it might improperly infl ate not only individual case reserves but also aggregate reserves and “ incurred but not reported ”
(IBNR) reserves — amounts set aside for claims that have occurred but have not yet 
been reported. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
c11.indd 376 3/2/09 12:34:59 PM
 Claims Management Strategy 
 Although a health care facility may be commercially insured, it is just as important for 
the risk management professional to be involved in claim management strategy in 
those situations as when the facility is self - insured because, quite simply, no matter 
who pays the claim, the loss history belongs to the facility. So while a commercial 
insurance company might argue that a good business decision might involve paying a 
nominal amount of money to settle the claim, a risk management professional might 
argue that the good reputation of the facility is worth defending the claim. 
 Settlement 
 There is general agreement that when a determination of liability has been made (that 
is, a duty to adhere to a standard of care existed, the duty was breached, and damages 
resulted directly from the breach of the duty), it is far better for all parties to reach a 
settlement agreement. This generally includes paying money, providing additional 
treatment, and having the claimant sign a release of future liability. It is in everyone ’ s 
best interest to settle legitimate claims as soon as possible. This generally follows a 
thorough investigation and appropriate communication with the involved health care 
professionals, the facility ’ s senior management, and any insurance carrier involved. It 
is equally important to defend claims that are found to be baseless. This approach 
supports the integrity of the facility and of the health care professionals who practice 
in it. Unfortunately, even though there might be a determination of liability, the parties may not agree on the amount of damages and thus may be unable to reach 
settlement. 
 Alternative Dispute Resolution 
 When settlement between or among the parties is not reached through informal discussions, a variety of mechanisms are available to facilitate resolution of the claim before 
fi ling suit and using the legal system. Among the alternative dispute resolution mechanisms are the following: 
 Mediation 
 Arbitration 
 Private judging 
 Neutral fact fi nding 
 Ombudsman 
 Minitrial 
 Summary jury trial 
 Moderated settlement 
 These mechanisms may be binding or nonbinding, and some may in fact be prescribed by state law as part of tort reform legislation. Remember that using any of 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
The Risk Management Professional ’ s Responsibilities 377
c11.indd 377 3/2/09 12:34:59 PM
378 Basic Claims Administration
these alternative dispute resolution mechanisms is more likely to provide a satisfactory 
conclusion than litigation would. 
 The Legal System 
 The use of the legal system as a claims management strategy should be reserved for 
cases in which suit has been fi led and the health care facility has made a determination 
that it has no legal liability for the injuries claimed. Defending such cases sends an 
important message to the plaintiff ’ s bar and supports the integrity of the claims management process. 
 REGULATORY REPORTING OF CLAIMS 
 Health care professionals are under enormous scrutiny in the practice of medicine and 
the delivery of health care. In addition to a facility ’ s peer review and quality improvement committees, there are other entities that are entitled to information regarding the 
quality of a health care professional ’ s practice. 
 National Practitioner Data Bank 
 Organizations and insurance companies who pay money on behalf of a health care 
provider (physicians, dentists, or other licensed practitioners, such as nurses or nurse 
midwives) for injuries sustained by a patient during the course of medical treatment 
are required to report such information to the National Practitioner Data Bank (see 
Chapter 10 ). 
 Governmental Agencies 
 The National Practitioner Data Bank also requires those payments to be reported to the 
appropriate state licensing agency within thirty days of the date the payment was made. 
Patients can also fi le claims against physicians through the state medical or nursing 
board. Such claims are taken very seriously and are generally investigated by members 
of the medical or nursing board in a manner similar to a peer review process. 
 SUMMARY 
 Once a claim is resolved, it is important to review the various aspects of the case with 
the involved individuals and others (such as members of a claims committee or patient 
safety committee) to identify whatever risk management issues might be the basis of 
future educational sessions, new or revised policies and procedures, or signifi cant systemic change. Thus risk management professionals ’ roles in claims administration 
becomes a necessary component of their responsibilities to promote practices that support patient safety. Health care providers are trained to learn from their mistakes, and 
the risk management professional can play a vital role in assessing the systems that 
support the practice of medicine and ensure that an atmosphere of continuous quality 
management with a focus on safe patient care prevails. 
c11.indd 378 3/2/09 12:34:59 PM
 KEY TERMS 
 Claims investigation 
 Commercial insurance 
 Coverage determination 
 Early warning claims reporting system 
 Evidence 
 Expert opinion 
 Incident reporting system 
 Investigation 
 Loss adjustment expense 
 Loss reserve 
 Reporting of claims 
 Reservation of rights 
 Stairstepping 
 Third - party administrator 
 ACRONYMS 
 LAE 
 IBNR 
NOTES 
 1. Cambridge Professional Liability Brochure, 2004, http://www.cambridgeintegrated
.com/claims_svcs/fi les/CISG_ProfLiab.pdf , p. 17. 
 2. Hoopes, D. The Claims Environment (2nd ed.). Malvern, Pa.: American Institute 
for Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters/Insurance Institute of America, 
2000, p. 2.8. 
 3. Johns, C. T. An Introduction to Liability Claims Adjusting (2nd ed.). Cincinnati: 
National Underwriting Co., 1972, p. 111. 
 4. Hoopes, D., Claims Environment, p. 2.18. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Hoopes, D. The Claims Environment (2nd ed.). Malvern, Pa.: American Institute for 
Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters/Insurance Institute of America, 2000. 
 Johns, C. T. An Introduction to Liability Claims Adjusting (2nd ed.). Cincinnati: 
National Underwriting Co., 1972. 
 SIR 
 TPA 
Suggested Reading 379
c11.indd 379 3/2/09 12:35:00 PM
c11.indd 380 3/2/09 12:35:00 PM
381
CHAPTER
12
INTRODUCTION TO RISK 
FINANCING 
 DOMINIC A. COLAIZZO 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify basic elements of risk fi nancing 
■ To be able to discuss the criteria by which a risk fi nancing option is chosen 
■ To be able to recognize the difference between risk retention and risk transfer and to identify key factors in electing one option over another 
■ To be able to identify the four types of insurance coverage and give examples 
of each 
c12.indd 381 3/2/09 12:57:19 PM
382 Introduction To Risk Financing
 Chinese merchants were among the earliest known businesspeople to use risk fi nancing 
in the conduct of trade and commerce. Merchants who shipped their goods on the Yangtze 
River could never be sure that their goods would arrive safely at the trading centers 
downriver. It was not unusual for a merchant boat to sink, losing both the boat and its 
cargo, because some sections of the river were treacherous and diffi cult to navigate. To 
avoid total loss, merchants would coordinate their shipping activities and distribute their 
cargo among several ships. If a boat and its cargo were destroyed during its voyage, an 
individual merchant suffered only a partial loss instead of a disastrous total loss. By pooling their interests, these merchants had greater assurance that all would not be lost. 
 In the late 1600s, individuals interested in investing or fi nancially participating in shipping and trade ventures would gather at Edward Lloyd ’ s Coffee House in London. Notices 
of trade voyages would be posted that identifi ed the type of ship and its cargo, destination, 
crew, and captain. Individuals would write their names under these notices with the amount 
of liability that they would assume in the event of a loss at sea. Each underwriter pledged 
his personal assets to cover his percentage of the loss in return for a premium for taking the 
risk. When the notice or slip was fully subscribed, the contract was complete. 
 Throughout history, close - knit communities have practiced risk fi nancing in an 
informal way by pooling their resources. In central Pennsylvania, Amish tradition provided for the entire community to help rebuild a barn or house devastated by fi re or 
storm. In return for each member ’ s pledge and resources to participate in the rebuilding 
effort, the risk of disaster was transferred and distributed to everyone in the community. 
 In recent years, health care institutions have faced aggressive audits and investigations of their billing practices under the Medicare program by the Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Offi ce of the Inspector General (OIG). As billing practices were found to be in noncompliance with the government ’ s interpretation 
of the reimbursement regulations, many providers were (and still are) faced with the 
repayment of large amounts to Medicare plus fi nes and penalties. Most providers never 
anticipated or funded for these business losses, which have had a material negative 
effect on the fi nancial solvency of their institutions. Traditional insurance for such 
losses is for the most part unavailable. To fi nance these payments, some providers 
entered into contracts with insurers that indemnifi ed the provider for the full loss in the 
year of payment in return for a full repayment of the insurance proceeds, plus the 
insurer ’ s expenses, over a designated time period. Although this transaction had all 
the characteristics of a loan, it was structured as an insurance transaction, allowing the 
provider to spread the fi nancial impact of this loss over several years. 
 In the examples mentioned, the Chinese, English, and Amish entrepreneurs and 
the health care executives all used some form of risk fi nancing to deal with the potential for fi nancial loss associated with adverse events. The basics of risk fi nancing for a 
trip down the Yangtze River or to address Medicare fraud and abuse are essentially the 
same, including some or all of the following: 
 The need to anticipate the risks of the group ’ s operations 
 A plan or means to fi nancially deal with a loss if it occurred 
 The pooling of resources to fi nance risk 
■
■
■
c12.indd 382 3/2/09 12:57:20 PM
 Transferring risk to others 
 Spreading the risk among others with similar risks 
 Risk retention 
 Written contracts to substantiate fi nancing arrangements in the event of a loss 
 Identifying the simplest, least expensive, and most creative way to fi nance loss 
without jeopardizing the fi nancial integrity of the group ’ s operations 
 The motivation to prevent the loss in the fi rst place 
 Today, risk fi nancing is viewed as a complicated subject involving legal contracts, 
sophisticated accounting, and myriad government regulations. All sorts of risk fi nancing structures are available: an indemnifi cation clause in a contract, an insurance policy that transfers the risk for a given exposure for a given price, the use of a captive 
insurance company for self - insurance, or a risk securitization plan that uses corporate bonds triggered by preestablished loss criteria. The types of exposures and losses 
faced by health care institutions for which a planned approach of risk fi nancing is 
needed are also numerous and complex. Examples include a slip and fall in the parking lot, failure to properly diagnose a patient ’ s condition, water damage to facilities as 
a result of severe weather, employee injuries while at work, a reduction of an institution ’ s fi nancial assets as a result of poor investment performance, the loss of key management individuals to the competition, the business risks of capitated reimbursement, 
Medicare fraud and abuse, and even acts of terrorism. 
 This chapter will introduce you to the concepts of risk fi nancing within the overall 
context of the risk management process. It will establish the principles and foundation 
for structuring and implementing the various risk fi nancing techniques. Further discussion on this topic can be found in Chapter 13 . 
■
■
■
■
■
■
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Risk fi nancing structures vary in complexity from programs offering guaranteed 
cost coverage on a primary basis to more complex and sophisticated retention 
programs involving captives and other alternative arrangements.
■ If an organization’s exposure to loss cannot be signifi cantly reduced or eliminated 
through risk control measures, plans must be made to fi nance for losses that do 
occur despite best efforts.
■ The most common forms of retention are the self-insurance trust and a captive 
insurance company.
■ The prerequisite for risk retention is an effective risk management program, which 
includes management support, access to sound risk information, loss control 
strategies, and robust claims and litigation management practices.
Learning Objectives 383
c12.indd 383 3/2/09 12:57:20 PM
384 Introduction To Risk Financing
 RISK FINANCING IN THE CONTEXT OF THE RISK 
MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
 The risk management process involves two major areas that are intricately tied to each 
other — the identifi cation and analysis of exposures and treating the exposures through 
some form of risk management technique. Figure 12.1 delineates the structure of this 
process and its key elements. 
 If we cannot treat these exposures in a manner that signifi cantly eliminates the 
potential for loss through loss control, we must plan for their treatment through some 
form of risk fi nancing. 
 The focus of this chapter is on the risk fi nancing techniques and methods for generating funds to fi nance losses that risk control could not avoid. In some cases, the 
potential for loss was not identifi ed or anticipated to allow for risk treatment. As Figure 
 12.1 shows, risk can be fi nanced through risk retention or transfer to an outside party. 
 The decision to use a specifi c method to treat your organization ’ s risk should be 
based on cost effi ciency, fi nancial stability and security, and the control over program 
administration that each method affords your organization. 
 RISK RETENTION 
 Risk retention techniques can vary from the unplanned payment of a loss from operating funds to a more planned approach such as the use of a captive insurance company. 
Basically, there are four methods organizations employ for the fi nancing of loss 
through retention. 
 Use of Available Cash 
 Losses can be paid out of available cash from operations. Neither loss reserves nor 
funds have been established or designated for these payments. For example, institutions typically pay the deductible for an automobile or property loss out of available 
operating cash. These deductible payments are typically treated as unplanned expenditures from operations. 
 From a risk fi nancing perspective, this technique is acceptable for losses that are 
small and occur infrequently. However, this is not an acceptable technique for fi nancing medical professional liability exposures that tend to be both signifi cant and frequent for most health care organizations. Unplanned or unfunded payments for this 
exposure could affect the fi nancial stability of the organization at any given time. 
 Establishment of Loss Reserves 
 A loss reserve can be established for the potential liability of payment for losses. The 
reserve is typically based on expected losses and is treated as an accounting entry 
that identifi es the potential liability on the organization ’ s fi nancial statements. Cash, 
securities, or other liquid assets can be earmarked to fund this liability. This technique recognizes that a potential for loss exists. It can go as far as setting aside assets 
c12.indd 384 3/2/09 12:57:21 PM
PROPERTY
Loss
PERSONNEL
Loss
TRANSFER
NON-INSURER
- Hold-harmless
agreements
INSURER
- A carrier
PASSIVE
- Not
 recognized
ACTIVE
- Non-
 insurance
- Self
 insurance
RETENTION
RISK FINANCING RISK CONTROL
RISK
AVOIDANCE
- To avoid
 risk
LOSS
PREVENTION
- Frequency
LOSS
REDUCTION
- Severity
TREATING THE EXPOSURE
THROUGH
RM TECHNIQUES
IDENTIFY/ANALYZE
EXPOSURES
RISK
IDENTIFICATION
- Identify the
 loss exposure
- How serious
 will the loss be?
Loss Severity
RISK
ANALYSIS
- How likely is it
 that a loss will
 happen?
Loss Frequency
NET
INCOME
Loss
LIABILITY
Loss
STRUCTURE OF THE
RISK MANAGEMENT
PROCESS
FIGURE 12.1. Risk Management Process Structure.
c12.indd 385 3/2/09 12:57:21 PM
386 Introduction To Risk Financing
to fund potential losses. This is the signifi cant difference from the fi rst technique 
described. 
 An example of the use of this technique is the treatment of the tail liability that an 
organization has when it uses a claims - made insurance policy for its professional liability exposures. (For a discussion of tail liability , refer to Chapter Thirteen on insurance principles and the glossary at the back of this book for a defi nition. Accounting 
standards for health care providers require them to “ book ” or account for the liability 
they have for claims incurred but not reported (IBNR) at the end of each accounting 
year. An accounting entry is made on the fi nancial statements to refl ect the liability for 
this IBNR. This liability may or may not be funded, depending on the philosophy or 
resources of the organization. 
 Use of Borrowed Funds 
 Borrowed funds can be used to pay for losses when they come due. For the traditional 
health care provider, this method is ineffi cient because it reduces the ability of the 
organization to borrow funds for more appropriate expenditures. Moreover, the cost of 
unplanned borrowing is typically ineffi cient and more expensive. The use of borrowed 
funds to pay for losses is essentially a means of borrowing time. Ultimately, the institution must pay for the loss with its own earnings or other resources. 
 Formal Self - Insurance Techniques 
 Formalized methods of self - insurance can be used when an organization fi nances its 
losses through a planned strategy. The most typical form of self - insurance that health 
care institutions use today is the self - insurance trust or some form of a captive insurance company. 
 Self - Insurance Trust A trust is a funding vehicle that, in simplest terms, is a bank 
account administered by an independent third party (trustee). The funds are designated 
for the sole and restricted purpose of paying losses. The trustee administers the trust 
through a formalized agreement and a statement of coverage that outlines the type and 
limits of losses to be paid. Funding in the trust is typically established at levels determined by an actuarial study and operated in accordance with Medicare requirements. 
From an accounting perspective, the trust ’ s assets and liabilities are recognized on the 
fi nancial statements, and a description of the liabilities and funding are generally disclosed in a footnote to those statements. Both profi t and not - for - profi t entities can 
establish trusts. 
 Because a trust is not an insurance vehicle, it is strictly limited to the funding purposes for which it was established. For not - for - profi t entities, a trust typically cannot 
be used for its for - profi t subsidiaries. Also, a trust lacks the fl exibility to accommodate regulated lines of insurance and cannot accommodate the risks of third parties 
(entities or individuals outside the parent ’ s economic family). Such activities would be 
considered the conduct of insurance and would be subject to state insurance regulations or would jeopardize the parent ’ s not - for - profi t status. 
c12.indd 386 3/2/09 12:57:21 PM
 The trust was once the most common vehicle for self - insurance of the primary professional and general liability exposures of a health care provider. Over time, trusts 
were replaced by captive insurance companies because these vehicles are more fl exible 
in accommodating the various exposures and risk fi nancing needs that a health care 
institution faces in today ’ s environment. Recent hard market conditions for professional 
liability are once again elevating this risk fi nancing option for consideration, especially 
for smaller not - for - profi t providers whose fi nancial resources are limited and whose 
risk fi nancing priorities are not driven by the need to accommodate other lines of coverage or the risks of third parties. Many providers are now combining the use of trusts 
and captives to take advantage of the benefi ts that each vehicle has to offer. 
Captive Insurance Company A captive is a closely held insurance company whose 
insurance business is primarily supplied by and controlled by its owners and in which 
the original insureds are the principal benefi ciaries. Simply stated, a captive is a corporation for which the product is the payment of losses and the revenue is premium payments. Because a captive is an insurance vehicle and can be structured in many ways, 
it has great fl exibility to accommodate the numerous and varied risk fi nancing needs of 
organizations such as third - party businesses, for - profi t entities, and multiple lines 
of coverage. It is a more formalized method of self - insurance in that it has separate 
fi nancial statements and is regulated in the domicile in which it is established. This 
vehicle elevates the risk management function in an organization as its separate fi nancial statements are scrutinized by board members typically drawn from the senior 
ranks of management and the parent ’ s board. Because of a captive ’ s visibility, there is 
a greater emphasis on controlling losses, the primary driver of costs for any program. 
 The form, structure, and ownership of captives can be established in different 
ways and combinations to meet the ownership, control, and coverage goals of their 
insureds. 
 Note that the use of captive insurance companies, trusts, and other forms of self -
 insurance — often referred to as the alternative risk transfer (ART) marketplace —
 has grown signifi cantly in recent years. According to A. M. Best, a leading provider of 
ratings, news and fi nancial data for the insurance industry worldwide, ART now 
accounts for over 50 percent of the commercial insurance marketplace in the United 
States. For health care institutions, this percentage is much higher because of the 
nature and volatility of the risks that must be dealt with in the context of a limited standard insurance marketplace. For fi nancing of all types of risk, ART can no longer be 
referred to as the “ alternative, ” as it has become a standard approach by which institutional insureds fi nance their risks. 
 Risk Transfer 
 When an outside party pays for losses when they occur, some form of risk transfer 
agreement is used. The most common method of risk transfer is the purchase of commercial insurance. Risk transfer can also be accomplished through noninsurance techniques, such as the use of an indemnifi cation provision in a contract. Indemnifi cation 
Risk Retention 387
c12.indd 387 3/2/09 12:57:22 PM
388 Introduction To Risk Financing
is the process by which one is restored or reimbursed to the extent of the loss ( “ made 
whole again ” ). 
 Insurance is a contractual relationship that exists when one party (the insurer) for 
consideration (premium) agrees to reimburse or pay for another party ’ s (insured) fortuitous loss caused by a predefi ned event (peril). Risk is shifted to others and spread 
among many parties. In general terms, covering the risks of unrelated parties by a 
company owned by multiple owners will constitute insurance. 
 From a practical view, insurance will nearly always involve some form of risk 
retention on a planned or unplanned basis. The use of a deductible would be an example of a planned retention. Denial of coverage as a result of an adverse policy coverage 
interpretation by the commercial insurer would certainly be an unplanned retention. 
The insurance policy, therefore, should never be viewed as a complete transfer of risk. 
 There are many forms and types of insurance that are generally classifi ed in four 
areas as defi ned and illustrated in Table 12.1 . Chapter 13 will provide a more detailed 
discussion of these coverages. Remember the principles and practices of these coverages as you apply them in a risk fi nancing program. 
 The other method of risk transfer, the use of indemnifi cation provisions in a contract, can be an effective tool to lower the overall cost of risk. A hold - harmless agreement is an agreement between two or more parties that defi nes an obligation or duty 
resting on one party to make good the liability, loss, or damage that the other party has 
incurred or may incur. Hold - harmless indemnifi cation provisions can vary signifi -
cantly. A common type of mutual indemnifi cation clause may read as follows: 
Provider agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the managed care organization 
(MCO) against any negligent act or claim made with respect to items or services provided by Provider under this Agreement to the extent that the negligent act or claim 
is attributable to any person or activity for which Provider is solely responsible or 
which arises in connection with the use or maintenance of property, equipment, or 
facilities under the direction or control of Provider. MCO agrees to indemnify and 
hold harmless Provider against any negligent act or claim made with respect to items 
or services provided under this Agreement to the extent that the negligent act or 
claim is attributable to any person or activity for which MCO is solely responsible or 
otherwise arises from duties or obligations that are solely the responsibility of MCO 
under this Agreement. 
 This clause states that each of the parties to the agreement will be responsible for 
indemnifying the other party for loss caused due to that party ’ s negligence. This method 
of risk transfer is practical in certain situations, such as the execution of construction or 
supply contracts, but not in others, such as for the professional liability risks of providing care to patients. Patients are unlikely to sign a hold - harmless agreement before 
consenting to admission to the hospital for care. (Consent - to - treat agreements that 
patients are asked to sign before surgery or other invasive treatment are not intended to 
transfer risk but rather to authorize the particular treatment being proposed.) 
c12.indd 388 3/2/09 12:57:22 PM
TABLE 12.1. Types of Insurance
Type of Insurance Defi nition Examples
First-party Provides coverage for the insured’s own property 
or person. Is intended to indemnify and restore the 
insured to the same fi nancial position existing prior 
to the loss.
Fire/property
Business interruption
Boiler and machinery
Builder’s risk
Flood
Earthquake
Crime
HMO/Capitation stop-loss
Third-party/liability 
insurance
Provides coverage to a party other than the insured. 
Coverage is intended to indemnify the third party for 
loss or injury caused by the insured.
Involves three parties: (1) the insured who caused the 
harm or damage, (2) the party who is harmed, and 
(3) the insurer.
Professional liability
General liability (Premises liability)
Excess/Umbrella liability
Employers’ liability
Auto liability
Directors’ and offi cers’ liability
Management errors and omissions
Environmental impairment
Health and welfare 
insurance (benefi ts)
Provides coverage for an insured’s employees. 
Coverage is intended to indemnify the employee by 
restoring his or her health and earnings to the level 
prior to the loss.
Workers’ compensation
Health benefi ts
Long-term disability
Short-term disability
Dental / Vision/Life
Financial guarantees 
(sureties/bonds)
Provides a guarantee that specifi c obligations of a 
contract or performance will be fulfi lled. Contracts 
of suretyship differ from traditional insurance in 
that assets are pledged for the full amount of risk 
transferred.
Sureties/Bonds
Public offi cial bonds
Judicial bonds
Contract / Performance bonds
License and permit bonds
c12.indd 389 3/2/09 12:57:22 PM
390 Introduction To Risk Financing
 As with any risk fi nancing technique, indemnifi cation provisions need to be evaluated for the cost effi ciency, fi nancial security, and control that they afford in the risk 
transfer process. Therefore, these agreements need to be supported by the fi nancial 
resources of the contracting party or some form of insurance or surety. They also need 
to be written or supported in such a way as to clearly defi ne each party ’ s rights and 
obligations in the event of a loss. In any event, given the legal uncertainties in enforcing hold - harmless agreements, they should never be relied on exclusively to accomplish risk transfer. 
 Risk Retention Versus Risk Transfer 
 The decision to transfer or retain risk will depend on many factors, including the 
following: 
 The size and type of the organization and its operations 
 The fi nancial strength and resources of the organization 
 The type of risk to be treated 
 The organization ’ s risk - taking philosophy 
 The organization ’ s future goals and objectives 
 The overall effectiveness of the risk management and loss control programs 
 Risk fi nancing can be viewed as a continuum between total risk transfer to total 
retention. Figure 12.2 provides a framework for evaluating the cost effi ciency and cost 
certainty that each technique provides. Total risk transfer through insurance will fi x 
costs with certainty, but cost effi ciencies are sacrifi ced as a result of the insurance 
company ’ s charges for taking on the full risk. The opposite is true for self - insurance of 
total exposures. 
 For example, if you purchased insurance for the fi rst dollar of loss for your professional liability exposures, your fi nancing costs for a given period of time would be 
fi xed, providing you with the highest level of cost certainty. Theoretically, it could also 
be the most costly approach, as your premium would cover all of the following items: 
 The insurance company ’ s profi t and overhead 
 Estimated losses to be paid under the policy 
 Charges for use of the policy form and administration of the insurance program 
(claims handling, loss control, and other policy services) 
 Reinsurance 
 A charge for the risk the company is assuming for this exposure 
 Charges to refl ect adverse loss development of other insureds and hard market 
conditions 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c12.indd 390 3/2/09 12:57:23 PM
 Because the insurance company is taking the risk, it will want to retain control 
over most or all major decisions involving the coverage. This might be the best risk 
fi nancing technique for a small organization with limited assets and resources in which 
maximum cost certainty is important for fi nancial well - being. It might also be a better 
technique for fi nancing miscellaneous exposures for which the frequency or severity 
of loss cannot be reasonably predicted. These exposures can usually be insured at a 
reasonable price. 
 At the other end of the continuum, you could choose to retain all the risk for your 
professional liability exposures through some method of self - insurance. The cost of 
fi nancing the risk would be most uncertain and would vary signifi cantly with the frequency and severity of losses. Your cost effi ciency would be at a high level because 
you would not pay an insurer for profi t, overhead, and program service administration 
charges and because you would retain control over all aspects of the risk fi nancing 
program. This approach might make sense for very large organizations that have the 
resources to manage all aspects of their risk management programs in an effective 
manner and have suffi cient assets to accommodate the volatility of loss payments 
without impairing the fi nancial strength of the organization. 
 Typically, risk managers use a combination of risk transfer and risk retention for 
professional liability exposures, whereby the predicable layer of loss is retained while 
the unpredictable, catastrophic loss is transferred. This approach strikes a balance 
FIGURE 12.2. Risk Financing Continuum.
Retention vs. Transfer
Financing Efficiency
Cost Certainty
Total Risk Transfer
Guaranteed-cost
Insurance/Reinsurance
Retrospectively Rated/High
Deductible Insurance/Reinsurance
No
Insurance/Reinsurance
Blended Risk Transfer/Retention Total Risk Retention
H
I
G
H
E
S
T
L
O
W
E
S
T
Risk Retention 391
c12.indd 391 3/2/09 12:57:23 PM
392 Introduction To Risk Financing
between cost effi ciency and certainty. By retaining the predictable loss layer, insurance company profi t and overhead and other charges are minimized. Transferring the 
unpredictable, more volatile catastrophic losses to an insurer at a reasonable premium 
prevents signifi cant swings in overall program costs and promotes fi nancial stability 
over the long term, a key objective of any well - run organization. Program control is 
also balanced in a more effective and appropriate manner between the organization 
and the insurer. 
 As you chose between risk transfer and retention, consider the following 
guidance: 
 The risk - taking philosophy of your organization affects the goals of the risk 
fi nancing program. Defi ne the risk you are willing to take versus what you can 
afford. Senior management needs to be involved in establishing the philosophy. 
 Self - insure the predictable layer of loss where possible. To do otherwise would be 
trading dollars with an insurer with a loss of control over your program. 
 Transfer the unpredictable or catastrophic layers of potential loss at limits suffi -
cient to protect the assets of your organization. Excess coverage at suffi cient limits is usually available at reasonable prices. Self - insuring this exposure to loss 
would be risking a lot to save a little. 
 If you retain risk, you should have an effective risk management program in place 
to control or minimize loss. Sound risk information, loss control, claims handling, 
and litigation management systems are prerequisites. You also need to involve 
senior management and all your insureds in the process. An effective program will 
also make your organization an attractive risk for insurance purposes as you purchase coverage for catastrophic exposures. Keep in mind that risk retention 
through some form of self - insurance is not a cure for poor loss experience. 
 Always take a long - term view of your risk transfer versus retention strategy. In a 
soft marketplace, you might be able to purchase insurance at a cost that is lower 
than expected losses. What effect does this have on your long - term costs and control over the program? Will the purchase of insurance take focus away from loss 
control efforts? 
 Be prudent and conservative in funding for your self - insurance program. You can 
always fund less in the future if your loss experience develops better than expected. 
You always need a buffer to accommodate adverse loss experience in any 
program. 
 When purchasing insurance, know your carrier better than it knows itself. Make 
sure it has the fi nancial security, stable management, and policy services to be a 
good partner. Investigate its track record for paying claims and honoring its commitments. Do you have a relationship with your insurer to resolve gray areas of 
coverage? 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c12.indd 392 3/2/09 12:57:24 PM
 Choose your risk fi nancing consultants, brokers, actuaries, legal advisers, defense 
counsel, and auditors carefully. They need to be your partners and advocates in 
safeguarding your organization ’ s assets and reputation. They not only have to be 
qualifi ed through education and experience but also need the integrity to have your 
total interest at heart. Make sure they can work together as a team to make your 
program as effective as possible. 
 SUMMARY 
 The fi nancing of losses that occur despite your best risk control efforts may come from 
the unstructured payment of losses from operating funds, from the application of the 
indemnifi cation provision of a contract, or from the structured terms of a formal captive insurance company. The best and most effective method for your organization will 
depend on many factors, including the type of risk, its predictability for loss, the fi nancial effect on your organization, your risk - taking philosophy, the sophistication of your 
risk management program, the degree of control you desire over program services, and 
the availability and affordability of insurance coverages. 
 As a risk management professional, it is your responsibility to guide your organization in making the best choice in meeting the overall mission and objectives of the 
organization. A sound risk fi nancing program is important in protecting the assets of 
your organization and ultimately its reputation and ability to serve its customers and 
patients. 
■
 KEY TERMS 
 Captive insurance company 
 Hold harmless 
 Incurred but not reported 
 Indemnifi cation 
 Insurance 
 Loss reserve 
 Risk fi nancing 
 Risk transfer 
 Trust 
 ACRONYMS 
 ART 
 CMS 
 IBNR 
 OIG 
 SUGGESTED READING 
Best ’ s Review, published monthly by A. M. Best Co. 
Captive Insurance Company Reports, published monthly by the International Risk 
Management Institute. 
Suggested Reading 393
c12.indd 393 3/2/09 12:57:24 PM
394 Introduction To Risk Financing
 Elliot, M. W. Risk Financing . Malvern, Pa.: Insurance Institute of America, 2000. 
 Krauss, G. E. Essentials of Property and Casualty Insurance: A Complete Guide to the 
Pennsylvania Licensure (11th ed.). Pittsburgh: Magellan Group, 2002. 
 Rejda, G., and Elliott, M. W. Insurance Perspectives. Malvern, Pa.: American Institute 
for Chartered Property Casualty Underwriters, 1994. 
 Society of Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriters, Georgia Chapter. The Hold 
Harmless Agreement: A Management Guide to Evaluation and Control (4th ed.). 
Cincinnati: National Underwriter Co., 1987. 
c12.indd 394 3/2/09 12:57:24 PM
395
CHAPTER
13
INSURANCE: BASIC 
PRINCIPLES AND 
COVERAGES 
 KIMBERLY WILLIS , JUDY HART 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify key criteria when choosing an insurance carrier 
■ To be able to describe how insurance is purchased and regulated 
■ To be able to identify and describe the four standard elements in an insurance policy 
■ To be able to describe the difference between claims - made and occurrence 
coverage 
■ To be able to describe what is meant by a “ hard market ”and the role of the 
risk management professional 
c13.indd 395 3/3/09 3:14:15 PM
396 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 This chapter presents insurance principles and practices that apply to the health care 
industry. There are two main themes in this chapter. The fi rst is a discussion of the 
basic concepts of insurance and how it is purchased and regulated, and the second is a 
review of the major types of insurance purchased by health care organizations. 
 The most common method of transferring or fi nancing risk is to purchase insurance. Unfortunately, many individuals charged with health care risk management 
duties and assigned responsibility for the purchase of insurance have limited knowledge of its nuances. Many health care risk management professionals seek an insurance product that is a comprehensive and cost - effective method of transferring 
unwanted risk to an insurer. This dictates a need to understand the nature of insurance, 
know how to read an insurance policy, understand traditional coverages applicable to 
health care, and have an ability to determine when changes are necessary. Insurance 
alone cannot prevent risk, but it can provide fi nancial security against loss. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ To manage a risk fi nancing program effectively, the risk management professional 
must understand the concept of risk transfer, know how to read and interpret policy language, understand the insurance market, understand traditional coverage, 
and have the ability to determine when changes are necessary.
■ An insurance policy is a legal contract that creates obligations for both the insured 
(health care organization transferring the risk of fi nancial loss) and the insurer 
(company that for a premium or consideration accepts the transferred risk).
■ The policy’s limits of liability state the maximum fi nancial obligation of the insurer. The 
limits are frequently quoted on a per-occurrence and annual aggregate basis. Defense 
cost can be included in the limit of liability or be in addition to the stated limit.
■ There are four general categories of insurance offered by the insurance industry: 
fi rst-party coverage, third-party or liability coverage, health and welfare coverages, 
and fi nancial guarantees.
 DEFINITION OF INSURANCE 
 Insurance is “ a system by which a risk is transferred by a person, business, or organization to an insurance company, which reimburses the insured for covered losses and 
provides for sharing of costs or losses among all insureds. Risk, transfer, and sharing 
are vital elements of insurance. ” 1 Risk, or the possibility of loss, creates the need for 
insurance. An organization can retain risk or transfer its risk to another organization. 
c13.indd 396 3/3/09 3:14:16 PM
Risk is commonly transferred to an insurance company. By accepting and sharing in 
the risk of many organizations, the insurance company can statistically calculate the 
likelihood that losses will or will not occur. It can also calculate their likely severity. 
This calculation permits establishment of a premium that the organization wishing to 
transfer its risk is charged. If the method of premium calculation is sound, the insurer 
should be able to pay the claims that are incurred and still earn a profi t. 
 An insurance policy is a legal contract that creates obligations for both the insured 
(the individual organization wishing to transfer risk) and the insurer (the insurance 
company accepting the risk). Under this contract, the insurer promises to pay certain 
amounts if defi ned events take place. For example, the insuring agreement of a medical 
professional liability policy obligates the insurer to pay on behalf of the insured sums 
that the insured shall become legally obligated to pay as damages for the rendering or 
failure to render professional health care services. This obligation is modifi ed by various other clauses, coverage terms, exclusions, and defi nitions in the insurance contract. 
The obligations of the insured vary, but most frequently they are required to pay a premium, report claims or likely losses in a speedy manner, and minimize the likelihood 
for loss. Insured losses must usually be fortuitous events — sudden and accidental. 
Intentional acts that result in loss are generally not covered by the insurance contract. 
 Although insurance contracts vary, they usually contain four standard elements: 
the declarations page, insuring agreement, conditions of the policy, and exclusions. 
 The declarations page identifi es the named insured and describes the property or 
activity to be insured. Components of the page include the policy number, coverage 
inception and expiration dates, retroactive date, insured address, policy limit, applicable deductibles, insurer, and premium. The declarations page may also identify the 
various forms or endorsements to be attached to the policy. 
 The insuring agreement states the insurer ’ s obligations under the terms of the contract. In general, the insuring agreement is often broadly stated but later narrowed by 
additional wording elsewhere in the policy. The insuring agreement contains conditional promises to pay. For example, if the policy states that the insurer will pay sums 
related to the rendering of or failure to render “ professional services, ” the meaning of 
 “ professional services ” is defi ned elsewhere in the policy. If the claim does not fall 
within this defi nition, it will not be covered. When interpreting the policy, the insured 
should remember that the insuring agreement is subject to the declarations, conditions, 
exclusions, and defi nitions contained elsewhere in the policy. 
 The conditions of the policy spell out many of the obligations of the insured and 
the insurer. Here are some examples of important conditions that may be included: 
 The insured ’ s obligation to provide prompt notice of loss 
 The insured ’ s obligation to cooperate with the insurer in investigation and settlement of a loss 
 The insured ’ s obligation to pay the premium in a timely manner 
 The conditions under which the policy may be canceled or not renewed 
■
■
■
■
Defi nition of Insurance 397
c13.indd 397 3/3/09 3:14:17 PM
398 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 The insurer ’ s right to inspect the premises 
 The coverage territory of the policy 
 The applicability of limits, deductibles, and defense expenses 
 Failure of an insured to adhere to the policy ’ s conditions could result in the insurer ’ s refusal to honor a claim. 
 Exclusions refer to policy provisions that eliminate or minimize coverage that the 
insurer does not intend to provide. Exclusions are usually identifi ed in a specifi c section 
of the policy; however, additional exclusions may be dispersed throughout the insurance contract. In some cases, exclusions are added by endorsements attached to the 
main policy form. Although exclusions may seem punitive, they might not be. In some 
cases, an exclusion may be added to eliminate the potential for duplicate coverage or 
coverage not needed by a typical insured. Under other circumstances, an insurer may 
add an exclusion for its own benefi t. Such is the case when the carrier is trying to limit 
risks it considers undesirable, a morale hazard, or outside its reinsurance arrangements. 
Typical exclusions include intentional acts, war, pollution or nuclear energy, terrorism, 
mold, and criminal acts. Many liability policies also exclude or minimize coverage provided for sexual misconduct, antitrust, punitive damages, and discrimination. 
 Insureds should work closely with the broker, agent, consultant, or carrier to make 
certain their insurance policies provide comprehensive, cost - effective, and fi nancially 
secure transfer of risk. 
 How Insurance Is Regulated 
 Insurance is a highly regulated industry. Most regulation is mandated at the state level. 
The rules and regulations vary by state. Nearly all states give their insurance departments the power to regulate rates, to license insurers and insurance company representatives, to approve policy forms, and to respond to consumer complaints. 
 Insurance brokers and agents must be licensed in their states of operation. This 
usually involves a state examination and continuing education requirements. 
 Most insurance carriers must apply and fi nancially qualify in every state in which 
they wish to solicit or conduct business. Once a carrier is approved by the state, it is 
considered admitted. As an admitted insurer, the carrier must obey all state laws regulating the operation of an insurance company. In addition, it must fi le its current policy forms, any changes in forms, and any premium rate increases or decreases with the 
state for approval by the insurance department. Most states have established guaranty 
funds to protect insureds from the insolvency of admitted carriers. These funds are 
typically fi nanced by assessments against those insurers. 
 For various reasons, some carriers operate as nonadmitted or “ surplus line ” carriers in a state. These companies are exempt from rigorous state regulations. Neither their 
premium rates nor the contents of their policies are subject to regulation and review. 
Because these carriers are exempt from various state regulations, they are not allowed 
to participate in the guaranty fund. Most states require that insureds who purchase 
■
■
■
c13.indd 398 3/3/09 3:14:17 PM
coverage from a surplus lines carrier pay taxes or other fees on the premium. These 
taxes are usually in addition to the annual premium quoted by the carrier. 
 Insurance Company Financial Security 
 The fi nancial stability of an insurance carrier should be a key consideration in an insured ’ s 
decision to transfer risk. If an admitted carrier fails, its insureds may have access to the 
state guaranty fund. Unfortunately, the protection offered by these funds is limited. Not 
all state funds cover all policies or claims. For example, some guaranty funds exclude 
medical professional liability policies. Others limit the time in which a claim can be 
reported to the fund. The duration may be shorter than the time provided under the original insurance policy. In some cases, the limits of liability provided by the fund are lower 
than the limits the defunct insurance carrier provided. For example, the fund may pay 
33 cents on each dollar of the policy limit, or it may provide only a $ 100,000 limit. 
Under this scenario, the insured is responsible for the remainder of any claim. 
 It is critical that insureds carefully evaluate the fi nancial position of their insurance carriers. To assist insureds and others with this evaluation, a rating system has 
been developed to categorize the fi nancial condition of carriers. The most frequently 
cited rating resource for insurance companies is A. M. Best Co. ( http://www.ambest
.com ). Best performs a comprehensive quantitative and qualitative analysis of each 
company ’ s balance sheet strength, operating performance, and business profi le. 
 Financial Strength and Size 
 Best ’ s reviews include an evaluation of the company ’ s spread of risk exposures, 
 appropriateness of reinsurance, quality and diversifi cation of assets, adequacy of loss 
reserves, adequacy of surplus, capital structure, management experience, market presence, and policyholders ’ confi dence. These tests primarily focus on profi tability, 
 leve rage and capitalization, and liquidity. Each carrier ’ s fi nancial performance is 
examined, and more than one hundred fi nancial tests are performed. Based on the 
ratios, Best assigns a value from A++ (superior) to F (in liquidation). 
 Companies that receive a letter rating from Best are further evaluated as to their 
fi nancial size and placed in a fi nancial size class (FSC) category. Policyholder surplus 
and other conditional or technical reserve funds are the basis for this rating. The rating 
is expressed in roman numerals, from the smallest FSC, I, to the highest, XV. Most 
insured will purchase insurance coverage from insurers that they feel can best provide 
adequate limits to cover their risk. 
 An insured can obtain an insurer ’ s A. M. Best rating by asking the insurance carrier, agent, or broker for a copy of the current report. In addition, Best manuals are 
usually available at large public or university libraries. (For more information on 
A. M. Best, go to the Web site.) Other sources of fi nancial information are Standard & 
Poor ’ s and Moody ’ s rating agencies. 
 Health care risk management professionals should inquire as to the fi nancial rating 
of their current and past insurance carriers. Health care medical professional liability is 
Defi nition of Insurance 399
c13.indd 399 3/3/09 3:14:18 PM
400 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
a long - tail exposure. Although some claims are reported promptly and paid quickly, 
other claims might not be known or paid until years into the future. When the policy is 
purchased, a carrier may be fi nancially sound, but over time, the carrier ’ s fi nancial 
strength could weaken to the point of insolvency. 
 How Insurance Is Purchased 
 Most health care risk management professionals gain access to the commercial insurance market by using an insurance broker or independent agent. 
 Traditionally, brokers are independent insurance professionals who represent the 
insurance buyer to the insurance company. In this role, they participate in the evaluation of risk potential, gathering of exposure and loss information, presentation of the 
data to the insurance community, negotiation of coverage terms and premium pricing, 
and evaluation of quotations. Brokers may also provide assistance in loss mitigation, 
with alternative means of fi nancing risk. Historically, agents have legally and contractually represented the interests of the insurance carrier, not the insured. An agent may 
represent one or many insurance carriers. In practice, the line between a broker and an 
agent has blurred. Both act as facilitators for the evaluation and purchase of insurance. 
 Brokers and agents are often compensated on a commission basis. The amount of 
commission varies by line of coverage and carrier. Brokers are frequently willing to 
accept compensation on a fl at - fee basis. This removes any bias the broker might have 
regarding its commission level with a particular carrier. Some brokers are willing to 
work on a fee - plus - incentive basis. Regardless of the method of compensation, your 
broker or agent should be willing to discuss and disclose all methods of compensation 
received from placing coverage. 
 Drafting Coverage Specifi cations 
 Risk management professionals often have the responsibility of securing cost - effi cient, 
comprehensive insurance coverage. This is not an easy task. The process should begin at 
least six months before policy inception. The fi rst step is an evaluation of exposures and 
the insurance products available to cover them. Once the exposures to be transferred are 
identifi ed, an application for coverage is prepared. This application is often called an 
underwriting submission. The submission serves as a tool to present your organization ’ s 
business strategies, risk exposures, and insurance desires to the insurance marketplace. 
 Some carriers will allow the insured to develop its own application for coverage. 
Others require that the submission be prepared based on a standard format developed 
by the carrier. The submission is then submitted to the carrier ’ s underwriting department. A quotation is developed. The insured, the broker or agent, and the insurer then 
negotiate through coverage terms, services, and pricing considerations. Upon agreement, the coverage is bound. The underwriting submission frequently includes the following components: 
 A description of operations and organizational chart 
 Listing of named insureds and additional insureds 
 Retroactive dates (if the coverage is on a claims - made basis) 
■
■
■
c13.indd 400 3/3/09 3:14:18 PM
 Location listing 
 Current and historical exposure information 
 Currently valued historical loss experience (fi ve to twenty years of loss experience) 
 Large loss detail for any claim over $ 100,000 
 Signed application (as requested by the carrier) 
 Current annual report or other fi nancial statements 
 Description of risk management department procedures, including loss prevention, quality improvement, patient safety initiatives, and claims management 
 Current actuarial report 
 Trust, captive, or underlying coverage document 
 Joint Commission or other accreditation report 
 Description of desired coverage — limits, deductible, coverage extensions, underlying 
coverages, pricing guidelines, policy period, key coverage terms, services, and so on 
 Identifying the carriers who are interested in assuming your risk is the next step. 
Since 2000, various carriers have been liquidated, and others have voluntarily left the 
market. Some carriers have refocused their health care initiatives, and new entrants 
have entered the marketplace. Following are some key criteria to consider when selecting a carrier: 
 Does the purchase of this policy support the short - term or long - term objectives of 
the health care organization and risk management department? 
 Is the insurance carrier fi nancially secure? What is its fi nancial rating according to 
A. M. Best or other rating organizations? 
 Is the carrier knowledgeable in health care operations? 
 Is the carrier fl exible? 
 Is the pricing competitive? 
 How will future pricing be affected by your organization ’ s favorable or unfavorable loss experience? 
 How will future pricing be affected by losses within the health care industry or 
outside the health care industry? 
 Is the carrier capable of meeting the claims administration, loss prevention, clinical risk management, risk management information systems (RMIS), and educational needs of your facility? 
 How long has this carrier been offering this type of coverage? What is its past history in the marketplace? Is it a long - term option? 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Defi nition of Insurance 401
c13.indd 401 3/3/09 3:14:19 PM
402 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 What is the carrier ’ s claims - handling philosophy? Will it allow input from your 
organization? 
 What fi rms are on the carrier ’ s legal defense panel? Does the insured have a choice 
of counsel? Can a fi rm or individual attorney be easily added to the insurer ’ s 
defense legal panel? 
 Once quotations are received, they must be analyzed for price, terms, services, 
and other qualitative issues. Insurance policies vary in terms and conditions, but key 
coverage considerations should include the following: 
 Is the quotation based on complete and accurate exposure and loss information? If the 
information is not complete, could the pricing change according to outstanding data? 
 What are the limits of the policy? How do they apply? 
 Is there a deductible or retention, and how does it apply? 
 Does the policy include a coinsurance provision? 
 What are the policy period, effective date, and expiration date of coverage? 
 What is the premium? Is there a minimum premium? Is the premium fl at, assessable, or auditable? 
 Is coverage claims - made or occurrence? 
 If coverage is claims - made, what is the retroactive date? 
 What is the intent of coverage? Has the carrier released sample forms and 
endorsements? 
 What are the key exclusions? Are these common? Can they be amended? 
 Who is covered by the policy— organizations in addition to individuals? 
 What is the coverage territory? 
 What is the procedure for reporting claims? 
 What is the defi nition of a claim? 
 What is the time frame within which claims must be reported? Is there a prescribed 
format for reporting? Who must report claims? 
 Does the application become a warranty to the policy? 
 How are defense costs handled? Are they included within the limit or retention or 
exclusive outside the limit or retention? 
 Are there provisions for adding or deleting exposures during the policy period? 
 Under what circumstances can the insured and insurer cancel or non - renew the 
policy? 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c13.indd 402 3/3/09 3:14:19 PM
 Once coverage has been bound, the broker or carrier will issue a binder of insurance 
evidencing that coverage was purchased. Once the actual policy is issued, the binder is 
no longer needed. It might also be helpful to have your broker or agent prepare an insurance summary. This tool emphasizes key components of your insurance policy. The 
summary will often include a description of the type of policy purchased, policy numbers, policy period, limits of coverage, deductibles, premiums, a coverage overview, and 
major exclusions. 
 Another helpful tool that is often prepared by your broker or agent is a schedule of 
insurance. This schedule is a condensed version of all insurance coverage placed and 
serves as a quick reference or guide. Many risk management professionals have this 
schedule readily available as an aid in answering questions. The schedule of insurance 
generally covers much the same material as a policy summary, except that the coverage overview and narrative description of policy type are not included and all lines of 
coverage are included. 
 The Hard and Soft Market 
 The insurance industry is cyclical. It is characterized by periods of low premiums, fl exible terms, and generous capacity followed by periods of escalating premiums, strict 
underwriting procedures, and limited availability of coverage. The periods of fl exible 
pricing and terms are known as “ soft ” markets. Once pricing and terms become more 
limited, the market is said to be in a “ hard ” cycle. The cycles usually last fi ve to seven 
years. Although no one can predict a turn in the market or the best position to take in a 
hard insurance market, considerations such as these should be evaluated: 
 What is the overall business strategy of the carrier? 
 Has it historically been committed to the health care industry? 
 Is it committed to your organization? 
 How has the carrier reacted to other pricing cycles? 
 What is the fi nancial status of the carrier? 
 What is the carrier ’ s loss ratio for similar accounts? Is the exposure profi table for 
the carrier? 
 Does it make sense to place all the organization ’ s exposures with one carrier and 
hope that the economies of scale prove benefi cial, or is it better to disperse the 
exposures throughout the marketplace and establish numerous relationships? 
 The potential for a hard market also dictates that a health care organization reevaluate its current risk fi nancing program. Analysis should include the following activities: 
 Review of limits purchased: Are they enough? Should they be reduced, increased, 
or restructured? 
 Review of retentions: Should they be restructured? 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Defi nition of Insurance 403
c13.indd 403 3/3/09 3:14:19 PM
404 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Should the organization continue to transfer this risk? Could the risk be better managed by the use of an alternative risk fi nancing vehicle or retention of the risk? 
 Review of the organization ’ s risk and claims management programs: Are they in order? 
 Throughout the course of their professional careers, risk management professionals will have to deal with hard markets. Because of this certainty, health care risk management professionals should constantly be reviewing their risk fi nancing vehicles for 
short - term and long - term benefi ts. They must also evaluate the best method and technique for presenting their risk to the insurance marketplace. Without proper planning, 
coverage may not be available at any cost. A hard market cycle dictates that the risk 
management professional take the following actions: 
 Consider alternative program structures. This might include considering higher 
deductibles, purchasing lower limits, going without coverage, and establishing a 
captive or trust in addition to other fi nite risk vehicles. 
 Start the process of securing coverage six months before inception of the policy. 
This will allow time for adequate planning, preparation of the submission, presentation of the risk, and evaluation of alternatives. 
 Develop a timeline for each viable alternative. Identify critical dates. 
 Engage senior management in the process. In a hard market, senior management 
might fi nd its insurance budget woefully inadequate. Premiums could escalate. 
 Rely on experts to assist in the process. Consultants or knowledgeable health care 
 brokers can provide assistance as to the marketplace and presenting the risk, but 
 actuaries, accountants, legal fi rms, clinical risk and claims specialists, and other 
experts may be needed if the organization is considering increasing retentions signifi -
cantly through a trust, captive, or other alternative fi nancing arrangements. 
 Recognize that underwriters view certain risk areas more or less favorably. For 
example, certain carriers are comfortable with physician exposures, whereas others are not and prefer to focus primarily on hospital exposures. 
 Present the risk in a way that appeals to the carrier. Each carrier ’ s appetite for risk 
is different. Research each carrier ’ s senior management and risk philosophy. 
Present your risk in a way that differentiates it in the marketplace. Be concise. 
Minimize the diffi cult areas of your risk picture, and maximize the positives. 
Present a complete and accurate loss picture, and identify steps that have been 
taken to reduce the likelihood of future occurrences. 
 A Discussion of Claims - Made Versus Occurrence Policies 
 Certain health care – related policies are written on a claims - made basis. Examples 
include directors ’ and offi cers ’ liability and managed care errors and omissions. Other 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c13.indd 404 3/3/09 3:14:20 PM
policies are offered on an occurrence basis. Automobile, property, and workers ’ 
compensation policies are usually written on an occurrence form. Still other coverages, such as medical professional liability, can be written on either a claims - made or 
an occurrence basis. 
 An occurrence policy covers an insured for incidents that occur while the policy is 
in effect, regardless of when the incident is reported to the insurer. Unlike claims -
 made, there is no need for an insured to obtain an additional policy endorsement 
or extension when the insured wishes to move to a new insurer. The date the claim or 
incident is fi led has no effect on the applicable policy period. The date that the claim 
occurred determines the applicable policy period. 
 A claims - made policy covers an insured for incidents that both occur and are 
reported to the insurer while the policy is in force. This method of tracking claims can 
be burdensome because claims or incidents might occur during one policy period but 
are not reported until after the policy period has ended. If this happens, coverage might 
not apply for the claim. This potential gap in coverage can be minimized through the 
maintenance of the original retroactive date (nose) or the purchase of a policy endorsement for an extended reporting period (tail). 
 For coverage under a claims - made policy to apply, the incident or claim must have 
occurred after the retroactive date of the policy. The retroactive date is usually the fi rst 
date that the insured purchased claims - made coverage. Under most circumstances, the 
retroactive date should be maintained on all subsequent policies. 
 For example, assume that a physician purchases a fi rst claims - made policy on July 
1, 2008, from XYZ Insurance. The policy will cover claims that are incurred and 
reported from July 1, 2008, to June 30, 2009. Because this is the fi rst claims - made policy the physician has purchased, it will have a July 1, 2008, retroactive date. Now 
assume that three years pass and the physician has maintained claims - made coverage 
with XYZ for the entire three - year period. In addition, the original retroactive date of 
July 1, 2008, has been maintained. Unknown to the physician, an incident occurred on 
August 1, 2008, but was not known to the physician until the current policy period 
(July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2011). Even though the claim occurred on August 1, 2008, it 
will be paid under the current claims - made policy rather than the original July 1, 2008, 
to June 30, 2009, policy. This is because the physician has maintained the retroactive 
date of July 1, 2008, on the current policy. The current policy covers claims incurred 
and reported for the current policy period (July 1, 2010, through June 30, 2011) and 
that occurred subsequent to July 1, 2008, and reported during the current policy period. 
The current policy, however, would not cover any claim that occurred prior to the retroactive date of July 1, 2008, or any claim reported in a previous policy period. If the 
physician failed to maintain the July 1, 2008, retroactive date, the claim would not 
have been covered by either the July 1, 2008, to June 30, 2009, policy (in place at the 
time of the event) or the July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2011, policy (in place at the time of 
the report). In contrast, if the physician had purchased occurrence coverage, the claim 
would have been paid under the July 1, 2008, to June 30, 2009, occurrence policy. 
Defi nition of Insurance 405
c13.indd 405 3/3/09 3:14:20 PM
406 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Nose 
 Under the claims - made form, the nose is the period of time between an insured ’ s retroactive date and the commencement date of the current policy period. In the example 
just given, the nose is the period July 1, 2008, through June 30, 2010. The policy will 
respond to claims that have been incurred during the period July 1, 2008, through June 
30, 2010, but are not reported until the July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2011, policy year. In 
addition, the July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2011, policy will also provide protection for 
claims incurred and reported during the July 1, 2010, to June 30, 2011, policy year. 
 Tail 
 A tail is also known as an extended reporting period (ERP). Various scenarios create 
the need for an ERP, but the most common scenario is when an insured changes carriers. The ERP essentially converts a claims - made policy to an occurrence policy by 
extending coverage to all claims that arise from care rendered during the policy period 
(and nose period, if applicable), regardless of when the claim is reported. 
 ERPs can be limited in time and in the limits of liability that they offer. An unlimited time for the extended reporting period is preferred, but some carriers limit the ERP 
to twelve months, thirty - six months, or some other specifi c period of time. The limits 
of liability purchased with an ERP also can vary. They can simply be an extension of 
the policy limits remaining and available from the last or expiring policy period, a new 
set of limits identical to the limits on the expiring policy, or some other negotiated 
limit. Remember that the limits of liability for the ERP are available for the payment of 
claims only if the limits have not been exhausted by payment of previous claims. 
Should the limits be exhausted through the payment of reported claims, many carriers 
will allow the insured to purchase an additional set of limits for a premium. This is 
called “ reinstating the limits. ” 
 The carrier will charge an additional premium for the ERP. The additional premium 
is generally 100 percent to 200 percent of the annual premium for the current policy 
period. During a soft market cycle, carriers might be more willing to offer this extension 
at a more reasonable price. An ERP can be purchased from the expiring carrier or the 
new carrier. Generally, using the new carrier is the more cost - effective option. 
 An additional item to consider when purchasing claims - made coverage is the defi -
nition of a claim. Most claims - made policies defi ne a claim as “ a lawsuit or an incident 
likely to result in a lawsuit. ” This allows the insured to report incidents that it feels 
could give rise to a lawsuit and have any subsequent lawsuits covered under the current policy regardless of when the claim is made. This defi nition minimizes the likelihood of a gap in coverage. Some policies, however, defi ne a claim as only a written 
demand for compensation or a fi led lawsuit. Care must be taken when moving from 
one claims - made insurance carrier to another. Even if the new carrier agrees to maintain the insured ’ s original retroactive date, it is possible for a gap in coverage to result 
if each carrier defi nes a claim in different terms. 
c13.indd 406 3/3/09 3:14:21 PM
 How Much to Purchase 
 Health care risk management professionals often wonder about the appropriate amount 
of insurance coverage to purchase. This question is not easily answered. Guidelines are 
provided by reviewing the limits historically purchased by the organization, the loss history of the organization, analysis of the regulatory and legal climate, evaluation of exposures created by the organization ’ s business strategies, and benchmarking these factors 
against other similar organizations. Included in this analysis is a review of what limits 
are being purchased and of risk retained through a deductible or self - insured retention. 
 Limits of Liability 
 The policy limits of liability state the maximum obligation of the insurer. Limits are 
frequently quoted on a per - occurrence and annual aggregate basis. For example, coverage might be purchased to provide $ 1 million per claim with a $ 3 million annual 
aggregate. These limits are commonly represented as “ $ 1 million to $ 3 million. ” Under 
this scenario, the most the carrier will pay is $ 1 million for a claim during the policy 
year. In addition, the most the carrier will pay for all claims in the policy year is $ 3 
million regardless of the number of claims fi led. 
 How defense cost will be treated is a key coverage condition. Defense cost can be 
inclusive or exclusive. Inclusive defense cost means that the costs to defend the case 
are part of the limits of liability (included) and erode the limits as costs are paid. This 
treatment diminishes the limits available (amount of money) to pay for any subsequent 
awards, judgments, or settlements. Under these circumstances, the maximum amount 
of money the carrier will pay out on behalf of the insured is $ 1 million. This is the less 
desirable method. Defense costs that are exclusive do not erode the limits of liability 
and are paid in addition to the available limits remaining on the policy. It is preferable 
to have defense costs outside the policy limits. Under these circumstances, the carrier 
will pay up to $ 1 million plus all defense costs. 
 The treatment of defense cost also has a direct effect on the calculation of premiums. Policies that offer defense costs inclusive of the limits of liability are generally 
less expensive than policies under which defense costs are exclusive or in addition to 
the limits. Limits of liability for policies that provide for inclusive defense cost will 
erode faster than policies with defense cost excluded. Once the insurer has paid out the 
limits of liability on a defense - included policy, its responsibility ends. Coverage for 
policies with defense costs exclusive or outside the limits of liability will have a higher 
premium cost because the possibility exists that the insurer will have to pay out more 
money — not only the limits of liability but also the cost of defense for each claim. It is 
understandable that the insurer would charge more for policies that offer defense costs 
exclusive of the limits of liability. 
 In addition to per - claim and aggregate limits, some policies contain sublimits. A 
sublimit caps the most the policy will pay for a particular peril. This limit is usually 
within the limits provided by the policy; it is seldom in addition to the policy limit. 
Defi nition of Insurance 407
c13.indd 407 3/3/09 3:14:21 PM
408 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Deductibles or self - insured retentions (SIRs) state the amounts the insured has 
agreed to retain. Deductibles or SIRs may apply to each claim, each occurrence, or in 
aggregate for all losses for the policy period. Both serve to reduce premiums. Under a 
deductible, claims handling usually remains within the authority and responsibility of 
the insurance carrier. The actual limit provided by the policy is usually the per - claim 
limit minus the deductible. Thus if the policy contains a $ 1 million limit and a $ 100,000 
deductible, the most the policy will actually pay is $ 900,000. In most cases, the insurer 
will pay the total cost of the claim and request reimbursement from the insured for the 
insured ’ s deductible. In contrast, if the policy includes a SIR, the policy will pay 
the full limit described in excess of the insured ’ s SIR. The SIR obligates the insured to 
pay the fi rst $ 100,000, after which the carrier will pay up to $ 1 million. SIRs usually 
allow the insured infl uence or control over the claims administration process. 
 SPECIFIC TYPES OF INSURANCE FOR THE HEALTH CARE 
INDUSTRY 
 Several broad categories of insurance are offered by the insurance industry. These types 
of coverage are categorized by the kinds of losses they insure against. The most common 
types of coverage relating to losses inherent in the health care industry are fi rst - party 
coverage, third - party or liability coverage, health and welfare insurance, and fi nancial 
guarantees provided by carriers in various forms of bonds such as surety bonds. 
 First - Party Insurance 
 First - party insurance provides fi nancial reimbursement as the result of damage or 
destruction to the insured ’ s own property. This type of insurance is also called “ direct 
damage ” coverage. 
 A signifi cant exposure faced by a health care organization is direct damage to 
property it owns, operates, controls, or is under the obligation to insure for physical 
loss or damage and the loss of income should all or a portion of its property be unusable as the result of a loss. Such losses can result from fi re and lightning, windstorm, 
hail, explosion, smoke, impact from aircraft and vehicles, objects falling from aircraft, 
strike, riot, civil commotion, vandalism, theft or attempted theft, sprinkler leakage, 
collapse of buildings, and other perils. 
 The common risk treatment for property losses is the purchase of commercial 
insurance. Property insurance for health care organizations has traditionally been readily available in the insurance market because of the positive nature of health care industry property risks. Most health care property is classifi ed as highly protected risk (HPR), 
meaning that the risk is adequately protected and that management has a proactive attitude toward loss avoidance and life safety. Health care property risks are considered 
well below the national average. 
 The property insurance marketplace for health care risks is cyclical, based on 
the overall insurance market cycle and on natural and man - made events that can 
c13.indd 408 3/3/09 3:14:21 PM
have a catastrophic effect on the industry. According to the National Hurricane 
Division of the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory, the four 
hurricanes to hit the state of Florida in 2004 resulted in an estimated loss of more 
than $ 45 billion and the 2005 hurricane season faired no better with losses estimated 
at $ 115.4 billion. The 2005 hurricane season encompassed fi ve hurricanes, three of 
which are well known due to their signifi cant damages: Katrina with cost estimates 
at $ 81 billion; Wilma at $ 20.6 billion; and Rita at $ 10 billion .2
 Current estimates for 
hurricane Ike in September 2008 could exceed costs related to the entire 2004 season 
or Hurricane Katrina. These estimates are catastrophic in terms of both dollars and 
people. The magnitude of the losses resulting from the September 11, 2001, terrorist 
attacks affected every insurance product and the risk appetite of every insurance carrier. Those effects are still being felt in the industry, particularly in the availability 
of terrorism insurance. Counting the value of lives lost as well as property damage 
and lost production of goods and services, losses already exceed $ 100 billion ,3
 making this the costliest disaster in U.S. history. In spite of that, the health care property 
market has not been severely affected by the loss of capacity. Adequate capacity 
remains available in the market at attractive terms; however, certain catastrophic 
exposures in high - risk areas are more diffi cult to place. In certain coastal areas, coverage can be acquired only through government - sponsored insurance programs such 
as the National Flood Program and catastrophic wind pools formed in some coastal 
states. 
 Many property carriers provide loss prevention services to their policyholders. 
These value - added services can assist the risk management professional in maintaining the status of the current facilities and can provide input on new construction. 
Generally, these carriers provide inspections and recommendations on an ongoing 
basis. The benefi ts of complying with the insurers ’ recommendations should be measured against the cost of compliance. 
 The majority of property policies available to the health care industry are comprehensive in form. A single policy can incorporate coverages such as the following: 
 Physical damage to real and business personal property 
 Time element coverage 
 Boiler and machinery 
 Transit coverage 
 Automatic builder ’ s risk protection 
 Fine arts coverage 
 Valuable papers and records 
 Electronic data processing (EDP) 
 Accounts receivable 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 409
c13.indd 409 3/3/09 3:14:22 PM
410 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Property policies specify the exact property and business personal property to be 
covered, the dollar amount of coverage afforded, and the types of losses covered under 
the policy. Property insurance may protect any covered person or organization that has 
an insurable interest in the property. 
 Property coverage can be written on an actual cash value (ACV) basis or 
replacement cost basis. Actual cash value is the replacement value of the property at 
the time and place of the loss or damage, minus deductions for depreciation. Under a 
property policy written on a replacement cost basis, claim payments will be based on 
the cost to repair or replace the property without any deduction for depreciation. 
Because this preferred option requires that the insured carry enough coverage to 
replace damaged or destroyed property, it is very important to determine the correct 
property limit. Most replacement cost policies contain a coinsurance provision. This 
provision requires the insured to carry insurance equal to a specifi ed percentage of the 
replacement cost of the value of the property covered. If the amount of coverage is 
inadequate, a coinsurance penalty is assessed at the time of loss. This may result in 
reimbursement for loss that is less than the replacement cost or cost to repair. 
Named Peril Versus All - Risk Coverage Insurance to protect against direct damage 
losses can be purchased on a named peril or all - risk basis. Under a named peril policy, only losses due to the specifi c perils named in the policy are covered. The burden 
is on the insured to prove that there has been a loss. The preferred form of coverage is 
the all - risk form. Its broad, blanket - insuring agreement covers all losses that are not 
specifi cally excluded. In the all - risk form, the burden of proof is on the insurance carrier to prove that a loss is not covered. 
 Even with comprehensive all - risk forms, several perils are diffi cult or impossible to 
insure. These include earthquake, landslide, mudfl ow, subsidence, fl ood, nuclear reaction or contamination, volcanic eruption, war and terrorism, intentional losses, normal 
expected wear and tear, and business perils such as marketing and political risk. 
 Where signifi cant exposure exists for perils such as earthquake, wind, and fl ood, 
carriers may provide sublimits of coverage or exclude coverage all together. In such 
instances, excess or wrap - around coverage can be provided by purchasing a difference 
in conditions (DIC) policy. In these policies, the defi nition of earthquake includes landslide, quake, and other similar movements. The defi nition of fl ood includes surface 
water, tidal or seismic sea wave, rising or overfl owing of any body of water, and seepage or infl ux of water from natural underground sources into basements or other fl oors. 
Time Element Coverage In addition to direct damage losses, a health care organization faces the peril of losing revenues as a result of an insured loss. Coverage for this 
kind of loss is provided by consequential loss or time element insurance. 
 Major wind damage, fi re, or fl ood could result in either a partial or total shutdown of 
a hospital ’ s operations. During the shutdown, revenues generated by those operations 
are lost, and there would probably be additional expenses in attempting to continue as 
nearly as possible the normal conduct of business. Business interruption, a time 
c13.indd 410 3/3/09 3:14:22 PM
 element coverage, pays for the loss of earnings and continuing expenses resulting from 
a covered loss. These expenses can include ordinary payroll if included in the limit 
determination. The insurer will also reimburse the insured for extra expenses incurred to 
keep a facility operating while repairs are being made or to mitigate further damage. 
These so - called extraordinary expenses are those considered above and beyond the 
insured ’ s ordinary operating expenses from the time ordinary operations are interrupted 
to the time they are resumed. Examples include the expense of transferring patients to 
another facility and the loss of income as the result of closing the emergency room or 
operating room while repairs are being made. 
 Time element claims are some of the most diffi cult to adjust. Potential disputes 
relating to lost revenue and expenses can be avoided by providing the insurance carrier 
with a thoroughly completed business interruption worksheet each year. The worksheet will identify continuing expenses and loss of income that the insured will experience if an insured claim results in a total or partial facility closure. 
 This coverage can provide a contribution clause that operates much like a coinsurance clause. To ensure that the limit of coverage applicable to the risk meets the policy ’ s requirements, limits should be reviewed annually with the insurance carrier or 
broker. The deductible for this form of insurance is typically stated as a specifi ed number of hours or days following the actual loss. 
Boiler and Machinery Boiler and machinery insurance provides insurance for mechanical and electrical breakdown of equipment and can extend to cover such exposures as 
ammonia contamination, hazardous substances, water damage, and the drying out of 
electrical equipment. Equipment covered can extend to pressure vessels, refrigeration 
equipment, heating and air - conditioning systems, and pumps and compressors. The policy covers owned property and resulting damage to other property, including property in 
 “ your care, custody, and control for which you are liable. ” Accidents to boilers and 
machinery are in most instances directly related to the energy inherent in their operations, 
such as heat, pressure, electrical energy, centrifugal force, and reciprocating motion. 
 Standard property policies cover losses to boilers and machinery and to other 
property when caused by perils insured against in the policy. However, these forms do 
not cover damage to boilers and machinery or anything else when the loss is caused by 
uninsured or excluded perils. These might include explosions or other sudden breakdowns in the boilers and machinery. Where such losses are excluded, a separate boiler 
and machinery policy is necessary. Many of the newer “ comprehensive ” property policies have limited boiler and machinery exclusions, eliminating the need to carry separate coverage. 
 Builder ’ s Risk Property risk associated with new construction is typically covered 
under a builder ’ s risk policy. Buildings under construction face unique hazards. 
Building materials on the premises are subject to theft or destruction. Because fi re protection systems, such as sprinkler systems, might not be fully installed and operational, 
the risk characteristics for a loss are modifi ed. 
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 411
c13.indd 411 3/3/09 3:14:22 PM
412 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 A builder ’ s risk policy may be issued to cover the interests of the building owner, 
the contractor, or both jointly as their interests may appear. A separate builder ’ s risk 
policy may be provided by the contractor or purchased by the health care organization. 
Under a comprehensive policy, automatic builder ’ s risk coverage is generally 
extended to construction on any existing premises. Coverage can be added to cover 
exposure at an off - site location, subject to carrier notifi cation and acceptance. 
Electronic Data Processing and Media Coverage Electronic data processing (EDP) 
equipment is subject to loss from all the perils to which other equipment is exposed (fi re, 
windstorm, and so on) and is sensitive to perils that have little effect on other property. 
These include dust, temperature, and humidity changes that can affect the equipment 
enough to result in an actual loss. Recorded media data are vulnerable to the same losses, 
including magnetic storms. They can also be lost, stolen, erased, or tampered with. 
 In addition to direct loss, the temporary loss of data processing facilities could 
result in a serious interruption to the organization. The extra expense coverage in an 
EDP policy could reimburse for equipment rental or use of time - sharing facilities, 
additional payroll, temporary offi ce equipment, or temporary help. 
 Separate EDP policies or an EDP extension on a standard property policy provide 
protection for the added risks associated with these exposures. Standard property policies pay for the loss of media but not the loss of information. EDP coverage will pay 
for replacement of information displayed on cards, disks, drums, or tapes. 
Commercial Crime Insurance and Employee Dishonesty Crime insurance covers 
two broad categories of risk — crimes committed by outsiders and crimes committed 
by employees. Because crime - related losses are not typically covered under property 
insurance policies, crime insurance is an important coverage in a health care organization ’ s insurance portfolio. 
 Crime insurance can cover money and securities against burglary, robbery, theft, 
destruction, disappearance, and employee dishonesty. 
 Crime insurance also covers property other than money and securities against loss 
due to specifi ed crime perils such as burglary, robbery, theft, computer fraud, extortion, and employee dishonesty. Crime coverage also extends to loss as the result of 
property damaged but not stolen by burglars or robbers. 
 Probably the most signifi cant fi nancial risk for health care providers is employee 
dishonesty. This can include embezzlement, the theft of drugs or other hospital supplies, 
or the alteration of fi nancial records for personal gain. Along with the rapid growth in 
technology has come a new opportunity for criminal losses. Computer fraud is at an all -
 time high and is rapidly increasing. Computer crime includes electronic theft of money 
and securities, embezzlement, fraud, or erased or modifi ed information. 
 Third - Party Insurance 
 Third - party insurance provides coverage to pay on behalf of the insured or reimburse 
the insured for bodily injury, personal injury, or property damage loss due to negligence caused by an insured. It involves three parties — the party who is harmed, the 
c13.indd 412 3/3/09 3:14:23 PM
insurer, and the insured party who caused the harm or damage. Unlike fi rst - party coverage, the named insured is never a direct recipient of the payment for loss responded 
to by a liability policy. The following are the most common third - party coverages 
applicable to a health care organization: 
 Medical professional liability 
 General liability (premises liability, personal injury, products or completed operations, independent contractor ’ s liability, and contractual liability) 
 Umbrella excess liability 
 Employment practices liability 
 Automobile liability 
 Directors ’ and offi cers ’ liability 
 Miscellaneous errors and omissions, including managed care errors and omissions 
 Environmental impairment liability 
 Fiduciary liability 
 Heliport and nonowned aircraft liability 
Medical Professional Liability Medical professional liability insurance provides coverage for claims arising from the rendering of or failure to render medical, surgical, 
dental, X - ray, or other imaging or nursing service or treatment or the furnishing of 
food or beverages in connection therewith; furnishing or dispensing of drugs or medical, dental, or surgical supplies or appliances; postmortem handling of human bodies; 
and service by any persons as members of a formal accreditation, standards review, or 
similar professional board or committee, as a person charged with executing the directives of such board or committee. 
 The named insured should be broad enough to cover all corporate entities, the 
insureds ’ interest in joint ventures, the board of directors or trustees, members of committees, employees, students, volunteer workers, and members of religious congregations acting at the request or behest of the named insured. If interns, residents, fellows, or 
employed or contracted physicians and surgeons are to be covered for their personal 
interests, basic policy wording requires modifi cation. The basic policy form should also 
be reviewed to ensure that physicians are covered for administrative responsibilities without a requirement to specifi cally extend the coverage to include that exposure. Coverage 
extended to employees that include physicians and surgeons typically extends to negligent acts occurring within the scope of their duties on behalf of the named insured. Even 
though several insureds are covered under the policy, the limit of liability applicable to 
each medical incident applies on a per - incident or per - occurrence basis. The aggregate 
limit on the policy is the maximum amount of losses to be paid in any particular year. 
 Health care entity employees, particularly nurses, frequently ask the risk management professional whether they should carry their own insurance. In responding to that 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 413
c13.indd 413 3/3/09 3:14:23 PM
414 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
question, the risk management professional should inform employees whom and what 
the entity ’ s policy covers. The risk management professional should also review the 
other insurance provisions of the organization ’ s medical professional liability policy to 
see how the coverage would respond if an employee carries individual coverage. In some 
instances, the policy would be excess over and above the employee ’ s personal insurance; 
in other instances, the policy would contribute to the claim proportionately with the 
employee ’ s carrier, based on the limits of each policy. The entity ’ s policy will usually 
cover employees for negligent acts and omissions within the scope of their employment. 
Coverage would not extend to a second job or moonlighting activities. If those activities 
exist, a separate policy should be purchased. Furthermore, the risk management professional should remind employees that although the entity ’ s policy protects them from the 
costs of defense and indemnity, they will have no decision - making authority over how 
their defense is conducted — something they may have with their own policy. 
 Most hospital bylaws require all voluntary attending physicians to carry their own 
medical professional liability coverage at stated minimum limits. If the physician and 
health care entity are found to be negligent, the entity may be held fi nancially liable 
for the inadequacy of the physician ’ s limits under the theory of joint and several liability. Where physicians have challenged the entity ’ s ability to impose minimum insurance requirements as a condition of staff membership, the courts have said the entity 
may do so if the requirement is not applied arbitrarily or capriciously. 
 Medical professional liability insurance is considered a “ specialty coverage. ” Most 
carriers have developed customized policy forms, many of which differ in terms and conditions. It is critical that the risk management professional perform a thorough evaluation 
and comparison of coverage terms and conditions when selecting a medical professional 
liability carrier. A broker, agent, or insurance company representative can be very helpful 
in this process. In addition to the product itself, most carriers provide a portfolio of risk 
management services that are available to assist risk management professionals in meeting their risk management objectives. These services should be evaluated on their perceived effectiveness and their ability to meet the risk management professional ’ s needs. 
 Two forms of medical professional liability coverage are available in the industry: 
claims - made and occurrence. In purchasing this coverage, it is critical that the risk 
management professional be knowledgeable about the differences in the forms, ensuring that all claims — those reported and those that have occurred but are not yet 
reported — are covered by a single policy or by continuous policies. (Claims - made and 
occurrence policies were discussed at greater length earlier in this chapter.) 
 The delivery of health care services in an integrated setting has presented additional exposures that the health care risk management professional must address. Basic 
medical professional liability policies need to be reviewed to ensure that they extend 
coverage to new exposures, including these: 
 Miscellaneous errors and omissions (E & O) coverage, such as data processing 
E & O, employed attorney ’ s E & O, and hospital or physician management E & O 
 Contractual liability as it relates to professional liability assumed on behalf of 
 others if liability would not have been present in the absence of the agreement 
■
■
c13.indd 414 3/3/09 3:14:24 PM
 Utilization management and review, particularly as it relates to liability assumed 
on behalf of a health maintenance organization (HMO) 
 Marketing, advertising, and Internet exposures 
 Confi dentiality issues 
 Credentialing of physicians and allied health care providers for others 
 Antitrust or restraint of trade 
 Third - party claims administration and claims management for others 
 Enterprise liability and vicarious liability for all aspects of delivery in an integrated 
network 
 Coverage for day care centers, special health care events, and volunteer activities 
 Architects ’ or builders ’ legal liability 
 Telemedicine and the associated licensing issues 
 Medicare billing errors and Medicare fraud and abuse issues 
Commercial General Liability Most medical professional liability policies cover all 
injuries to patients on or about the premises for the purpose of receiving medical treatment. A health care provider is subject to third - party claims from members of the public other than patients for injury as the result of negligence in connection with the 
 nonmedical aspects of its premises. This would include non - medical - related contractual obligations, injury to visitors, product liability, independent contractors ’ liability, 
advertising liability, and personal injury allegations such as libel, slander, false arrest, 
or defamation of character. 
 Commercial general liability protects the named insured against fi nancial losses 
resulting from liability to third parties arising out of the premises owned or occupied, 
acts of independent contractors hired, products sold that leave the premises, and liability assumed under contract, subject to the exclusions in the policy. Coverage applies to 
bodily injury, property damage, and personal injury allegations. 
 The same insurer that provides the medical professional liability coverage to the 
health care entity usually provides general liability coverage. Those two types of protection are frequently combined in a single policy, avoiding the gray area of determining what is a professional versus a general liability claim. Where coverage is purchased 
separately, the general liability carrier will include an amendment excluding injury to 
patients. This limitation will typically read something like this: “ Coverage is excluded 
for bodily injury to any person who is in your building or on your premises for the purpose of receiving any type of medical evaluation, care, or treatment. ” In some instances, 
the coverage can be modifi ed with the following additional language: “ . . . except for 
injuries caused by windstorm or fi re, including any injury from smoke, fumes, or panic, 
earthquake, lightning, or explosion. ” This extension of coverage provides additional 
protection in the event of a catastrophic loss injuring patients as well as visitors. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 415
c13.indd 415 3/3/09 3:14:24 PM
416 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Additional commercial general liability exposures can exist for organizations with 
child care centers. These exposures may include corporal punishment, sexual molestation, or failure to maintain sanitary conditions resulting in the spread of disease. 
 In addition, many health care entities are affi liated with academic universities that 
require special protection for claims that might arise out of an educational setting. 
Examples of those claims are failure to educate, wrongful suspension from a program, 
or inadequate supervision. Commercial general liability policies should be reviewed to 
make certain that coverage is included for these exposures, or a separate policy must 
be purchased. 
 The risk management professional is challenged to stay informed about the health 
care entity ’ s activities, to ensure that the policy is broad enough to cover new ventures 
and operations. Common areas of concern are increased advertising (including e - marketing), environmental impairment or hazardous waste disposal exposure, asbestos 
removal, and the general liability exposures applicable to patient - owned premises in 
home health operations. 
Managed Care E & O Coverage The emergence of managed care has signifi cantly 
increased the need to purchase managed care E & O coverage. Managed care entities 
such as preferred provider organizations (PPOs), management service organizations 
(MSOs), physician - hospital organizations (PHOs), HMOs, independent practice associations (IPAs), and foundations have presented new exposures that health care risk 
management professionals must address. As stated earlier, a medical professional 
 liability policy responds to bodily injury allegations as the result of the delivery of or 
failure to deliver medical services. However, it may not respond to allegations for 
 “ wrongful acts ” in the design and administration of a managed care plan. These allegations may involve economic loss rather than bodily injury. 
 Allegations of negligence against managed care organizations may include the 
following: 
 Improper design or administration of cost control systems 
 Physician incentive agreements 
 Breach of patient confi dentiality 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) violations 
 Antitrust 
 Economic credentialing 
 Denial of benefi ts or services 
 Failure to refer, delay in referral 
 Discrimination 
 Violation of state insurance regulations 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c13.indd 416 3/3/09 3:14:24 PM
 Invasion of privacy 
 Insolvency or bankruptcy 
 The insurance industry has responded to this risk with separate managed care 
E & O policy forms. Some forms will include coverage for the administrative risk associated with managed care and extend to provide direct medical professional liability 
coverage for employed providers. Other forms are intended to cover the administrative 
risk associated with managed care and provide vicarious liability coverage for the 
organization facilitating the delivery of health care services. The typical insuring 
agreement of these policies covers damages because of personal injury in the performance of professional services, including utilization review, peer review, claims processing, enrollment, and marketing of services. 
 Managed care E & O policy forms contain several exclusions or coverage limitations 
applicable to the risk associated with managed care contracting and health care delivery. 
It is important that the risk management professional review these restrictions to have a 
clear understanding of what portion of the risk is insurable and what portion is not. 
Excess Umbrella Liability Catastrophic losses can have a major effect on the bottom 
line of a health care entity, threatening its long - term fi nancial viability. Excess 
umbrella liability coverage can be purchased to provide coverage after the fi rst 
layer — the primary layer — of liability coverage has been exhausted. The primary layer 
is typically considered a minimum $ 1 million per claim and $ 3 million annual aggregate. The excess policy picks up over and above the primary limits afforded per claim 
and, if so written will drop down to effect coverage in the event of aggregate exhaustion of the underlying coverage. Umbrella excess liability coverage is a comprehensive form of excess liability coverage, providing coverage excess of several third - party 
exposures such as medical professional liability, commercial general liability, automobile liability, employer ’ s liability, nonowned aircraft, and heliport liability. It can normally be extended to cover managed care E & O. 
 To maintain concurrency (avoid gaps in coverage), primary and excess insurance 
policies should maintain the same effective date. If the coverage is claims - made, policies 
should also maintain the same retroactive date. In addition, it is important that primary 
and umbrella excess medical professional and commercial general liability coverage be 
written on concurrent coverage forms. If the primary is claims - made, the excess coverage should be claims - made to avoid gaps and overlaps in coverage. If the primary is 
written or self - funded on an occurrence basis, the excess should be maintained on an 
occurrence basis. If primary coverage is afforded on an occurrence basis and the excess 
coverage is written on a claims - made basis, it is necessary for the risk management professional to maintain two sets of loss data, one on an occurrence basis as required by the 
primary carrier and one on a claims - made basis to meet the requirements of the claims -
 made excess carrier. 
 As with primary medical professional liability policies, all umbrella excess liability carriers have customized policy forms. Most of these forms are “ stand - alone ” and 
■
■
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 417
c13.indd 417 3/3/09 3:14:25 PM
418 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
do not necessarily follow the form of the primary policies or self - insured documents 
that they sit over. It is important that the risk management professional conduct a thorough evaluation of policy forms to make certain that continuity of coverage exists. 
 Although the frequency of losses has remained stable over the past few years, loss 
severity has continued to increase. In view of this, it is important that the risk management professional continually review the limits of liability insurance purchased, making certain that the assets of the organization are adequately protected. 
Automobile Liability Health care entities are exposed to liability as the result of 
owned or leased automobiles and nonowned and hired automobiles. In addition, automobile exposures can exist from the operation of parking garages, including valet 
parking. A commercial automobile policy protects against loss arising out of the 
ownership, maintenance, or use of automobiles and their equipment. It extends to 
vehicles “ you own, hire, or borrow and those you do not own but may be responsible 
for, ” such as the personal car of an employee used in a home health operation. Coverage 
provided for vehicles not owned is excess over any coverage the owner may have. 
 Uninsured motorists (UM) coverage and personal injury protection (PIP) are also 
included subject to limits required by each state. These cover bodily injury in most 
states. Repairs for physical damage to the vehicle caused by an uninsured driver are 
not covered. The policy should provide automatic coverage for newly acquired or 
leased vehicles, including those used for emergency or patient transport. Automobile 
physical damage — comprehensive and collision coverage — should be considered for 
owned and long - term - leased vehicles. 
 Insurers determine rates for automobile coverage based on loss experience, territory of operation, location of the vehicle while garaged, and type and use of the vehicle. Loss prevention activities such as safe driver programs and insurance requirements 
for individuals using their personal vehicles on behalf of the organization are taken 
into consideration in the fi nal pricing determination. 
 The risk associated with employees using their personal vehicles associated with 
home health organizations has materialized into a major exposure for many health care 
risk management professionals. In some instances, automobile carriers are adding premium surcharges to accounts with this exposure. It is important that health care organizations maintain liability insurance requirements for all individuals using their personal 
vehicles in business at an adequate level of liability coverage. Certifi cates of insurance 
should be required and maintained on a current basis for all drivers. It is also recommended that each driver participate in a safe - driving course at least every two years. 
Updated motor vehicle records (MVRs) should be obtained on each driver annually. 
Garage Liability Exposure Some health care organizations provide valet parking for 
emergency room patients and visiting family members. Two signifi cant exposures are 
created by this service. A third - party liability exposure develops when hospital employees operate the vehicles. The hospital can also be held responsible for damage to 
patient vehicles while parked in hospital - owned or - operated parking garages. While 
diffi cult to quantify, this ultimate exposure can be determined by the maximum value 
c13.indd 418 3/3/09 3:14:25 PM
of all vehicles parked in the garage. Protection for this risk can be found in both automobile and commercial general liability policies. The risk management professional 
should review commercial general liability and automobile policies before purchasing 
a separate garage liability policy.
 Most general liability policies respond to garage operations as the result of 
 damages such as a parking garage entrance arm malfunction that causes damage to a 
third - party vehicle. It also responds to injury due to the “ existence ” exposure of the 
premises, such as a visitor slip and fall in the parking garage. An automobile policy 
can protect the insured for the ownership, maintenance, and use of any vehicle. A 
garagekeeper ’ s legal liability policy provides coverage for physical damage (comprehensive and collision) for automobiles in the care, custody, and control of the insured. 
The basic coverage in this form applies to damages for which an insured is legally liable. The policy can be endorsed to include “ goodwill ” coverage, providing reimbursement for damages where there is a question of legal negligence. This can be used as a 
public relations tool for the risk management professional. The coverage can be modifi ed to respond on either a primary or excess basis. If written on a primary basis, coverage for damage to the third - party vehicle is provided automatically regardless of any 
other insurance. Coverage on an excess basis only provides payment in excess of the 
owner ’ s automobile coverage. 
 The risk management professional can take several steps to reduce the probability 
of loss. Garage security and a system to provide vehicle key protection should minimize vandalism and theft. A driver - recruiting program, including MVR verifi cation 
for all employees driving third - party automobiles, may reduce exposures. Outsourcing 
the garage operations to a third party by contract will shift the majority of the exposure 
to the garage management company. 
 Directors ’and Offi cers ’Liability Decisions made by directors, offi cers, trustees, and 
other key executives have a signifi cant effect on the fi nancial health and daily operations of a health care entity. It is essential that they have the freedom to make wise, 
responsible, and sometimes diffi cult decisions without risk to their personal assets. 
 The board delegates authority to conduct affairs on a day - to - day basis to administrative and medical staff offi cers. However, the board is ultimately responsible for the 
establishment and maintenance of appropriate standards relating to all activities associated with the delivery of health care services. This governance responsibility cannot be 
delegated. The purpose of directors’ and offi cers’ (D&O) insurance is to protect directors, offi cers, trustees, and key executives in the event of personal liability litigation or to 
insure the health care entity ’ s obligation to provide indemnity from such litigation. 
 Staff - related issues are becoming a more signifi cant exposure for directors and offi -
cers, who are being held increasingly accountable for medical staff decisions related to 
staff credentialing and privileging. In making these decisions, they may be accused of 
lack of due process or interference with a person ’ s right to practice a profession. What 
were once routine denials of staff privileges can now give rise to antitrust allegations 
with charges of restraint of trade by denying an individual the right to practice a profession or by favoring one group of competing interests over another. 
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 419
c13.indd 419 3/3/09 3:14:26 PM
420 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Statutory immunity laws have been enacted in several states that grant immunity 
from personal liability to directors of not - for - profi t health care facilities. However, this 
relief does not guarantee immunity from being sued. Also, state laws provide no protection from legal actions under federal statutes involving for example, antitrust, discrimination, and environmental protection. 
 Changes in the health care industry have opened new areas of risk for health care 
executives. Integrated delivery networks are engaged in joint ventures with physicians, 
private enterprises, and other health care providers. These alliances hold a strong 
potential for antitrust allegations from excluded providers or suppliers who claim that 
a cooperative arrangement restricts their ability to compete in the community. 
Heightened competition for patients, managed care contracts, and other revenue 
sources present a restraint of trade exposure. 
 Mergers, acquisitions, and divestiture activities among hospitals and physicians is 
another area of concern. Companies involved in these ventures experience a signifi -
cantly heightened frequency and severity of D & O claims. 
 Another source of exposure is third - party contractual relationships. As health care 
organizations increasingly take advantage of opportunities to deliver care on an outpatient basis, it is often diffi cult to maintain the same quality standards across their 
owned and managed facilities and their off - site delivery facilities, such as surgical centers and home health operations. 
 There are several ways to manage this risk. Most organizations purchase D & O 
 liability insurance, including employment practices liability insurance coverage 
from the commercial insurance market. Others are now assuming this risk in their 
alternative risk fi nancing vehicles, such as a captive insurance company. 
 The D & O liability policy, typically written on a claims - made form, pays on behalf 
of the organization all losses for which the organization grants indemnifi cation to the 
insured persons and for which the insured persons have become legally obligated to 
pay on account of any claim for a wrongful act. A wrongful act means any error, misstatement, misleading statement, act, omission, neglect, or breach of duty. 
 D & O liability insurance policies typically have three distinct insuring agreements. 
The fi rst pays on behalf of the individual insureds ’ claims for wrongful acts, which are 
nonindemnifi able events under the organization ’ s bylaws indemnifi cation agreement. 
The second reimburses the entity for wrongful acts on the part of individual insureds 
who can be indemnifi ed under the corporate bylaws. These insuring agreements are 
considered “ individual ” coverage (Part A) and “ corporate reimbursement ” (Part B). 
 “ Entity ” coverage (Part C) can be purchased to provide coverage for the entity if it is 
held legally responsible for wrongful acts covered in the individual coverage sections 
of the policy. 
Employment Practices Liability Employment practices liability (EPL) coverage 
can be included in the D & O policy by endorsement or purchased as a separate policy. 
The risk management professional should evaluate this risk and determine if a combined D & O approach is appropriate or if separate coverage should be purchased. 
c13.indd 420 3/3/09 3:14:26 PM
 The EPL policy is designed to reimburse an organization for alleged negligence in 
the selection and hiring of employees and other employment issues associated with all 
current health care personnel. Recent legislative changes and increased public awareness have expanded liability risk for employment - related claims, making it easier to 
fi le claims and secure greater compensation. Some of these exposures are discrimination, sexual harassment, hostile work environment, wrongful termination, and violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
Fiduciary Liability The need for insurance protection for individuals who exercise 
management or administrative responsibilities for employee benefi t plans was redefi ned by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). ERISA 
defi nes the principal responsibilities for individuals who are fi duciaries of employee 
benefi t plans while making the fi duciaries personally responsible for their actions. 
Employers with more than twenty - fi ve employees are subject to ERISA, with limited 
exceptions. Two of these exceptions are plans providing government - sponsored benefi ts (including Medicare) and some plans sponsored by religious organizations. 
 Every plan subject to ERISA must have a written document that defi nes the benefi ts provided to eligible participants, their vesting rights, and how claims will be handled. In addition, the plan document must identify by name the individuals responsible 
for management of the plan. An annual update to plan participants is required. 
 Fiduciaries are defi ned by ERISA as individuals named as fi duciaries in the plan 
documents and any other persons or organizations responsible for administering benefi ts or claims or collecting or handling funds relating to the plan. Fiduciary liability 
insurance covers the alleged breach of a fi duciary ’ s responsibility under common law 
or ERISA for directors and administrators of the plans. 
Employee Benefi t Legal Insurance In addition to management responsibilities, individuals with duties relating to the administration of employee benefi t plans can create 
situations in which they or their employees might become liable for misadministration 
of an employee benefi t program. 
 Administrative risk arising from workers ’ compensation, Social Security, unemployment compensation, or statutorily required nonoccupational disability benefi t programs exists even though these programs do not fall under the ERISA regulations. 
 Insurance protection against this administrative risk is called employee benefi t liability. This coverage is usually endorsed onto a commercial general liability policy. 
Environmental Impairment Liability Insureds are more aware and concerned than 
ever over the extent of potential liabilities related to the transfer of properties that 
might be contaminated. 
 Exposures include the particularly serious cases of gradual pollution that can occur 
in the course of normal operations of a hospital entity and liability for sudden and accidental exposure. Impairment is considered to have occurred when substances (shock, 
noise, pressure, radiation, gases, vapors, heat, or other phenomena such as light) propagate or spread through soil, air, or water. Examples in the hospital environment include 
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 421
c13.indd 421 3/3/09 3:14:26 PM
422 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
underground storage tanks, hazardous waste incinerators, and radioactive, hazardous, 
medical, pathological, and infectious wastes. 
 Since 1973, most commercial general liability policies have excluded contamination and pollution except when sudden and accidental. This exclusion created a gap in 
basic liability coverage that very few insurers have fi lled, even under specialty coverage or in the excess and surplus lines marketplace. Certain specialty underwriters, 
however, have developed environmental impairment liability coverage, which 
insures liability for environmental impairment, including cleanup costs. “ Sudden and 
accidental ” contamination or pollution is excluded unless the insured cannot obtain 
such coverage under the commercial general liability policy. 
Aviation Coverage: Non-owned Aircraft and Heliport Coverage Many health care 
facilities have sites available for helicopter landings. A separate heliport liability policy 
should be purchased if such a site is designated as a helipad for use by life - fl ight operators or other emergency helicopter landings. The exposures associated with this risk 
depend on the hospital ’ s role in the operation and use of the heliport premises along 
with any contractual obligation it assumes as the result of operation of the heliport. 
 Heliport liability policies cover bodily injury and physical damage arising out of 
the use, ownership, or operation of a helipad, including slips and falls that occur during the loading and unloading of patients, bodily injury to bystanders, and damage to 
the property of others. Operation and use of the helipad is excluded from a commercial 
general liability policy. 
 Non-owned aircraft liability policies cover bodily injury and property damage 
caused by an accident involving a nonowned helicopter or one involving a nonowned 
aircraft for which the organization is responsible. 
 The frequency of air travel by employees and health care executives should be 
evaluated to determine the need for this type of coverage. Claims have been made 
against corporate entities arising out of their sponsorship of meetings in connection 
with which employees became victims of commercial air disasters or chartered aircraft crashes. Risk management professionals should also evaluate the adequacy of 
insurance provided by charter companies and helicopter services. 
Health and Welfare Insurance: Employee Benefi t Insurance Although most 
employee benefi t insurance plans are coordinated by human resource departments, it 
is important for risk management professionals to be familiar with the types of plans 
provided by their employers. Some risk management professionals may have responsibility for coordinating such programs or be involved in the decision - making process 
for carrier selection. These coverages can include long - and short - term disability, life, 
health, accident, dental, and vision insurance. 
 Workers ’Compensation All states create a statutory obligation on the part of employers to provide compensation to employees for injuries arising out of and in the course 
of their employment. All employers are subject to the applicable workers ’ compensation laws of the states in which they operate and under appropriate circumstances to 
c13.indd 422 3/3/09 3:14:27 PM
federal statutes. Failure to comply with these laws can result in fi nes and penalties, one 
of which is statutory removal of the employer ’ s defense to suit by employees alleging 
injury as a result of their work. Workers ’ compensation insurance is a pure form of no -
 fault insurance. Adherence to the workers ’ compensation statute is governed by each 
state ’ s division of workers ’ compensation. 
 Employers who fall under the workers ’ compensation statutes are required to purchase insurance, qualify as a self - insured, or reject the act, which is permissible in 
some states. Workers ’ compensation insurance provides statutory benefi t coverage 
with virtually unlimited medical benefi ts to work accident victims. It also replaces a 
portion of lost wages defi ned as indemnity payments. Employer ’ s liability, part of the 
standard workers ’ compensation policy, protects employers from suits brought by 
injured employees to recover monetary damages separate and distinct from claims for 
statutory benefi ts. Employer ’ s liability claims can arise from the following sources: 
 Employees who reject the act (possible in some states) 
 Injuries not covered by the act (questionable claims relating to scope of employment) 
 Suits by a spouse for loss of consortium or companionship 
 Suit by a third party that has been held liable for the injury and seeks reimbursement from the employer 
 The premium for workers ’ compensation insurance is based on the application of 
rates established on a state - by - state basis to employee remuneration. The rates are 
based on classifi cations determined by the risk associated with the responsibilities of 
the employee. Individual claims history is used to modify the ultimate premium, based 
on experience rating models for each classifi cation of employee. Risk management 
professionals should work closely with the human resource and employee health 
departments in identifying, measuring, and addressing workers ’ compensation risks. 
 Financial Guarantees 
 Surety bonds are frequently required to comply with laws associated with several health 
care exposures. In a surety contract, one party (the surety) agrees to be bound, along 
with the principal, to a third party in the same agreement. The surety and the principal 
on the bond become the promisor to a third - party promisee. The third party would be 
able to collect the obligation from the surety if the principal cannot meet the fi nancial 
responsibility. If the surety is called on to meet the obligations under the bond, it 
attempts to collect the obligation (seek reimbursement) from the principal. This is the 
major difference in fi nancial guarantee insurance versus other insurance contracts. 
 Health care organizations are required to post surety bonds to comply with laws in 
a number of areas, including the following: 
 Patients ’ valuables 
 Durable medical equipment 
■
■
■
■
■
■
 Specifi c Types of Insurance for the Health Care Industry 423
c13.indd 423 3/3/09 3:14:27 PM
424 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
 Home health bonds 
 Liquor bonds 
 Residents ’ funds bonds 
 Performance and payment bonds for construction projects 
 License bonds 
 Various court bonds such as appeal bonds 
 Notary bonds 
 Pharmacy bonds 
Provider Stop - Loss Coverage Provider stop - loss coverage may be needed by organizations that have agreed in advance to bear fi nancial risk for the provision of health 
care services under full or partial capitated managed care contracts. Provider stop - loss 
coverage reimburses a health care provider, subject to daily limitations and coinsurance requirements, for losses in excess of a stipulated amount per member per year. 
 There are two avenues for the risk management professional to consider in purchasing such coverage. Some managed care organizations are willing to include a 
 certain amount of stop - loss protection in the provider ’ s capitated agreement. The coverage can also be purchased from the commercial insurance industry. 
 Risk management professionals should evaluate both options to ensure that the 
avenue selected provides maximum protection for the fi nancial performance of their 
organizations. 
 SUMMARY 
 Insurance is only one of the many tools available to the health care risk management 
professional to manage the fi nancial aspects of risk. The risk management professional ’ s 
primary insurance responsibility is to identify the organization ’ s risk exposures and 
determine whether the transfer of risk to an insurance company is the appropriate method 
of treatment of that risk. Using insurance products for risk treatment requires the risk 
management professional to develop a level of insurance knowledge and a good working relationship with agents or brokers and with the insurance industry. The risk management professional ’ s role should also include the preparation of statistical risk data, 
including rating data and up - to - date historical loss data for use by the carriers in determining the appropriate premium. The risk management professional should also be 
familiar with the resources external to the organization, such as brokers, agents, and 
consultants, who are available to help place coverage, the analysis of carriers, and the 
proposals submitted by those carriers. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c13.indd 424 3/3/09 3:14:28 PM
 KEY TERMS 
 Actual cash value 
 Admitted insurer 
 All - risk coverage 
 Auto liability insurance 
 Aviation coverage 
 Boiler and machinery coverage 
 Broker 
 Builder ’ s risk coverage 
 Business interruption coverage 
 Claims - made coverage 
 Commercial auto coverage 
 Commercial general liability 
 Crime coverage 
 Directors ’ and offi cers ’ insurance coverage 
 Electronic data processing coverage 
 Employer ’ s liability 
 Employment practices liability 
 Employment Retirement Income Security Act 
 Environmental impairment liability 
 Exposure 
 Extended reporting period 
 Fiduciary liability 
 Financial guarantees 
 First - party coverage 
 Garage liability policy 
 General liability insurance 
 Guarantee fund 
 Hard insurance market 
 Managed care E & O liability 
 Medical professional liability 
 Named peril coverage 
 Nonadmitted insurer 
 Nose coverage (prior acts 
 coverage) 
 Occurrence insurance 
 Professional liability insurance 
 Property coverage 
 Provider stop - loss coverage 
 Replacement cost 
 Risk 
 Surety 
 Surety bond 
 Tail coverage 
 Third - party coverage 
 Umbrella coverage 
 Underwriter 
 Underwriting 
 Workers ’ compensation 
 ACRONYMS 
 ACV 
 ADA 
 DIC 
 EDP 
 EPL 
 ERISA 
 ERP 
 MSO 
 MVR 
 RMIS 
 SIR 
 UM 
 Acronyms 425
c13.indd 425 3/3/09 3:14:28 PM
426 Insurance: Basic Principles and Coverages 
NOTE 
1. Smith, B. D. How Insurance Works: An Introduction to Property and Liability 
Insurance. Malvern, Pa.: Insurance Institute of America, 1984, p. 4. 
2. Hurricane Research Division, Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological laboratory, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, US Department of 
Commerce, site accessed 11.07.8 [ http://www.aoml.noaa.gov ] 
3. “ How much did the September 11 terrorist attach cost America? ” Institute for 
Analysis of Global Security site accessed 11/07/08 [ http://www.iags.org/costof 
911.html ] 
 SUGGESTED READING 
Best ’ s Insurance Reports. Oldwick, N.J. : A. M. Best Co., updated annually . 
 Head , G. L. , Elliot , M. W. , and Blinn , J. D. Essentials of Risk Financing ( 3rd ed. ). 
 Malvern, Pa. : Insurance Institute of America , 1996 . 
 MacDonald , M. G. , Meyer , K. C. , and Essig , B. Health Care Law: A Practical Guide.
 New York : Bender , 1987 . 
 Malecki , D. S. , Horn , R. C. , Wiening , E. A. , and Donaldson , J. H. Commercial Liability 
Risk Management and Insurance ( 2nd ed. ). Malvern, Pa. : American Institute for 
Property and Liability Underwriters , 1986 . 
 Rodda , W. H. , Trieschmann , J. S. , Wiening , E. A. , and Hedges , B. A. Commercial 
Property Risk Management and Insurance ( 3rd ed. ). Malvern, Pa. : American 
Institute for Property and Liability Underwriters , 1988 . 
 Smith , B. D. , Trieschmann , J. S. , and Wiening , E. A. Property and Liability Insurance 
Principles ( 2nd ed. ). Malvern, Pa. : Insurance Institute of America 1994 . 
 Troyer , G. , and Salman , S. Handbook of Health Care Risk Management. Rockville, 
Md. : Aspen , 1986 . 
c13.indd 426 3/3/09 3:14:28 PM
427
CHAPTER
14
INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGIES AND 
RISK MANAGEMENT 
 RONNI P. SOLOMON , MADELYN S. QUATTRONE 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify examples of computerized clinical applications 
■ To be able to identify ways in which health information technology can integrate risk management, patient safety, and quality improvement initiatives 
■ To be able to list examples of the types of information that are reported, 
tracked, and trended through electronic reporting systems 
■ To be able to describe security risks and identify strategies to reduce risks 
associated with information technologies commonly used in health care 
organizations 
c14.indd 427 3/2/09 1:01:07 PM
428 Information Technologies and Risk Management
 Health care risk management professionals are witnessing a revolution in health information technology that is expected to transform the delivery of health care and the 
work processes of health care risk management professionals. 
 As the patient safety movement gained momentum, the 2001 Institute of Medicine 
(IOM) report Crossing the Quality Chasm recognized that information technology 
must play a central role in the redesign of the health care system to support substantial 
improvements in quality and patient safety. “ Many medical errors, ubiquitous throughout the health care system, could be prevented if only clinical data were accessible and 
readable, and prescriptions were entered into automated order entry systems with 
built - in logic to check for errors and oversights in drug selection and dosing, ” the 
report stated. 1
 Although it was not the fi rst organization to call for greater automation 
of clinical data, the IOM recommended national health information infrastructure to 
establish what it called the “ rules for the road ” for distributing health care data. 
 Three years later, in the spring of 2004, President George W. Bush, calling for an 
electronic health record (EHR) for most Americans within a decade, established 
within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) the Offi ce of the 
National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) to coordinate 
and promote health information technology. Headed by David J. Brailer, MD, PhD, 
national coordinator for health information technology, the offi ce identifi ed four goals 
and twelve strategies to guide the adoption of information technology (IT) in the 
nation ’ s private and public health care sectors. The goals are (1) the adoption of electronic health records, (2) the development of a secure national health information network to permit the exchange of health information among clinicians, (3) the use of 
personal health records, and (4) the improvement of public health through quality 
measurement, research, and dissemination of evidence. Indeed, HHS envisions the 
years ahead as “ the decade of health information technology. ” 2
 In 2005, the Government Accountability Offi ce (GAO) reported on HHS ’ s 
efforts to develop a national health IT strategy and to identify lessons learned from 
the Department of Defense (DOD), Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and other 
nations ’ experiences in implementing health care IT. States are also beginning the 
process of building health IT networks to share health information statewide, raising 
concern that different health IT systems in different states and in different hospitals 
may not be able to “ talk to each other. ” The following month, a bipartisan legislative 
initiative, Senate Bill 1262, known as the Health Technology to Enhance Quality 
Act of 2005, was sponsored by Senators Bill Frist and Hillary Rodham Clinton to 
spur the development of national health IT standards for the electronic exchange of 
health information. The bill would also provide fi nancial grants to measure the quality of care provided to patients and to develop the infrastructure of health IT 
systems. 
 Industry standards for EHR systems are in need of development and should be 
adopted so as to allow data to be shared as envisioned by the IOM. Indeed, electronic 
data storage that employs uniform data standards will enable health care organizations 
c14.indd 428 3/2/09 1:01:08 PM
to comply more readily with federal, state, and private reporting requirements, including those that support patient safety and disease surveillance. 
 To encourage the implementation of EHRs among physicians participating in the 
Medicare program, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) announced 
that as of August 2005, it would offer participating physicians, free of charge, a simplifi ed version of EHR software that has been used by the VA for two decades. CMS 
estimates that by choosing Medicare software, a typical fi ve - physician offi ce practice 
could save more than $ 100,000 annually. High start - up costs for purchasing and installing software are frequently cited as a major reason for physician practices ’ relatively 
slow adoption of EHRs. 
 Digitally transforming hospitals, health care services, and physician offi ce practices raises complex issues. IT managers, users, and even IT staff become prophets of 
the doctrine of unanticipated consequences. Risk management professionals should 
become familiar with health IT generally and should prepare thoughtfully for the benefi ts and risks of electronic technology, whether related to clinical information systems, electronic incident reporting systems, or other health IT applications. Artful risk 
management professionals will embrace and benefi t from the new information technologies while helping their organizations set and maintain the standards that govern 
their use. 
 This chapter will inform risk management professionals about current and emerging health IT applications and will look at health IT from three perspectives: (1) ways 
in which risk management professionals themselves might use IT, (2) ways in which 
clinical staff might use IT to improve safety and reduce loss, and (3) general risk management issues that are raised as organizations switch to an electronic environment. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Risk management programs today require more data more frequently and from 
more sources than ever before. 
■ The core need of the risk management professional is to review the right i nformation 
at the right time to make the best decision. 
■ The risk management professionals needs tools to automate common processes, a 
knowledge bank of credible information on which sound risk reduction strategies 
can be based, and ways to automate the gathering of intelligence for in - depth 
analysis in real time. 
■ Many health information systems have been shown to reduce errors and thereby 
have a positive effect on quality of care, patient safety initiatives, and medical 
 professional liability. 
Learning Objectives 429
c14.indd 429 3/2/09 1:01:08 PM
430 Information Technologies and Risk Management
 RISK MANAGEMENT INFORMATION NEEDS 
 Today ’ s risk management programs require more data more frequently and from more 
sources than ever before. They require creating new loss prevention and control programs for various care settings and liability exposures. To be effective, these programs 
must be alert to the ever - increasing and fast - changing laws, regulations, clinical practice guidelines, best practices, and evidence - based safety recommendations that 
 ultimately bear on the organizationwide risk management program and its liability 
exposure. Whatever IT system or programs are used in risk management, the goal 
should be to turn data into meaningful information that supports the risk management 
program through effective risk management action. 
 As health care risk management expands its reach, the number of risk management 
staff is likely to remain the same or even decrease in some organizations. Risk management professionals will have to broaden their base of knowledge, understand various 
health IT applications, and develop new approaches to risk management that foster collaboration with patient safety, quality assurance, performance improvement, legal and 
regulatory compliance, and other relevant departments and programs within their organizations. As a result, risk management professionals have a need for automated programs 
and systems that not only capture data from multiple sources but also produce meaningful and timely reports. Indeed, the failure to adopt new systems might reduce the value —
 real and perceived — that risk management brings to the organization. Unlike electronic 
incident reporting systems, manual systems are typically incapable of decreasing time 
lag, making it diffi cult to implement a rapid - response program. The time lag that occurs 
when manual systems are used can inhibit timely data analysis and trending, loss control 
initiatives, and decision making. Ultimately, the use of manual risk management systems 
might make it impossible to demonstrate reduction in the overall cost of risk. 
 Health care risk management professionals have many IT needs. The core need is 
to review the right information at the right time to make the best decisions. Risk management professionals also need tools that automate various risk management processes, such as identifying and analyzing incident and loss information, and performing 
organizational risk assessments, a knowledge bank of credible information that underpins risk reduction strategies and helps to promote risk management and patient safety 
initiatives to others, and automated ways of gathering the intelligence that will enable a 
shift from general risk management assessments and evaluations to more focused and 
in - depth analyses of specifi c areas of risk that have high payback potential. 
 Information technologies, many with Web - enabled modules, can support these 
risk management needs. Computer technologies can also help spot problems that were 
previously unidentifi able and can facilitate efforts to improve the quality and safety of 
patient care. For example, in performance measurement, automated assessment provides signifi cant advantages over manual review of medical records. Electronic review 
of EHRs has also been shown to be more accurate, systematic, and effi cient than 
 manual review of paper medical records. Automated review systems also eliminate 
human error caused by fatigue, inattention, diffi cult - to - read handwriting, buried 
c14.indd 430 3/2/09 1:01:09 PM
 information, missing data, and the like. Electronic systems have the power to assess 
archived data quickly and within minutes assess data and information that would take 
weeks or even months to review by nonautomated means. 
 Computer automation is a key to effective risk management. Automated tracking 
and trending, fi ling and retrieving information, performing statistical analysis of data, 
performing risk assessment surveys, electronic claims management, tapping into electronic libraries, and communication with peers through computer electronic mailing 
lists, e - mail, and discussion forums are critical tools for today ’ s risk management 
 professional. It can be expected that risk management IT applications will have a signifi cant payoff. Real - time electronic reporting of “ near misses, ” for example, might 
trigger timely proactive risk assessment and result in the prevention of losses. 
 RISK MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS 
 Many health care facilities use some form of risk management information system 
(RMIS) that automates many aspects of record keeping. Mergers, acquisitions, and 
joint ventures have increased the need for RMISs, particularly ones with network 
capabilities that serve multiple sites and locations. These software systems are indispensable for corporate risk management professionals who have responsibilities for 
multiple institutions. 
 RMISs consist of computerized databases that, simply put, are comprehensive collections of information. Risk management data might include incident and occurrence 
reports, claims tracking and claims administration data (for workers ’ compensation, 
professional liability, general liability, directors ’ and offi cers ’ liability, and other claims 
information), insurance policy information, reserve data, regulatory compliance information, survey reports, patient complaints, and litigation management information. 
Basic RMISs typically have the capability of data collection and consolidation, data 
analysis, data reporting, and report circulation and may permit remote access. 
 Off - the - shelf and customizable RMISs are available from software vendors or can 
be developed to meet an organization ’ s specifi c needs by in - house IT staff. Some insurance carriers, brokers, third - party administrators, and management service organizations 
also offer specialized RMISs. Regardless of the source of the system that is used, risk 
management professionals should work closely with IT staff in reviewing or developing 
software specifi cations, ongoing support services, data entry and maintenance requirements, Web interfaces, and other key characteristics. Special needs and expectations are 
best discussed before purchasing software and at the outset of a development project. 
 Computerized and Web - based incident management systems that provide real - time 
access to incident data and reports are used in many health care organizations. Web -
 based systems allow for quick “ point and click ” entry using standard browser technology at any computer site in the organization. Reporting forms often consist of highly 
categorized fi elds using check boxes or drop - down menus. Once a report is entered, the 
data are immediately available to the organization ’ s management and leadership. Access 
to information is by authorization and typically varies by job duty: only frontline staff 
Risk Management Information Systems 431
c14.indd 431 3/2/09 1:01:09 PM
432 Information Technologies and Risk Management
will have the ability to access the reporting form and enter data; department managers 
might have access to individual and aggregate information on reports fi led by that 
department and be able to enter or update information; risk management professionals 
would likely have full access to all reporting information and the analytics. 
 Paper incident reports may take months and even years to reach the risk management professional ’ s offi ce and get logged into a system. In contrast, online reports 
facilitate immediate action and investigation and daily review of reports. Standardization 
and taxonomy provide better, more accurate data that lead to better analysis. From a 
security and confi dentiality perspective, online reporting permits limitations on who 
can view, who can print, and who can enter or update data. It also offers better controls 
on the circulation of reports. System controls also prevent others from deleting or 
changing data or “ losing ” a report. 
 Interactive Web - based assessment tools are available to help with proactive analysis, often in high - risk or specialized areas. These tools may include questionnaires along 
with the evidence base that would support the optimal answer. Benchmarking of results 
may be available if many organizations participate in the assessment program. When 
assessment results are automated into a computerized database, new benefi ts arise. A 
key advantage is the ability to integrate and sort information located in different parts of 
the overall data collection. This helps transform risk management data into risk management information. A database system has the capability to retrieve and display records, 
to extract subsets of data, and to produce formatted reports. Each use, however, must be 
carefully planned to ensure that it will generate accurate, useful, and effective reports. 
 USING INFORMATION SYSTEMS TO GENERATE REPORTS 
 When envisioning reports, risk management professionals should consider who should 
be authorized to receive them, how they will be used, and how often they will be produced. With these facts in mind, they can decide what sources of data should be used 
and how best to present data (in graphic or narrative form). 
 Risk management professionals should consider what factors should be tracked 
and analyzed. These will vary, depending on whether it is an incident reporting, claims 
management, risk assessment, or other type of system. The list of elements that can be 
captured by electronic information systems is endless. The following are some examples of the types of information that electronic systems typically report: 
 Insurance policies and coverage limits 
 Newly reported losses or incidents 
 Losses or incidents by department or service 
 Losses or incidents by date reported 
 Losses or incidents by date of occurrence 
 Loss costs by accident type or part of body 
■
■
■
■
■
■
c14.indd 432 3/2/09 1:01:10 PM
 Current status of open claims 
 Incident frequency by job and location 
 Number of employee injuries or patient incidents 
 Types of employee injuries or patient incidents 
 Lost work time 
 Actual medical costs versus average costs 
 Most frequent and most expensive causes of loss 
 Reserves 
 Allegations 
 Staff involved in incident or claim 
 Patient characteristics 
 Names of attorneys 
 Names and contact information for witnesses 
 Insurance carriers 
 Status of claim 
 Actions taken 
 INTEGRATING RISK MANAGEMENT, QUALITY ASSURANCE,
AND PATIENT SAFETY 
 Risk management professionals, patient safety offi cers, and others involved in quality assurance (QA) should recognize the capabilities of EHR systems to facilitate better and safer 
patient care and should work together to develop strategies that will take advantage of the 
technologic capability of EHRs. Interoperable electronic information technology allows 
different systems to “ communicate ” with each other. QA information that is captured 
electronically from routines in daily practice, rather than from reports generated by reviewing medical records, can be referred to risk management and patient safety systems. The 
transfer of information among risk management, patient safety, and QA systems helps foster effective follow - up on patient safety issues and facilitates proactive risk assessment. 
 Certain indicators that are tracked for safety and QA purposes should be referred 
to the RMIS (for example, dental injuries or ocular injuries in the operating room). 
This information could indicate the need for risk management investigation or for setting up a potential claim fi le. Conversely, risk management incident trending reports 
can be incorporated into the QA and patient safety systems. Reports can be coded 
numerically with selected factors, such as date, location, individual who assessed the 
patient, and follow - up information. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Integrating Risk Management, Quality Assurance, and Patient Safety 433
c14.indd 433 3/2/09 1:01:10 PM
434 Information Technologies and Risk Management
 ELECTRONIC MAIL 
 The use of electronic mail (e - mail) has burgeoned over the past decade. Few risk 
management professionals today can envision working without it. The use of e - mail, 
a means of communication by and between health care providers, patients, health 
care organizations, and staff, is a revolutionary cultural change. An increasing number of hospitals and physician practices have public Web sites that facilitate direct 
e - mail communication with staff. Through e - mail, individual providers interact with 
patients, communicate with pharmacies and hospitals, and consult with colleagues 
and subspecialty physicians across the globe. A nationwide telephone survey conducted in April 2005 by a marketing information fi rm revealed that about 31 percent 
of all practicing pediatricians were using e - mail to communicate with their patients ’ 
parents. 3
 
 E - mail has many advantages over traditional paper - based mail and voice messaging. E - mail messages can be sent at any time, and recipients can collect their 
e - mail when they want, from wherever they are. It is easier than writing, printing, 
proofi ng, addressing, and stamping a letter. In contrast to voice messages, which 
typically contain brief contact information, e - mail facilitates communication of 
detailed messages and makes it easy for recipients to reply to the sender and to forward the message or reply to others. Because of its unique characteristics, e - mail 
communication between health care providers and patients raises risk management, 
legal, and regulatory concerns about confi dentiality, privacy, and medical record 
documentation. 
 For example, although the details of what is communicated by telephone between 
physicians and patients are rarely recorded and preserved, e - mail communication 
between the patient and a health care provider can be saved electronically and preserved in paper form by sender and recipient alike. Because e - mail can be intercepted or inadvertently sent to persons not intended to receive it, confi dentiality and 
privacy of e - mail health communication might be jeopardized without appropriate 
safeguards. The timeliness of replies to e - mail communication requiring a rapid 
response can be delayed if e - mail systems go down or if messages are delayed by 
heavy Internet traffi c. Written policies and procedures are needed to facilitate compliance with applicable federal and state laws and regulations concerning the privacy, security, and confi dentiality of individually identifi able health information 
communicated by e - mail. 
 Risk management professionals should participate in drafting and updating their 
institutions ’ e - mail policies and procedures, noting guidelines such as those of the 
American Medical Association (AMA) for physician - patient e - mail, and applicable 
federal and state law and regulatory mandates concerning health information privacy 
and security. Policy should require that e - mail concerning a patient ’ s health care be 
preserved electronically or printed in hard copy if paper medical records are maintained and made a part of the patient ’ s medical record in accordance with sound documentation and recordkeeping practice. 
c14.indd 434 3/2/09 1:01:10 PM
 INTERNET - AND WEB - BASED TECHNOLOGY 
 The Web is rapidly transforming the way clinicians communicate, document, treat, 
and diagnose. Physicians can get online access from their homes or offi ces to laboratory and radiology results, pharmaceutical profi les, clinical pathways, and medical 
 references. A system that permits patients with implantable cardiac devices to send 
clinical information to their physicians over the Internet can result in more timely and 
effi cient monitoring, thus potentially improving patient care. The technology is made 
up of a handheld monitor that patients hold against their chest to capture electronic 
signals from the implanted device. The monitor is connected to a small console that 
resembles an external modem from a personal computer. The console automatically 
downloads the data from the implanted device and transmits it over a standard telephone line directly to a secure server. The system has two secure Web sites, one for 
physicians and one for patients, where clinical information can be accessed. 
 Health care information technology is poised to play a major role in advancing 
communication of health information between patients and their health care providers. 
Until recently, the paper medical record was rarely shared freely with patients. Now 
large health systems and health maintenance organizations (HMOs) are taking steps 
to implement EHR systems that will make patient records available to physicians and 
patients via the Internet. 
 PERSONAL HEALTH RECORD 
 Most people who maintain a personal health record (PHR) create paper records or 
establish electronic ones by typing or scanning their personal health information into 
software applications and storing the information on personal computers. Newer, more 
sophisticated Web - based services now allow individuals to maintain their health information in online accounts that include e - mail, document sharing, videoconferencing 
capability, and access to the individual ’ s health information from Internet - connected 
devices. Some applications give individuals the option of allowing their health care 
providers and hospital emergency departments access to their electronic PHR, which 
may include information that is not otherwise readily available, such as end - of - life 
advance directives. Some systems would also allow providers to enter health care data 
directly into the PHR. These and similar products are being made available to the public by several entities, such as the AMA - affi liated Medem organization and the 
American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA). 
 In the near future, technology solutions will allow seamless integration of health 
information between EHRs and PHRs. Information such as test results could be directly 
entered into PHRs from EHRs, and communication via the Internet and e - mail might 
become a preferred means of discourse between patient and provider about certain 
medical conditions. Policies and procedures for dissemination of health information to 
PHRs will be needed to ensure that clinicians have had the opportunity to review critical test results and confer with patients before results make their way into PHRs. 
Personal Health Record 435
c14.indd 435 3/2/09 1:01:11 PM
436 Information Technologies and Risk Management
 Although the PHR and EHR may one day be integrated, the PHR will not replace 
the medical record that must be maintained by health care providers. Risk management professionals should keep up - to - date on developments in this area as technology -
 savvy patients begin to use electronic, interoperable PHRs. 
 ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS AND SYSTEMS 
 An electronic medical record is generally defi ned as a longitudinal collection of health 
information that is made accessible in electronic form to authorized users. 4
 In addition to 
patient information and billing applications, EHR systems may include knowledge and 
active clinical decision support tools to enhance patient safety, health care quality, 
and operational effi ciency. 
 Interactive EHR systems can prompt clinicians automatically with reminders 
about care and can fl ag potentially adverse outcomes. In place of time - consuming 
manual reviews of paper medical records, EHR systems can provide automated assessments of performance measurement, such as adherence to clinical guidelines. In a 
pilot demonstration of a national health information infrastructure, known as the 
eHealth Initiative, participating hospitals provide continuous, real - time electronic data 
about performance directly to CMS via a secure Internet connection. 5
 EHRs are expected to help provide an effective means of implementing institutional policy and procedures and related accreditation requirements. Because EHRs 
store and share information such as medication history, laboratory results, allergies, 
test results, and other pertinent health data, they support and facilitate patient safety 
initiatives and facilitate compliance with related policies and procedures. 
 Innovative comprehensive EHR systems in development in several large health systems may serve as bellwethers for health care organizations nationwide. An EHR system 
recently put into place by Sutter Health, a large California system, allows affi liated physicians to view comprehensive patient data beginning with an offi ce visit, an emergency 
department visit, or a hospital admission. Lab test results, medication histories, and 
physician notes are available as real - time data. Patients have access to the system using 
the Internet to schedule physician appointments, view their personal health history, send 
e - mail to their physicians, and access health information related to their diagnoses. The 
EHR system also includes numerous patient safety functions, such as alerts to potential 
drug interactions and reminders about relevant clinical guidelines. 
 Few facilities currently employ electronic charting, which typically uses templates 
for clinician documentation. And although signifi cant advances have been made in 
voice recognition technology, clinicians in many health care organizations continue 
to dictate patient information. Many EHR systems store health information that has 
been dictated and transcribed, often by transcribers in foreign countries who can transmit the transcribed information to providers over the Internet. To ensure legal and regulatory compliance, health care risk management professionals in organizations that 
 outsource transcription of health care information should be aware of the numerous 
federal and state laws and regulations that apply to their situation. Contracts with transcription vendors should also adequately address related risks. 
c14.indd 436 3/2/09 1:01:11 PM
 Health care risk management professionals should champion their organization ’ s 
transition from paper - based health records to EHR systems while remaining aware of 
risks to patient safety during the transition. Risk to the quality and safety of patient 
care can arise during the signifi cant process and cultural changes that occur during 
transition. For example, whereas laboratory results, X - ray interpretations, and physician progress notes may be available electronically, other vital patient information 
may remain on paper or be maintained in other media. 
 Risk management professionals must keep their focus on the end result — safer 
and better patient care. They can support their organization ’ s transition to EHRs by 
developing policies and procedures that support the organization ’ s strategic plan for 
switching to an EHR environment and by developing policies and procedures pertinent to an electronic environment. AHIMA ’ s practice briefs provide a resource for risk 
management professionals and others in health care facilities who are switching to the 
electronic environment. 
CLINICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND “ SMART ”TECHNOLOGIES 
 Many health information systems have been shown to reduce errors and thereby have a 
positive effect on quality of care, patient safety initiatives, and medical professional liability. Hospitals and health care organizations are moving incrementally toward the use of 
electronic information into the clinical aspects of health care delivery. Although risk management professionals are not the primary users of these systems, they should become 
educated about them and consider their applications to risk management and patient safety 
programs. Risk management professionals who are equipped with an understanding of 
clinical information systems can more effectively take steps to identify and reduce risks as 
facilities evolve from paper - based organizations to integrated digital organizations. 
 A computerized provider order entry system (CPOE) is a networked system 
that allows users to electronically enter specifi c diagnostic orders, such as laboratory 
tests and radiology exams; medication orders, for which users can maintain an online 
medication administration record (MAR); nursing orders; and special orders. Data 
can be accessed from the full range of orders found in a paper - based environment, 
including medication orders. These systems also provide online clinical decision support and safety alerts. Authorized users have access — from a single workstation or 
remote location — to clinical data from multiple sources. This data include patient 
medical information from workstations within the facility and from physician offi ces 
or workstations in physicians ’ homes. CPOE systems replacing paper - based systems 
are intended to achieve specifi c objectives: 
 Reduce misinterpretation of handwritten or oral orders 
 Eliminate the use of paper documents 
 Reduce the number of inputs to generate orders and execute them 
 Provide rules - based clinical decision support through embedded clinical guidelines (such as dosage calculations and suggestions for alternate therapy) 
■
■
■
■
Clinical Information Systems and “ Smart ” Technologies 437
c14.indd 437 3/2/09 1:01:12 PM
438 Information Technologies and Risk Management
 Enhance patient safety by alerting clinicians to certain occurrences, such as an 
unsafe order (for example, the prescription of a drug to which the patient is allergic or the prescription of a drug that interacts adversely with another prescribed 
medication) or the completion of an order (such as notifi cation that laboratory 
results have been returned) 
 Generate a reliable electronic health record 
 Although hospitals have been slow to adopt the technology, hospitals and health 
systems in the United States are increasingly investing in CPOEs that include hazard 
alerts for cautions, contraindications, and drug interactions. However, many clinicians 
who use such systems lack knowledge about the range of patient safety features that 
exist on their clinical computer systems. A study reported in 2005 in the journal 
Quality and Safety in Health Care discussed the experience of physicians in the United 
Kingdom, where 90 percent of physicians in general practice regularly use advanced 
computer systems to assist directly in providing patient care. The study showed that 
only 25 percent of the physicians received formal training in the use of the patient 
safety features available on their systems and that many physicians made erroneous 
assumptions about the safety features ’ warning functions. 6
 The importance of raising 
clinicians ’ awareness of patient safety features on their clinical IT systems and ensuring that appropriate training is available should be on the agenda of health care risk 
management professionals in all organizations that have implemented CPOEs or plan 
to implement them. 
 Laboratory information systems are widely used to improve the fl ow of information inside and outside of clinical laboratories. These systems are designed to order 
tests, create bench worklists, verify specimens, report results, collate patient demographics with results for reports, and process or transfer billing information. Some 
systems also integrate with EHR systems. 
 Automated anesthesia recordkeeping systems not only interface with anesthesia 
gas machines and patient monitoring equipment but also document drug administration, timing, and patient response more accurately and completely than manual recordkeeping. Indeed, the automated record might help defend against charges of anesthesia 
professional liability. 
 Some emergency departments (EDs) use clinical support systems to enhance physician decision making about whether to admit a patient for a cardiac workup. Artifi cial 
intelligence technology estimates the probability of an acute myocardial infarction 
based on patient history and EKG fi ndings. This technology might help reduce the frequency of inappropriate defensive medicine practices and the frequency and severity 
of medical professional liability claims that allege failures in diagnosing and treating 
acute myocardial infarctions. 
 A number of pharmacy applications help reduce the risk of errors. Examples include 
automated drug dispensing systems, drug interaction programs, drug allergy warnings, 
dosage crosschecking, side effect data, and drug and food interaction warnings. 
■
■
c14.indd 438 3/2/09 1:01:12 PM
 Bar coding, a technology that has been used for years in the retail industry, has the 
potential for numerous applications in health care. The VA hospital system has been a 
leader in employing the technology in medication ordering and administration to verify that the right patient gets the correct drug, dose, and route at the correct time. A bar 
code representing the patient identifi cation number is scanned, and the computer displays the medications that are due. Alerts and pop - up boxes display discrepancies and 
potential problems. Before administering medications, nurses use retail store – type 
scanners to compare bar codes embedded in patient identifi cation bracelets against the 
labels on the medications. 
 Computer - assisted protocols that are used for antibiotic therapy employ real - time 
patient data to calculate antibiotic dose, duration of therapy, and cost - effective choices. 
These systems can pull patient information directly from bedside monitors in intensive 
care units (ICUs). 
 Radiology systems are linked to remote viewing units, such as the ICU and off -
 site physician practices, thereby reducing fi lm retrieval time from a typical twelve 
hours to less than one minute. All of these applications have the potential to reduce 
medical professional liability. 
 Other examples of computerized clinical applications include the following: 
 Automated dispensing systems 
 Drug interaction programs 
 Triage documentation, discharge instructions, and prescriptions 
 Tickler systems for physician offi ce visits and periodic screening examinations 
 Patient tracking systems 
 Bed tracking systems 
 Medical device tracking systems 
 Medical equipment control programs 
 Health hazard appraisal systems 
 The list grows daily. Risk management professionals should view computerized 
clinical applications as potential clinical risk management tools that might help reduce 
loss exposures in certain practice settings. At the same time, they can champion the adoption of appropriate technologies and encourage the necessary cultural change that must 
occur as health care organizations switch from manual to digital systems. Risk management professionals must continue to help develop and maintain policies and procedures 
that protect the security and confi dentiality of electronic data and that encourage proactive 
risk assessment to identify risk - prone systems and processes that might benefi t from the 
application of newer computerized health information technology. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Clinical Information Systems and “ Smart ” Technologies 439
c14.indd 439 3/2/09 1:01:12 PM
440 Information Technologies and Risk Management
EXHIBIT 14.1. Security Checklist for Information Technologies
■ Develop and strictly enforce policies against disclosing or sharing passwords, access 
codes, key cards, and other means of access to the system.
■ Develop policies and procedures for the assignment of passwords, as well as for 
their deactivation should an employee leave.
 INFRASTRUCTURE TECHNOLOGY 
 Risk management professionals and their organizations will also need to ensure that 
there are backups to their electronic health information system so that ongoing operations and patient care are not affected when a system goes down. Redundancy, failover, 7
and disaster recovery protection features are necessary to avoid downtime that can paralyze an institution, resulting in patient harm and fi nancial loss. Risk management professionals and regulatory compliance offi cers should work with their organization ’ s IT 
department to ensure compliance with federal and state laws and regulations addressing the security of electronic health information. 
 Everything from infusion pumps to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanners 
is now controlled by computers; hence medical device security should also rank among 
important risk management, legal, and regulatory compliance concerns. Health care 
risk management professionals should become familiar with risks that might threaten 
the security of computer - based medical devices that generate, store, and transmit 
patient health data and should champion strategies for risk reduction and legal and regulatory compliance. The modernization of medical equipment has seen a proliferation 
in the number of computer - based devices, which are vulnerable to viruses and other 
malicious programs that target computers. 
 Many medical devices are networked for data exchange or Internet access. Most 
hospitals currently use technical solutions such as fi rewalls to isolate the internal hospital 
network from the outside world. While this usually blocks outside threats, computer 
viruses could enter a network through an internal device, thereby bypassing the fi rewall 
protection. In traditional local area network (LAN) architecture, all of a hospital ’ s devices 
are connected in a single network, thus allowing a virus that infects the LAN to access all 
of the devices in a hospital. Because some medical device suppliers do not take an active 
role in maintaining the security of their devices in the fi eld, health care organizations 
must be vigilant in ensuring that device security is regularly updated, as with any other 
device on the hospital ’ s network. Health care organizations ’ IT staff, clinical engineers, 
and risk management professionals should combine their expertise in a team effort to 
identify and resolve risks to the security of their institutions ’ computer - based medical 
devices. Exhibit 14.1 provides a security checklist for information technologies. 
c14.indd 440 3/2/09 1:01:13 PM
■ Institute a time-out on computer terminals; that is, program terminals should have 
screens go blank after a certain period (for example, three minutes) of inactivity 
following the display of a patient record.
■ Establish audit trails so that access to each record is tracked by the system.
■ Sharply limit access to sensitive records or portions of records (for example, HIVantibody test results).
■ Protect against mass access and extraction of information.
■ Educate staff about the importance of privacy and the problems that arise from 
sharing passwords.
■ Ask medical staff members to sign confi dentiality statements.
■ Hold physicians liable for any entries to a record made by nurses or assistants using 
the physician’s password.
■ Provide 24-hour assistance to authorized users who forget their access codes or to 
persons who legitimately need one-time access.
■ Provide mechanisms for minimizing human error, such as review of input data for 
accuracy. If bar codes or other programmed codes are used to record clinical observations, there should be a mechanism for visual confi rmation or other verifi cation 
of entries. Document accuracy reviews.
■ To the extent possible, limit connections to, and electronic data sharing with, outside computer systems.
■ Use disks from reputable software vendors only.
■ Obtain antivirus software to protect against computer viruses.
■ Require software vendors to indemnify against all damages and costs arising from 
viruses, bombs, and similar sabotage inserted into the software by the vendor or its 
agents.
■ Explore the feasibility of using optical disk “write-once, read many” (WORM) 
technology; although it is considered antiquated for other industries, it may be 
ideal for hospitals because records cannot be altered after they are initially recorded 
in this form.
■ Properly maintain hardware, and thoroughly debug and maintain software.
■ Include performance standards in any lease or contract with a vendor, as well as 
guarantees of reliability and ongoing maintenance support.
■ Have adequate backup and emergency capability. (For example, frequent backup of 
databases; off-site as well as on-site computer tape storage; and emergency data 
processing capability are essential, as is electrical power during power outages.)
■ Routinely monitor available security systems and ensure that existing measures are 
reasonable by current standards.
Infrastructure Technology 441
c14.indd 441 3/2/09 1:01:13 PM
442 Information Technologies and Risk Management
 POINT - OF - CARE TECHNOLOGY 
 Current and emerging health information technologies hold the promise of increasing 
patient safety at the point of care and should become an integral part of risk management programs in health care organizations. 
 Medical “ smart cards ” are designed to improve patient care and reduce medical and 
administrative errors by storing patient data that are accessible at several points of care. 
The small plastic cards are embedded with microchips that can process information and 
store numerous pages of a patient ’ s vital health and demographic information, making 
it easier for patients to interact with the health care system. Smart cards have numerous 
capabilities. Card readers installed in the emergency department, for example, allow for 
rapid access to potentially lifesaving information about a patient, such as allergies to 
medications and chronic medical conditions. Patient information can be updated during 
physician offi ce visits. Patients can view their medical information and obtain a printed 
copy of the smart card record. Information stored in the card is encrypted for security 
purposes, and each card contains a confi dential code that is required for decrypting the 
text. Patients use personal identifi cation numbers to access their information, and unauthorized or questionable use of the smart card automatically deactivates it. 
 Radio-frequency identifi cation (RFID) tags store identifying information and 
hold promise for various applications in health care, including reducing the risk of 
elopement by mentally incompetent patients and infant abduction. RFID tags may be 
attached to patients at the wrist or ankle and can be used to track patients ’ whereabouts 
as they move, for example, from the emergency department to the operating room to 
the recovery room and then to a bed on a surgical unit. RFIDs are used for tracking and 
matching blood for transfusion and tracking inventory. The market for RFID tags 
and systems in healthcare will rise rapidly from $ 90 million in 2006 to $ 2.1 billion in 
2016. Primarily, this will be because of item level tagging of drugs and Real Time 
Locating Systems (RTLS) for staff, patients and assets to improve effi ciency, safety 
and availability and to reduce losses. 8
 TELEMEDICINE 
Telemedicine is the use of telecommunication technology for medical diagnosis and 
patient care for sites that are at a distance from the provider. Thus telemedicine permits care to be provided without moving the patient. Several technologies are employed 
in telemedicine. Typically, digital images are transferred from one location to another, 
and two - way interactive television is used for real - time videoconferencing. 
 This technology has a wide range of applications. Telepathology involves rendering diagnostic opinions on specimens at remote locations. Teleradiology is the 
 electronic transmission of radiological images from one location to another for interpretation or consultation. Radiologists who are continents away from the patient can 
provide “ digital readings ” of radiology images, transmitting their preliminary interpretations to clinicians in a timelier manner than could otherwise be achieved. The 
c14.indd 442 3/2/09 1:01:14 PM
 technology also allows clinicians to make virtual house calls to patients in remote 
locations and permits a surgeon in one location to remotely control a robotic arm for 
surgery on a patient in another location. 
 Several hospitals, including Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, employ robotic 
technology for making patient rounds within the hospital. Equipped with video camera 
and microphones, “ robo - docs ” permit virtual “ telerounds ” of hospitalized patients by 
electronically linking the robot to a physician at a remote location, giving the live physician a remote presence in the hospital. Viewing a computer monitor, the physician 
directing the robot near the patient sees and hears what the robot “ sees ” and “ hears. ” 
Patients can see the physician ’ s face displayed on a fl at screen on the robot ’ s shoulders 
and can talk with the physician. The system uses the Internet and a wireless network. 
 Other uses exist and undoubtedly will evolve as states, such as New Mexico, with 
its large rural area, establish telemedicine systems and provide funding for telemedicine projects. Although improvements in technology have led to a revitalization of 
interest in telemedicine, its viability will be shaped by insurance reimbursement policies adopted by public and private payers. 
 Telemedicine carries a host of risk management, legal, and regulatory issues that 
must be identifi ed and resolved. One of the fi rst hurdles is the state - based physician 
licensure system, which runs counter to telemedicine ’ s “ virtual ” boundaries. The rules 
for licensure by endorsement and out - of - state consultations vary among the states and 
pose barriers to development of interstate systems. Risk management professionals 
should be aware of telemedicine initiatives on the state and national levels. A related 
problem that must be addressed is credentialing of physicians who would need to be 
granted telemedicine privileges. 
 Medical professional liability issues for telemedicine practitioners also evolve 
over time. Telemedicine networks may cross state lines and international boundaries, 
raising uncertainty about the jurisdiction in which a malpractice suit may be fi led and 
what state or nation ’ s law should apply. These issues are important for several reasons. 
For example, different statutes of limitations and different statutory limitations on the 
amount of fi nancial compensation that can be awarded to successful plaintiffs may 
apply. What is the standard of care for a telemedicine practitioner in a particular specialty? Who is legally responsible for the quality of telemedicine equipment? In addition to these legal and risk concerns, measures must be taken to address applicable 
federal and state laws and regulations affecting the privacy and security of patient 
health information for information that is electronic and networked to remote locations via modem, telephone lines, satellite, and other communication technology. 
 SUMMARY 
 The Internet and the application of associated computer and digital technologies 
in health care are revolutionizing the delivery of health care services and the role of the 
health care risk management professional. Health information technologies will continue to promote collaboration, increase the knowledge base, enhance the quality of 
Summary 443
c14.indd 443 3/2/09 1:01:14 PM
444 Information Technologies and Risk Management
health care, and improve patient safety, thus reducing the risk of harm to patients and 
losses to the organization. Risk management professionals who champion their facilities ’ transition to an electronic environment will be poised to be key players in ensuring that these changes are in the best interest of the organization and the patients that 
they serve. Risk management professionals will face many challenges as they adapt 
health IT risk management functions, collaborate with patient safety and quality assurance to identify the benefi ts and risks of new technology applications, and develop 
policies and procedures to reduce the risk of harm and ensure legal and regulatory 
compliance. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Computerized provider order entry 
 Electronic health record 
 Government Accountability Offi ce 
 Information technology 
 Offi ce of National Coordinator for 
Health Information Technology 
 Medication administration record 
 Personal health record 
 Radio frequency identifi cation 
 Risk management information system 
 Telemedicine 
 ACRONYMS 
 AHIMA 
 CMS 
 CPOE 
 DOD 
 ED 
 EHR 
 GAO 
 HHS 
 HMO 
 ICU 
 IT 
 LAN 
 MAR 
 MRI 
 ONC 
 PHR 
 QA 
 RFID 
 RMIS 
NOTES 
 1. Institute of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 
21st Century. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2001, p.176. 
 2. Government Accountability Offi ce. Health Information Technology: HHS Is 
Taking Steps to Develop a National Strategy. GAO - 05 - 628. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Accountability Offi ce, May 27, 2005, p 32, 37. 
 3. Payne, J. W. “ E - Mailed Parents Feel Better. ” Washington Post, June 7, 2005, 
p. HE1. 
c14.indd 444 3/2/09 1:01:14 PM
 4. Government Accountability Offi ce. Efforts to Promote Health Information 
Technology and Legal Barriers to Its Adoption. GAO - 04 - 991R. Washington, D.
C.: Government Accountability Offi ce, August 13, 2004. 
 5. Visit the eHealth Initiative Web site at http://www.ehealthinitiative.org 
 6. Morris, C. J., and others. “ Patient Safety Features of Clinical Computer Systems: 
Questionnaire Survey of GP Views. ” Quality and Safety in Health Care, 2005, 14,
164 – 168. 
 7. Failover is the capability to switch over automatically to a redundant or standby 
computer server, system, or network upon the failure or abnormal termination of 
the previously active server, system, or network. Failover happens without human 
intervention and generally without warning, unlike switchover. 
 8. Rapid Adoption of RFID in Healthcare , May 8, 2006. IDTechEx. Available at: 
 http://www.idtechex.com/research/articles/rapid_adoption_of_rfid_in_health
care_00000470.asp (accessed November 11, 2008). 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 ECRI, a nonprofi t health care research services agency, is the source of numerous publications and programs, including Healthcare Control System, Health Technology 
Forecast, Health Devices, Health Care Standards Directory Online, and 
Information Security for Biomedical Technology: A HIPAA Compliance Guide.
For more information, go to the ECRI Web site at http://www.ecri.org 
Suggested Reading 445
c14.indd 445 3/2/09 1:01:15 PM
c14.indd 446 3/2/09 1:01:15 PM
447
 APPENDIX 14.1
IT GLOSSARY FOR RISK MANAGERS 
@ (at symbol) Separates the specifi c user ID and domain name of an Internet address. 
Access The ability to use a computer or program to store or retrieve information. 
Address A unique identifi cation assigned to a specifi c computer. To send e - mail, the sender needs the Internet 
address. Usually consists of a user ID, the @ symbol, and a domain name and can use or include numbers as well 
as words. 
Anonymous FTP A public fi le transfer protocol (FTP) fi le archive that is made available for Internet users to 
access. 
Application program A program designed to carry out specifi c tasks for the user. Such programs may be purchased from commercial software companies or written by computer staff. 
Application service provider (ASP) A company that offers individuals or enterprises access over the Internet to 
applications and related services that would otherwise have to be located in their own personal or enterprise 
computers. 
Archie An Internet search tool used to locate fi les on anonymous FTP sites. 
ASCII American Standard Code for Information Interchange, a standard code used in computer telecommunication that allows computers to exchange text - based fi les. 
Bandwidth The volume of data that a particular transmission channel can carry at once. There are several media 
for transmission; two types are twisted - pair telephone wires and fi ber optics. 
Bits per second (bps) Transmission rate; the higher the rate, the more data can be transmitted. 
Browser Software that enables users to move around the World Wide Web to explore Web sites. Examples are 
Netscape and Internet Explorer. 
Bug An error that occurs in a computer program. 
Bulletin board system (BBS) Software that allows messages to be left on a computer from a remote computer. 
Chat A real - time typed conversation between two or more people over the Internet or a proprietary computer 
network such as America Online or CompuServe. 
.com A commercial organization ’ s domain designation. 
CPR Computerized patient record. 
Database An entire collection of stored data. 
Domain The name of the computer that is connected to the Internet. Computers are uniquely identifi ed by a 
series of numbers. The domain name system translates those numbers into a name to which users can relate. 
Download To transfer or capture data fi les from a database to the user ’ s computer storage area; to retrieve fi les 
from an external computer to one ’ s own computer. 
.edu An educational institution ’ s domain designation. 
Electronic data processing (EDP) The automation of a routine manual clerical activity (for example, an association membership list). 
c14.indd 447 3/2/09 1:01:15 PM
448 Information Technologies and Risk Management
Electronic signature A feature that allows a physician to sign off on a report through the information system by 
using a special password, logging off, or some other means that does not require signing a hard copy. 
EPR Electronic patient record. 
FAQ Frequently asked questions; a fi le that contains questions and answers about specifi c topics. 
Field Specifi c pieces of data that will be coded as a sequence of characters. Each fi eld is given a name (incident 
type, incident location, date, shift). 
File A subset of the database that is stored and used as a unit. 
File transfer protocol (FTP) A service that supports fi le transfers between local and remote computers. 
Gateway A hardware and software interface system that links two different types of computer systems, such as 
a mainframe and a LAN. 
Gopher A search tool that displays information through a system of menus and menu choices. 
.gov A government agency ’ s domain designation. 
Hardware The pieces of equipment used by the system. 
Home page A location on the World Wide Web that identifi es an individual or organization, generally used to 
refer to the fi rst screen at a site. A home page welcomes visitors and points them to other information available at 
the Web site. 
HTML Hypertext markup language, the standard format for documents on the World Wide Web. 
http Hypertext transfer protocol, used by the World Wide Web for transmitting Web pages and other hypertext -
 linked fi les over the Internet. 
Hypertext Text that has contextual links to other related text. For example, if a document uses a term that is 
defi ned or explained in depth somewhere else, a hypertext document would include a link from that term to the 
related text. 
Internet An interconnected collection of computer networks. 
Internet relay chat (IRC) Software that allows real - time typed conversations between two or more people over 
the Internet. 
Listserv Trademarked name for an electronic mailing list used to transmit an electronic newsletter to all its subscribers or to facilitate a discussion of a special - interest group. All e - mail sent to the Listserv is sent to everyone 
on the list. 
Mailing list A group discussion distributed through e - mail. 
Management information system (MIS) System, generally for middle and operating management, that integrates data from several functional areas and produces much of its output on an on - demand basis. 
.mil A military organization ’ s domain designation. 
Modem A modulator/demodulator, an electronic device that translates computer signals into a form suitable for 
long - distance transmission, usually by telephone; the hardware that translates between analog and digital so that 
a digital computer can communicate over an analog telephone line. 
.net An Internet organization ’ s domain designation. 
Newsgroup A discussion group on Usenet. Each newsgroup covers a specifi c topic. Within a newsgroup, there 
are initial postings listed by subject and subsequent response postings. Newsgroups are not real - time conversations; the postings are stored and forwarded and often last for weeks or months. 
Node Any single computer connected to a network. 
c14.indd 448 3/2/09 1:01:16 PM
.org A not - for - profi t organization ’ s domain designation. 
Packet A unit of data sent across a packet - switching network. 
Prompt An on - screen instruction. 
Protocol A set of rules governing communication between computers on the Internet. 
Record A collection of related fi elds describing an entity. 
Software The programs required for the computer to perform desired operations. 
Systems software Software that makes the entire computer system operate. It is provided by the manufacturer. 
TCP/IP Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol, the standardized set of computer guidelines that allow 
different types of machines to talk with each other and exchange information over the Internet. 
Telnet A terminal emulation protocol that allows Internet users to log into a host computer from a remote location using a Telnet program. 
Upload To transfer information or data fi les from a user ’ s computer to another computer. 
URL The uniform (or universal) resource locator, a unique identifi er that points to a specifi c site on the World 
Wide Web. 
Usenet A collection of discussion areas (bulletin boards) known as newsgroups on the Internet. 
Virus Software designed to cause damage to computers or fi les. Viruses generally enter a computer system via 
fi les received on fl oppy disk or over networks. 
Web site An organization ’ s or individual ’ s Web pages, the fi rst of which is called the home page. 
Appendix 14.1 449
c14.indd 449 3/2/09 1:01:18 PM
c14.indd 450 3/2/09 1:01:19 PM
451
CHAPTER
 15 
RISK MANAGEMENT 
METRICS 
 JUDITH NAPIER , TRISTA JOHNSON 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to describe the specifi c steps for successful performance improvement 
■ To be able to articulate how key process measures are defi ned 
■ To be able to identify the seven pillars of quality in health care 
■ To be able to defi ne fi ve characteristics identifi ed with good measures 
c15.indd 451 3/2/09 1:02:00 PM
452 Risk Management Metrics
 This chapter defi nes metrics that are useful when measuring the success of a risk management program. Risk management professionals need to determine how risk 
 management is defi ned in the organization, the essential components to be measured, 
to whom the measurements will be provided, and how success will be determined. 
This chapter focuses on traditional measurements and provides information to assist 
organizations that are linking patient safety and risk management processes. 
 Risk management is defi ned in several ways. Broadly defi ned, “ risk management 
includes any activity, process or policy to reduce liability exposure. From both a 
patient safety and a fi nancial perspective, it is vital that health centers conduct risk 
management activities aimed at preventing harm to patients and reducing medical 
malpractice claims. ” 1
 It is sometimes considered in processes related to adverse outcomes and claims 
handling when litigation occurs. Unless the risk management process is clearly defi ned 
in an organization, it is diffi cult to determine the appropriate measurements to apply. 
Also, consideration should be given as to whether one is describing risk prevention or 
The authors thank Marva West Tan, associate director, Quality Initiative, State of Maryland, 
 Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, for her research assistance in developing this 
 chapter.
KEY CONCEPTS
■ High-reliability research has focused on the fundamental principles that need to be 
in place for an organization to develop predictable processes producing dependable outcomes.
■ Benchmarking involves uncovering best practices wherever they exist.
 ■ A “total cost of risk” report provides a fi nancial snapshot of the cost to the organization of the risk management program across all lines of insurance and operating 
business units.
 ■ The “plan, do, check, act” (PDCA) cycle offers health care systems a simple yet effective way to measure and modify change based on the effect on the quality outcome of the change they are attempting to achieve.
 ■ In most health care organizations, potential accidents are rarely reported through 
traditional safety event or incident reporting systems.
■ The most useful metrics support strategic goals of the health care organization 
and the risk management program and produce actionable information for use by 
the governing body, medical staff, risk management professional, or other 
stakeholders.
c15.indd 452 3/2/09 1:02:01 PM
risk mitigation after an event has occurred. Risk prevention activities are proactive 
and risk mitigation are reactive initiatives. Each would have different descriptions, 
expectations, and processes. 
 Risk analysis is also a process described in multiple ways. Risk analysis may 
involve a review of data, a process, or a situation to learn and apply the information for 
trends or patterns. Risk analysis is sometimes used to quantify risk frequency or severity or to describe the magnitude of potential risk. This would suggest that there is a 
screening process or severity rating applicable to the events, which can be used to 
establish priorities of risk mitigation efforts. Another defi nition of risk analysis equates 
to the liability assessment used to determine the legal liability exposure of a specifi c 
event and the subsequently assigning of a value to the potential fi nancial loss. 
 The terms risk management and risk analysis are often used interchangeably, yet 
they are not synonymous. Risk analysis is part of the risk management process. Before 
measuring the success of a facility ’ s risk management program, the risk management 
professional needs to establish what the terms mean to the various stakeholders in the 
organization. 
 BENCHMARKING DEFINED 
 The American Productivity and Quality Center (APQC) defi nes benchmarking as “ the 
process of identifying, learning, and adapting outstanding practices and processes 
from any organization, anywhere in the world, to help an organization improve its performance. Benchmarking gathers the tacit knowledge — the know - how, judgments, 
and enablers — - that explicit knowledge often misses. ” 2
 Another well - known expert in the area of benchmarking, Robert C. Camp, has 
described benchmarking as “ the search for industry best practices that lead to superior 
performances. ” 3
 Background 
 The Xerox Corporation was one of the fi rst companies in America to develop and use 
benchmarking as a method to understand its competition. In 1976, after the Japanese 
excelled in the offi ce copier market, Xerox recognized the need to do things differently. 
In 1979, Xerox introduced benchmarking methods as a means to study its competitors ’ 
products and to compare to and contrast its own products and processes. 
 When Xerox fi rst applied benchmarking principles to the manufacturing of its 
products, signifi cant changes were made to the processes that led to incorporating the 
best features of the competitors ’ products. Success in manufacturing led to implementation of benchmarking principles in other parts of the organization, including maintenance, warehousing, distribution, and billing. Xerox quickly found that the principles 
applied to all aspects of the company. 
 Many tools are now available to assist organizations in benchmarking. In 1994, 
the U.S. Department of Defense produced a document that establishes a framework 
 Benchmarking Defi ned 453
c15.indd 453 3/2/09 1:02:01 PM
454 Risk Management Metrics
for managing process improvement using benchmarking as a process. 4
 The tool introduced specifi c steps for successful performance improvement: 
 Establishing a strong foundation by selecting an improvement project, analyzing 
the process, and calculating metrics and gaps in performance 
 Selecting benchmark partners with “ best in class ” processes to form a benchmark 
team. Planning for productive sessions with tight agendas, trained personnel, and 
defi ned responsibilities 
 Establishing an appropriate benchmark through site visits, data gathering, interviews, and questionnaires 
 Analyzing the results and planning to make changes to achieve a best - in - class 
model 
 The key process measures are defi ned in this tool in the following categories: 
Fitness for purpose (FFP): These measures record how well the process is satisfying the stakeholders ’ interests, requirements, and desires. They defi ne effectiveness measures. 
Conformance to standard (CTS): These measures record how well the process is 
conforming to rules, regulations, standards, requirements, and specifi cations. 
These are quality measures. 
Cycle time (CT): These measures record how responsive the process is. They are 
considered effi ciency measures. 
Process cost (PC): These measures record the fi xed or investment costs associated 
with the process. They are overhead measures. 
 Currently, benchmarking in risk management relies on national data such as average cost of claims, average verdict data, and number of staff in risk management 
departments, so as to compare results to other health care risk management departments. The Risk and Insurance Management Society ( http://www.rims.org ) produces 
an annual benchmark survey that reviews the overall cost of risk for many different 
types of organizations. Health care has been adapting these tools to measure the effectiveness of risk management programs in the hospital and health care settings. The 
information compares an organization ’ s cost of risk against industry competitors to 
gauge the cost of effectiveness of risk management departments. 
 However, “ benchmarking involves uncovering best practices where ever they 
exist. ” 5
 Thus it is important to compare not only data but also processes. Benchmarking 
suggests that the risk management professional looks at the processes that are used to 
achieve results and then modifi es internal processes to gain better results with the 
benchmark. Instead, the data are often used as a gauge to establish what is an acceptable range of results, and therefore, the organization is able to stay the course. However, 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c15.indd 454 3/2/09 1:02:02 PM
an organization should evaluate internal processes affecting the numbers and defi ne, 
measure, and monitor the processes that affect the data. 
 True benchmarking through the sharing of lessons learned in system changes and 
system failures is a new direction. Using process improvement measures in risk 
 management raises the issues of linkages between patient safety, quality, and risk management efforts. Deciding whether these disciplines fi t together suggests that the information collected in each of these disciplines has connectivity. The health care industry 
is trying to understand what the data mean across the enterprise, rather than in each 
distinct discipline. 
 With the advent of the 1999 IOM report To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health 
System, and the follow - up report, Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health Care System 
for the 21st Century , the bar was raised for health care to look at its systems in a new way. 6
The industry shifted focus to the patient and asked whether this is the best that health care 
has to offer our communities. In many cases, the answer was a resounding no, and so 
began the patient safety movement. 
 Avedis Donabedian, widely acknowledged as the father of health systems research, 
introduced a model in which he identifi ed the “ seven pillars ” of quality in health care: 7
 1. Effi cacy—improving a patient ’ s well - being 
 2. Effi ciency — obtaining the greatest improvement at the lowest cost 
 3. Optimality — balancing costs and benefi ts 
 4. Acceptability — adapting care to the wishes, expectations, and values of the patient 
 5. Legitimacy— providing care acceptable to society at large 
 6. Equity — distributing care fairly 
 7. Cost — providing the greatest benefi t at the lowest cost while optimizing the cost -
 benefi t ratio. 
 Donabedian built his premises on these pillars — that health problems are not a 
collection of unrelated events but rather a complex process that follows general principles. This breakthrough thinking in his initial work is accepted today as a fundamental 
principle. The patient safety movement and the body of work that has begun to refl ect 
the science of safety clearly recognizes the complexity in health care systems. High -
 reliability research has focused on the fundamental principles that need to be in place 
for an organization to develop predictable processes that produce dependable outcomes. Such principles include a just culture, open reporting systems, and teamwork 
and communication across multiple disciplines. 
 In a just culture, everyone speaks up. The current model of reporting incidents, 
which risk management has relied on for several years, is based on a voluntary system. 
Unfortunately, the feedback loop has often resulted in the disciplining of the individual 
who was involved in the event. To break that cycle, risk management needs to team 
 Benchmarking Defi ned 455
c15.indd 455 3/2/09 1:02:02 PM
456 Risk Management Metrics
with patient safety to create a just culture for reporting events, to streamline the reporting process, to decrease the time needed to complete reports, and to develop essential 
feedback loops to caregivers when system failures are reported. If the health care facility begins to shape its efforts around these foundations, the work focuses on the patient 
rather than on the organization. This makes the risk management program a multidimensional part of the health care organization, rather than a one - dimensional function 
managing after - the - fact investigations and litigation. 
 Traditional risk management measures continue to be important cornerstones in 
program evaluation, but they are not the only focus for an organization interested 
in making signifi cant improvements in safety. Traditional measures will be described, 
along with how they are typically collected and analyzed. 
 CLAIMS 
 Risk management professionals often choose medical professional liability claims as 
an area to benchmark because claims represents measurable outcomes, claims data is 
readily available, and a clear baseline can be established. 
 Total Number of Claims 
 Most health care risk management professionals track the number of claims that the 
organization is involved with at any given time. The total number of claims represents, 
arguably, high - level results of the safety and risk program at a facility. The measurement is attained by counting the total number of claims for a given time period and can 
be tracked in a line graph plotting the monthly, quarterly, or annual number of claims. 
The advantage of this measure is that it provides a baseline of the volume of claims 
against the organization in several areas. The disadvantage is that the numbers are 
often too small to be statistically signifi cant, and the claims that are currently active in 
an organization refl ect events that occurred months or even years before the report. 
 Just as the organization has to defi ne risk management and risk analysis, it also 
has to defi ne what constitutes a claim. Many organizations identify a claim as any 
event that the risk management professional thinks could give rise to compensation or 
a formal demand for compensation, be it a letter or fi led lawsuit. Other organizations 
defi ne a claim as a fi led lawsuit. It is important that the organization defi ne how it will 
use the term claim and then consistently apply that defi nition. 
 Total Number of Potential Claims 
 Many health care risk management programs track potential claims, such as events 
that involve identifi able patient harm or events where there is no legal activity or 
demand for compensation but the risk management professional determines that there 
is potential for an assertion. These potential claims provide a sense of the volume of 
potentially compensable events that the organization is experiencing, allowing for 
early intervention and disposition. 
c15.indd 456 3/2/09 1:02:03 PM
 Cost to the Organization for Claims 
 The total claims costs, along with the claims volume, are good basic measurements of 
a traditional risk management program. Total claims costs include expense and indemnity dollars, both reserved and paid. Expense dollars generally include the cost to 
defend or settle a claim, along with the cost of investigation, medical record copying 
fees, deposition cost, expert witness fees, attorneys ’ fees, and the like. Indemnity costs 
include the dollars necessary to settle the case with the plaintiff and can represent 
medical cost (past, present, and future), lost wages, pain and suffering, and so on. The 
advantage of this cost measurement is that it provides a direct measure of fi nancial 
obligation, but the disadvantage is that the values are quite variable. 
 Potential Claims by Event Type or Cause 
 Risk management professionals can isolate, per specialty, the number and severity of 
cases so as to implement specifi c risk prevention strategies. However, the breakdown 
of claims into subgroups by event type or cause often results in such small numbers in 
the subgroups that they cannot be used effectively for tracking purposes. 
 Total Cost of Risk 
 The total - cost - of - risk report is a means of capturing multiple data sets to describe the 
risk management structure and services so as to focus on the issues relative to 
the fi nancial measurement of risk. Taking a snapshot in time allows the organization to 
look at the insurance program structure (limits, coverage, and premium costs); 
expenses to run the program, including salaries of risk and claims staff; funding of the 
self - insured retention or deductible; claims adjusting costs if an outside TPA is used; 
medical bill write - offs; and costs to defend or manage claims. The administrative 
expenses, including the costs related to risk management and loss control, audit fees, 
actuary fees, and the like, should be factored into the total cost of risk. 
 A total - cost - of - risk report provides a fi nancial snapshot of the cost to the organization of the risk management program across all lines of insurance and operating 
business units. An example is provided in Exhibit 15.1 . 
 Qualitative Measurements of Risk Management Programs 
 Many organizations track broad process measures that indicate that the structure of a 
risk management program has been implemented. These measures are most important 
in an organization where the risk management program is relatively new. They include 
the creation of policies and procedures to document the risk management program 
or the communication of risk management issues to senior leadership or the board of 
directors. Although these measurements indicate whether a basic risk management 
infrastructure has been established, they do not refl ect how successful the organization 
has been in reducing risk exposures. The disadvantage of traditional measurements for 
risk management is they do not provide data that can be acted on in any meaningful 
way because the data refl ect fi nancial risks for events that occurred in the distant past. 
 Claims 457
c15.indd 457 3/2/09 1:02:03 PM
458 Risk Management Metrics
 A method often used in the past is to benchmark the number (frequency) of claims 
in a particular area against the cost or severity of those cases. For instance, tracking 
the number of neonatal injury cases and the average cost of those cases in various 
parts of the country is one method risk management has used to provide a focus to one 
clinical area. Defense costs and the average cost to defend certain claims are calculated 
EXHIBIT 15.1. Total Cost of Risk Report
Provides a snapshot in time used to summarize, inform, and improve the health care system‘s total cost of risk by using data to identify risk trends for the health system and 
individual business units
 YEARS FOR COMPARISONS
 2005 2004 2003 2002
Premium Expense
• Gross premiums
• Broker fees
• State fees
• Bonds/Securities
• Other
• Excess (state-related)
Subtotal
Loss Expenses
• Funded losses
• Claims adjusting—TPA (insourced)
• Medical/Rehab (insourced)
• Deductible retained
• Investigation (business unit claims and litigation)
Subtotal
Administrative Expenses
• Department costs related to risk
• Loss control: System
 Local
 Outsourced
• Audit Fees
• Actuary Fees
Subtotal
GRAND TOTAL
c15.indd 458 3/2/09 1:02:03 PM
and tracked over time. This might be relevant information; however, it only identifi es 
a potential problem. To address the problem and move toward resolution, it is necessary to apply process improvement in a quantifi able way to compare a facility ’ s processes against other facilities that might have better results. 
 Other measurement tools for performance and process improvements have been 
proposed by W. Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran. Their work is viewed as fundamental for quality improvement principles and tools for industry and health care. 8
 Deming focused on the theoretical aspects for managing organizations and emphasized systems effect on outcomes. His work to defi ne systems and understand variation in practice supported much of the early work in health care quality. 
 Juran had a more practical approach to managing quality in organizations. He 
used principles to implement strategic quality processes to manage quality functions 
in organizations. Quality improvement, quality planning, and quality controls were 
touted as the means to affect the strategic quality planning for organizations. 
 Together, these two giants established the premise that top management needs to 
be the driver for long - term commitment and change. Further, systems were more at the 
root of problems in organizations than the failure of individuals operating within 
the faulty systems. Deming and Juran began to question the incentives that had been 
built to motivate practices that were based on faulty premises. Great importance was 
placed on planning upstream, which would ultimately affect the output downstream. 
Finally, they recognized the need to understand process variation and the effect this 
was having on overall improvement. 
 MEASURING CHANGE 
 The “ plan, do, check, act ” (PDCA) cycle offers health care systems a simple yet effective way to measure and modify change based on the effect on the quality outcome of 
the change they are attempting to achieve. Sometimes it is referred to as the Deming 
cycle, after Deming introduced the concept in the 1950s. PDCA is an improvement 
cycle based on a scientifi c method of proposing a change in process, implementing the 
change, measuring the results, and taking appropriate action. It has four stages: 
 1. Plan. Determine goals for a process and changes needed to achieve them. 
 2. Do. Implement the changes. 
 3. Check. Evaluate the results in terms of performance. 
 4. Act. Standardize and stabilize the change or begin the cycle again, depending on 
the results. 
 Metrics 
 A metric is a standard used to measure and assess performance or a process. The new 
prospective patient safety measurements provide a robust set of measurements to 
assess the safety of an organization and guide improvement efforts. 
 Measuring Change 459
c15.indd 459 3/2/09 1:02:04 PM
460 Risk Management Metrics
 Measurements typically used as part of patient safety work often embrace reactive 
and proactive measurements. Take patient falls data as an example. The patient falls 
rate (number of inpatients falling in a given time period divided by the total number of 
inpatient days) is often a retrospective measurement used to track the outcome 
of patient safety efforts. The patient falls rate tells leadership, risk management, and 
the patient safety staff whether process improvements are making a difference in reducing patient falls. Other types of measures often tracked in a patient falls prevention initiative include concurrent data, such as the percentage of patients that receive a falls 
risk assessment or the number of patients scored as high risk with an intervention in 
place to reduce the fall risk. These process measures indicate how well the nursing staff 
is addressing the issue of patient fall risk for the patient population and implementing 
appropriate care plans to reduce the risk of falls based on patients ’ risk profi les. 
 Another type of measure, called a balancing measure, is also used in prospective 
patient safety work. A balancing measure for the patient falls work would be the number 
of patients who receive a one - on - one attendant. This measure would help provide an assessment of whether the fall risk is decreasing because of the increased use of one - on - one attendants, rather than the more robust and less resource - draining prevention methods. 
 Good Catches and Near Misses 
 Beyond the typically reported safety events, hospitals have begun reporting events 
called “ near misses ” or “ good catches. ” These events are not true events in the traditional risk management defi nition but rather are occurrences that are identifi ed before 
they become events. The Joint Commission has used the term near miss in its sentinel 
event program to mean events that did not have a signifi cant outcome but might have 
if the situation had been repeated. Similarly, good catch is a synonymous term used to 
describe an event caught before it harmed the patient. An example might be a nurse 
who prepared medications for two patients in separate rooms, walking into the fi rst 
patient ’ s room to administer the medication and almost giving the patient the wrong 
medications but catching the mistake before administering the medication in error. 
 Tracking these events and reporting on a monthly basis will do little for an organization except to demonstrate how staff members are reporting situations that could be 
acted on to prevent events before they happen. The underlying data on the events are 
most useful to guide organizational improvement efforts aimed at preventing signifi -
cant events, rather than waiting until a major event occurs before action is taken. The 
best way to analyze such data is fi rst to organize them into categories and then analyze 
the details to understand the processes leading to the near misses. Process review 
and improvement, using tools such as the PDCA model, enable the organization to 
monitor improvements and continually alter processes and measure results. 
 Accidents Waiting to Happen 
 In most health care organizations, potential accidents are rarely reported through traditional safety event or incident reporting systems. The “ accident waiting to happen ” is 
c15.indd 460 3/2/09 1:02:04 PM
an event that most likely does not involve any specifi c patient but has the potential to 
cause harm to patients. For example, this might include the manner in which a medication is stored in a cabinet next to another medication with a similar name, potentially 
leading to error when the wrong medication is chosen. This type of situation is useful 
in guiding a health care organization to implement process improvements before 
adverse events occur. This information is important in leadership rounding programs, 
as an extra or external pair of eyes can pick up potential safety situations more easily 
than staff routinely working in the environment. 
 Comparative Data on Patient Safety 
 So many health care organizations established separate patient safety data collection 
processes following the 1999 IOM report that the National Quality Forum assigned a 
council to decide on a standard national patient safety taxonomy that will serve as the 
basic data collection taxonomy for future measurements. Standardizing a Patient Safety 
Taxonomy , released in 2006, is available at http://www.qualityforum.org/pdf/reports/
taxonomy.pdf. 
 This taxonomy will be a guide for health care organizations in standardizing the 
data elements collected. This will allow for comparison of data across hospitals to 
determine trends of signifi cant events and identify areas for improvement on a larger 
scale. Alignment with this taxonomy will be a key task for health care organizations 
over the next several years to permit reliable comparisons of data. 
 The most useful metrics support strategic goals of the health care organization and 
the risk management program and produce actionable information for use by the governing body, medical staff, risk management professional, or other stakeholders. 
Developing meaningful metrics that measure the factor desired requires time and 
thought. Sometimes mentally working backward from desired outcomes or the data 
needed to support decision making will lead to the needed process or outcome measure. Small - group brainstorming about the service or program that is being measured 
may also provide a focus for measurement and potential measures. Typically, developing good outcome measures poses the most diffi cult challenge, as outcomes may be 
delayed or under the infl uence of multiple factors outside the risk management program ’ s control. Relying solely on process measures may be a prudent fi rst step when 
devising a new measurement system or it might be possible to identify some measurable short - term or partial outcomes. It is more desirable to develop a few robust measures than to count multiple items for vague purposes. 
 DEVELOPING NEW METRICS 
 The following characteristics are associated with good measures: 
Quantifi ability. Although this is an obvious characteristic, it is also a challenging one, as the broad goal in program evaluation is often to measure the “ success ” 
of a specifi c effort. The subjective term success must be measurable in ways such as 
■
 Developing New Metrics 461
c15.indd 461 3/2/09 1:02:04 PM
462 Risk Management Metrics
fewer claims, reduced legal fees, or increased physician reporting, so that the data that 
must be collected can be identifi ed. Qualitative information, such as comments from 
clinical staff, might provide some useful data when you cannot identify an objective 
quantifi able measure. 
Sensitivity or responsiveness. The item to be measured is believed to change 
over time and to be responsive to risk management activities. The metric can capture 
or record these changes. 
Meaningfulness. The metric addresses a key aspect of program operation or 
desired outcomes and is likely to be important as a basis for decision making. A meaningful measure will be understood both inside and outside the risk management 
department. 
Uniqueness. The metric measures one item or factor or, if it measures more 
than one factor, is divided into subcomponents that each measure one item. For example, a metric regarding the number of adverse events and near misses reported in a 
quarter should have a separate indicator for counting adverse events and another for 
counting near misses. 
Realm of control. Is the item being measured under the direct control of the 
risk management program or thought to be infl uenced by organizationwide risk management activities? If there are other internal or external factors affecting this measure, they need to be identifi ed so that they can be factored into data analysis and 
reporting. Considering realm of control is particularly important when developing 
and reporting outcome measures. Jurisdiction, new state medical professional liability 
legislation, relative number, and expertise of the plaintiffs ’ bar are external factors that 
might affect the risk management program ’ s ability to reduce aggregate claim settlement amounts. 
Feasibility. Are the data needed for the measure readily available or easily 
derived from existing health information management systems? How often will data 
be needed: quarterly, monthly, weekly, or at some other frequency? Will data need 
to be pulled from various sources within the health system, such as from the medical 
record, incident reports, or audits? If the measure involves new data collection, how 
would this be accomplished, and what resources would be needed? Could data collection be piggybacked on an existing effort? Could the data collection process be 
 automated through an electronic medical record system? If possible, do a rough cost -
 benefi t analysis for implementing this measure. Reducing the burden of ongoing data 
collection should be a factor in the design of any new metric. 
Validity. Does the metric actually measure what it is supposed to measure? 
Few risk management professionals routinely perform any statistical tests of validity of 
a measure. Most rely on face validity, which involves consensus by experts in the fi eld 
that this is a reasonable measure of what is being measured or some dimension thereof. 
Seek some internal or external review of draft measures by professional colleagues or 
■
■
■
■
■
■
c15.indd 462 3/2/09 1:02:05 PM
others knowledgeable in risk management, and try to improve the validity of new 
measures. If more assurance is needed regarding validity, get assistance from a statistician or health service researcher. One particular area of concern with relation to validity 
in risk and safety work is the underreporting associated with voluntarily reported safety 
events or incidents. When using trends or rates of voluntarily reported safety events, 
validity of the data is a concern if underreporting of events is a factor. 
Reliability. Will the measure produce similar results in the hands of different 
users over time? If the measure involves considerable additional data collection, a 
simple test of interrater reliability (reliability among multiple raters) might be worthwhile before proceeding to full implementation. Interrater reliability indicates the consistency of data collection among separate individuals collecting the same data. For 
example, if two individuals are abstracting the same data elements and end up with the 
same results, there is high interrater reliability.
Baseline. It is important when selecting a metric to look for one that has a baseline period available to use as a comparison to the follow - up data once improvements 
have been put into place. A baseline is a measurement during a period of time before an 
intervention. It is collected to provide this comparison. Without a baseline measure, it is 
diffi cult to ascertain whether the current data indicate a change from the previous environment or if any improvement has been made. 
Multidimensionality. Consider measuring different dimensions of the risk 
management program by using several structure, process, and outcome measures to 
develop a fuller picture of program functioning. In addition to these three standbys of 
measurement, many national evaluation programs, such as the Quality Improvement 
Organizations ’ 8th Scope of Work,9
 include other types of measurements, such as 
patients ’ experience of care; infrastructure enhancements, such as use of health information technology; and cultural readiness for patient safety. 
 Using the right metrics helps create a dashboard or scorecard for risk management that directs leaders and board members to answer the question, Is the risk management program successful in its efforts? 
 A scorecard is an evaluation tool that specifi es the criteria the health care facility ’ s 
key stakeholders will use to rate risk management performance in relation to the 
requirements. By contrast, a dashboard is a tool used for collecting and reporting information about vital customer requirements or your business ’ s performance for key customers. Dashboards provide a quick summary of process or performance outcomes. 10 
 An effective performance metrics system does all of the following: 11
 Defi nes what is important from the customer ’ s perspective 
 Builds measures that support the desired performance 
 Creates an environment of trust where real issues can be discussed openly and 
progress is celebrated 
■
■
■
■
■
■
 Developing New Metrics 463
c15.indd 463 3/2/09 1:02:05 PM
464 Risk Management Metrics
 Is routinely reviewed and analyzed 
 Effective metrics will have the following attributes: 12
 They drive better decision making. 
 They are objective and easily measured. 
 They always result in action. 
 Over time, they are predictive, not simply reactive. 
 They are easily understood by multiple stakeholders. 
 They drive improvements in effi ciency and effectiveness, customer satisfaction, 
and employee satisfaction in an environment of mutual respect. 
 They are owned and regularly reviewed by management and employees alike. 
 Performance metrics can be extremely useful to assess the effectiveness of a risk 
management program. Using predetermined goals that are measured against performance standards takes the subjectivity out of the effectiveness question. Further, by 
creating a team of people at the inception of the process to help defi ne the measures 
and by monitoring the suitability and effectiveness of the measures, using predetermined goals permits the organization to stay focused on the risk management goals. 
 The Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) ( http://www.ihi.org ) has 
defi ned measures for improvement as different from measures for research. It is important to differentiate the two. Measures for research have a purpose to discover new 
knowledge. The purpose of measurement for process improvement is to bring new 
 knowledge into daily practice. 
 Research typically relies on one large blind test, whereas process improvement 
uses many sequential and observable tests of change. Volumes of data are gathered in 
research to ensure that all bases are covered. Just enough information is gathered to 
learn and complete another cycle of improvement, and research usually takes long 
periods of time to report on the results. Performance improvement relies on small 
tests of change to accelerate improvement. 
 SUMMARY 
 Connecting fi nancial information with clinical risk information begins to paint a picture 
for the organization ’ s leadership of the importance of risk management and patient safety 
to the viability of the health care organization. It is important to represent both components to relate the true picture of risk prevention and management in the organization. 
 Clinical risk measures focus on issues such as clinical and environmental risk 
assessments and on identifying gaps from regulatory standards to practices with strong 
links to patient outcomes and claims. Integrating the quality data and the risk management data not only provides the organization with a sense of continuity and teamwork 
between the disciplines but also begins to describe the various components of issues 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c15.indd 464 3/2/09 1:02:05 PM
from a quality viewpoint, a patient safety vantage, and a risk management and prevention perspective. 
 Risk management, patient safety, and quality improvement are all vehicles currently used in health care to build a safe and reliable system of patient care. Past work 
has involved individual departments separately collecting data and analyzing that 
information to draw conclusions and direct the organization in setting plans and goals 
independent of each other. As risk management professionals continue to defi ne and 
expand their professional discipline and assess their organizations ’ readiness to change, 
it is incumbent that past models be reevaluated. The disciplines of risk management, 
patient safety, and quality improvement need to integrate their approach to patient 
care. This integration will ultimately support the effi cient use of organizational 
resources to improve outcomes. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Balancing measure 
 Benchmarking 
 Conformance to standards 
 Cycle time 
 Dashboard 
 Fitness for purpose 
 Frequency 
 Institute for Healthcare Improvement 
 Metric 
 Near miss 
 Performance improvement 
 Process cost 
 Realm of control 
 Reliability 
 Responsiveness 
 Risk analysis 
 Scorecard 
 Total cost of risk 
 Validity 
 ACRONYMS 
 APC 
 APQC 
 CT 
 CTS 
 FFP 
 IHI 
 PC 
 PDCA 
 NOTES 
 1. OIG Final Report: Risk Management at Health Centers (OEI - 10 - 03 - 00050) 
Department of Health & Human Services, Offi ce of Inspector General, Washington, 
D.C., February 17, 2005, p. 8. Available at: http://www.oig.hhs.gov/oei/reports/
oei - 01 - 03 - 00050.pdf (accessed November 10, 2008). 
 2. APQC. Glossary of Benchmarking Terms, page 1. Available online at: http://www
.apqc.org/portal/apqc/ksn/GlossaryofBenchmarkingTerms.pdf?paf_gear_
id=contentgearhome & paf_dm=full & pageselect=contentitem & docid=119519 
(accessed November 11, 2008). 
 Notes 465
c15.indd 465 3/2/09 1:02:06 PM
466 Risk Management Metrics
 3. Productive Solutions Australia Pty. Ltd. “ Benchmarking, ” 2001, http://www.pro
ductivesolutions.com.au/Benchmarking.html .
 4. Davis, R. I., and Davis, R. A. How to Prepare for and Conduct a Benchmark 
Project. Washington, D.C.: Department of Defense, 1994. 
 5. Productive Solutions, “ Benchmarking. ” 
 6. Kohn, L. T., Corrigan, J. M., and Donaldson, M. S. (eds.). To Err Is Human: 
Building a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 
1999; Institute of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health Care 
System for the 21st Century . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2001. 
 7. Best, M., and Neuhauser, D. “ Avedis Donabedian: Father of Quality Assurance 
and Poet. ” Quality and Safety in Health Care, 2004, 13, 472 – 473. 
 8. Landesberg, P. “ In the Beginning, There Were Deming and Juran. ” Journal for 
Quality and Participation, Nov. - Dec. 1999, pp. 59 – 61. 
 9. Harris, Y. Quality Improvement Organizations: 8th Scope of Work: Transforming 
Nursing Home Quality, 2007, http://www.ltcombudsman.org/uploads/NCCNHR8
thscope0306.ppt .
 10. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. “ Medicare Takes Major Step Toward 
Impr oving Quality of Care: Protecting Medicare Trust Fund Is Also Goal. ” 
Press release, Apr. 7, 2005, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/apps/media/press/release.asp
?Counter=1421 .
 11. Six Sigma. “ Six Sigma and Quality Metrics, ” 2005, http://healthcare.isixsigma.com 
/me/metrics .
 12. Romeu, M. Developing a Performance Metrics System: An Introduction to 
Performance Management Tools. Charleston, S.C.: MR Group, 2003, p. 1. 
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Donabedian , A. “ Evaluating the Quality of Medical Care . ” Milbank Memorial Fund 
Quarterly, 1966 , 44 , 166 – 206 . 
 Juran , J. M. (ed.). A History of Managing for Quality: The Evolution, Trends, and 
Future Directions of Managing for Quality. Milwaukee : ASQC Quality Press , 
 1995 . 
 Juran , J. M. Juran on Leadership for Quality: An Executive Handbook. New York : 
 Free Press , 1989 . 
 Standards Australia . Guidelines for Managing Risk in the Health Care Sector. Canberra : 
 Standards Australia , 2001 . 
c15.indd 466 3/2/09 1:02:06 PM
467
CHAPTER
16
ACCREDITATION, 
LICENSURE, 
CERTIFICATION, AND 
SURVEYING BODIES 
 FREDERICK ROBINSON 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to understand the type of atmosphere and culture of improvement 
that will lead management and governing bodies to research and implement 
voluntary accreditations 
■ To be able to identify necessary policies, procedures, protocols, and guidelines to monitor compliance with all applicable statutes, standards, and 
regulations 
■ To be able to identify resources and understand how to access them 
■ To be able to understand the various accreditation and licensing programs 
and related standards in order to identify defi ciencies and improve the delivery of health care 
c16.indd 467 3/2/09 1:49:44 PM
468 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 This chapter acquaints the risk management professional with resources and information that will identify and explain the variety of organizations responsible for the licensure, accreditation, certifi cation, and surveying of health care organizations. 
 It provides an overview of major bodies that oversee both mandatory and voluntary activities. It examines the rationales for participating in these activities and the 
role that the risk management professional may play. In some cases, states and local 
jurisdictions maintain the right to regulate health care through licensure of institutions 
and practitioners. In all states, prescriptive regulations and rules describe the compliance elements that must be in place before a health care enterprise can do business. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ The consumer push to obtain better data about the quality of care and services 
that the medical community provides has led to increased attention to accreditation, licensure, and certifi cation bodies.
■ Failure to meet standards may adversely affect the health care organization’s ability 
to operate, provide services, meet contract requirements, or receive funding from 
sources that require compliance with specifi c standards.
■ The risk management professional who understands how to integrate risk management techniques for achieving compliance with standards and regulatory 
 requirements adds value to the health care delivery system.
■ Loss of funding due to any violation of regulatory or accreditation standards or 
public disclosure of a failure to meet established standards could result in an 
adverse effect on the health care organization’s business operations or pending or 
future litigation.
■ The health care industry will continue to be subject to increased demands for health 
care provider and payer accountability, including compliance with published standards and regulations. 
 THE CONSUMER ERA OF HEALTH CARE 
 The consumer movement in the United States has extended deep into the health care 
provider community. Health care organizations are subject to specifi c mandatory 
review and may also participate in voluntary accreditation and inspection programs 
that apply to either the organization as a whole or to specialized areas within the industry. Results are often posted in the community newspaper and on the Internet. The 
medical provider community must deal with the perceptions and expectations of 
increasingly concerned and inquiring public consumers. 
c16.indd 468 3/2/09 1:49:44 PM
 The health care industry continues to experience transition in a consumer - focused 
marketplace. An aging population in the United States increasingly demands added 
information and accountability regarding the hospital and medical provider community. 
Furthermore, consumers believe they have the right to access certain information, statistics, and background details about the medical provider community and take personal 
responsibility for obtaining them. Internet access and friendly Web browser systems 
facilitate access to data and information that had previously not been accessed so easily. 
 The consumer push to obtain better data about the quality of care and services 
that the medical community provides has placed greater focus on the development of 
accreditation, licensure, and certifi cation bodies. The medical provider community has 
been asked to be more accountable to the public to demonstrate its quality and commitment to providing health care services. 
 The medical provider community relies on meeting accreditation, licensure, and 
certifi cation standards to demonstrate its quality and effectiveness. Customer service 
satisfaction surveys continue, but the pressing questions of the purchasing public 
revolve around the clinical expertise, training, and performance record of a medical 
provider or facility. 
 The American health care system has responded to the growing public demands 
for information by meeting evolving accreditation standards and licensure requirements. Managed care growth has been subject to regional ebb and fl ow as medical 
service providers have reacted to decreasing reimbursements and loss of control of the 
managed care environment. In some areas, there has been a signifi cant shift of the population into integrated managed care delivery systems. With these changes, there has 
been an increased emphasis on measuring the quality of care. In addition, more public 
and private attention has been focused on the organizations assigned or related to 
health care organizational oversight. 
 WHAT THE HEALTH CARE RISK MANAGEMENT PROFESSIONAL 
NEEDS TO KNOW 
 Accrediting organizations and licensure, certifi cation, and surveying bodies have continued their efforts to establish requirements and regulatory standards that are subject 
to review by federal, state, and private organizations. Although it might not be the risk 
management professional ’ s job to manage or monitor compliance with published standards, the risk management professional should be familiar with the organizations 
responsible for oversight. Failure to meet standards may adversely affect the health 
care organization ’ s ability to operate, provide services, meet contract requirements, or 
receive funding from sources that require compliance with specifi c standards. 
 Risk Management Responsibilities 
 Risk management program requirements have continued to expand. Note that nearly 
every single accreditation, certifi cation, and regulatory requirement involves some 
What the Health Care Risk Management Professional Needs to Know 469
c16.indd 469 3/2/09 1:49:45 PM
470 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
form of risk management activity. At the same time, recognize that health care organizations must demonstrate a willingness to comply with published standards and regulations if they intend to succeed and remain in business. 
 The health care risk management professional must ensure collaboration with 
many professionals within the delivery system. There are too many issues and far 
too many details to expect that a single person can turn the tide of risk management 
events. The efforts must be championed by the top leadership of the organization and 
supported throughout the organization. 
 Patient safety, patient protection, and compliance with standards and regulations 
require management of outcomes data. The best - qualifi ed health care organizations 
are focusing on how to demonstrate that they deliver safe, effective, and effi cient care 
without compromising essential elements of control. One way to improve is to identify 
the ineffi cient areas of the system and to devote attention to the process of continuous 
improvement. This means that health care organizations must identify opportunities to 
improve and then design program infrastructures that support the design. Health care 
organizations that do not attend to this priority will suffer the consequences of increased 
risks, diminished fi nancial return, and lack of public confi dence. 
 The health care risk management professional is in a unique position to make a 
difference when knowledgeable and resourceful about the issues that the organization 
must address. The risk management professional who understands how to integrate 
risk management techniques for achieving compliance with standards and regulatory 
requirements adds true value to the health care delivery system. 
 Why Participate in Voluntary Accreditation Activities? 
 Given the staggering amount of mandated regulation in health care, it is reasonable to 
ask why organizations participate in additional programs, most of which are voluntary. 
There are signifi cant reasons to participate voluntarily. First, demonstrating an organization ’ s commitment to following established standards and regulations is the right 
thing to do. The principle of providing the best possible service and looking for ways 
to constantly improve that service is a core part of the medical ethic for individual 
 caregivers and for provider organizations. Moreover, the public demands it. Public 
accountability is fulfi lled through several different activities. Licensure, accreditation, 
and certifi cation make up just one category but are important in ensuring that an organization meets or exceeds contemporary expectations of quality, safety, and performance. 
 Participation also makes good business sense. Although participation in many of 
the basic programs is necessary just to be in business, other programs enhance the 
organization in important ways. Through ongoing benchmarking and performance 
improvement programs, service quality and cost - effectiveness are addressed. 
 Participation in voluntary programs can also present marketing and recruiting 
advantages. From a risk management perspective, failure to meet licensure, accreditation, certifi cation, and survey requirements might directly affect the health care organization ’ s loss exposure. 
c16.indd 470 3/2/09 1:49:45 PM
 Licensure, Accreditation, and Certifi cation Activities 
 Licensure, accreditation, and certifi cation activities can be characterized as mandatory 
and voluntary functions, although some, such as deemed status relationships, play a 
dual role. Mandatory functions include organizational licensure; individual health care 
professional licensure; specifi c licensure for activities such as handling radioactive 
materials or preparing and shipping blood or blood components; approval to participate in federal funding programs through either government inspection or deemed status; and compliance with broadly applicable regulatory programs such as workplace 
safety, equal rights, and the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
 Accreditation and certifi cation programs make up the voluntary activities and are 
generally sponsored by the industry itself or by specialty organizations. Virtually all 
such entities are nongovernmental. 
 The Risk Management Professional ’ s Role 
 The health care risk management professional should make it a priority to be aware 
of the multitude of organizations performing licensure, accreditation, certifi cation, and 
surveying of health care organizations. The risk management program description may 
include participation in the processes associated with the oversight activities. Loss of 
funding due to any violation of regulatory or accreditation standards or public disclosure of a failure to meet established standards might result in an adverse effect on the 
health care organization ’ s business operations or pending or future litigation. 
 It is critical for risk management professionals to understand the effect of compliance with regulatory, licensure, certifi cation, and accrediting bodies. It is even more 
critical that health care risk management professionals understand their roles and 
responsibilities for working as team members in the framework of the organizational 
goals to meet standards and accreditation requirements. 
 MANDATORY SURVEYING BODIES 
 Mandatory surveying bodies are required for health care organizations to operate and 
obtain a license. This is a requirement in every state. The health care risk management 
professional must be acquainted with state requirements and have the ability to access 
the published standards criteria to fulfi ll certain job - related functions. 
 Department of Health and Human Services 
 The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is the United States government ’ s principal agency for protecting the health of all Americans and providing 
essential human services, especially for the members of the population least able to 
help themselves. 
 HHS has more than three hundred programs that cover a wide spectrum of activities. 
The department works closely with all state and local governments, and many HHS - funded 
services are provided at the local level by state or county agencies. Eleven operating divisions 
Mandatory Surveying Bodies 471
c16.indd 471 3/2/09 1:49:46 PM
472 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
report directly to the Secretary. Included in the eleven and represented by an asterisk ( * ) are 
components of the Public Health Service. The operating divisions are: 
 Administration for Children and Families (ACF) 
 Administration on Aging (AoA) 
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) * 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) * 
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) 
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) * 
 Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) * 
 Indian Health Service (IHS) * 
 National Institutes of Health (NIH) * 
 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) * 
 In the public sector, the most visible certifi cation organization is the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), which oversees payment for most of the 
health care covered by the federal government. This federal agency administers 
the Medicare, Medicaid, and State Children ’ s Health Insurance programs. CMS provides health insurance for more than eighty - three million Americans. 
 In addition to providing health insurance, CMS performs several quality - focused 
activities, including regulation of laboratory testing, surveys, and certifi cation of health 
care facilities (including nursing homes, home health agencies, intermediate care 
facilities for the mentally retarded, and hospitals), development of coverage policies, 
and improvement of quality of care. 
 CMS spends more than $ 519 billion a year buying health services for benefi ciaries 
of Medicare, Medicaid, and the State Children ’ s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP). It 
is responsible for ensuring that the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP programs are properly run by its contractors and state agencies. CMS must establish policies for paying 
health care providers and must conduct research on the effectiveness of various health 
care management, treatment, and fi nancial practices. CMS is also accountable to assess 
the quality of health care facility services and take enforcement actions as necessary. 
 CMS oversees payments that may comprise more than 50 percent of a health care 
organization ’ s revenue. The onset of federal Medicare and Medicaid laws in the mid - 1960s 
and federal statutes and regulations defi ned the requirements for health care organizations 
to participate in these programs. These requirements, known as conditions of participation 
(CoPs), defi ne the organization structure and functional requirements, with particular focus 
on service quality and appropriateness. 
 Many of the requirements highlight documentation required in the clinical record to 
justify care and payment for care. CMS oversees these requirements by inspecting 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 472 3/2/09 1:49:46 PM
 organizations directly, contracting with state health departments to inspect organizations, or relying on private accrediting organizations such as The Joint Commission, the 
American Osteopathic Association (AOA) or Det Norske Veritas Healthcare, Inc. 
(DNVHC). 
 To ensure public and expert involvement in its programs, CMS maintains standing 
committees. Committee meetings are open to the public and are used to provide advice 
or to make recommendations on several issues related to the health care organization ’ s 
responsibilities. CMS also sponsors special projects and initiatives in response to 
national issues challenging the health care industry. The following standing committees have been established: 
 Practicing Physicians Advisory Council 
 Advisory Panel on Medicare Education 
 Medicare Coverage Advisory Committee 
 Advisory Panel on Ambulatory Payment Classifi cation Groups 
 Competitive Pricing Advisory Committee 
 Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act Technical Advisory Group 
 Advisory Board on the Demonstration of a Bundled Case - Mix Adjusted Payment 
System for End - Stage Renal Disease Services 
 Medicaid Commission 
 State Pharmaceutical Assistance Transition Commission 
 When CMS grants “ deemed status ” to private organizations, it reserves the right 
to assess their performance. It does this through an ongoing effort known as a validation survey, in which it conducts the inspection of a health care entity that has been privately accredited. CMS then compares its results with those of the deemed accrediting 
organization. CMS also monitors individual patient care through a series of contracted 
relationships with quality improvement organizations (QIOs) and through its own 
compliance programs, monitored by its inspector general. 
 On July 15, 2008, Congress voted to override President Bush ’ s veto of the 
Medicare Improvements for Patients and Providers Act of 2008 which included a provision which changed the deeming authority status with CMS. The new law removes 
the “ unique deeming authority ” given to The Joint Commission via CMS since 1965, 
requiring instead that the accrediting body (as well as any other accrediting bodies 
seeking deeming status) to apply through CMS for that authority. In order to prevent 
any breaks in accreditation for Joint Commission - accredited hospitals, a two - year 
transition period has been included in the provision for The Joint Commission to apply 
for deeming authority through CMS. The Joint Commission expects to receive CMS ’ s 
decision by July 15, 2010 for continuation of its Medicare recognition. Until then, the 
Joint Commission will continue to offer hospitals Medicare deemed status through its 
current statutory authority. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Mandatory Surveying Bodies 473
c16.indd 473 3/2/09 1:49:47 PM
474 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 Health care organizations can be excluded from participation in Medicare if they 
fail to comply with any element of these activities. The CMS Web site ( http://www
.cms.hhs.gov ) is a user - friendly tool to identify the correct regional offi ce and to access 
specifi c program requirements. CMS regional offi ces are listed in Table 16.1. 
TABLE 16.1. CMS Regional Offi ces
Region I
CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT
JFK Federal Building
Room 2325
Boston, MA 02203
(617) 565-1188
Region II
NJ, NY, PR, VI
26 Federal Plaza, 38th Floor
New York, NY 10278
(212) 264-3657
Region III
DE, DC, MD, PA, VA, WV
Public Ledger Building
Suite 216
150 South Independence Mall West
Philadelphia, PA 19101
(215) 861-4140
Region IV
AL, FL, GA, KY, MS, NC, SC, TN
Atlanta Federal Center
61 Forsyth Street S.W., Suite 4T20
Atlanta, GA 30303
(404) 562-7500
Region V
IL, IN, MI, OH, WI
233 North Michigan Avenue, Suite 600
Chicago, IL 60601
(312) 886-6432
Region VI
AR, LA, NM, OK, TX
1301 Young Street, Suite 714
Dallas, TX 75202
(214) 767-6423
Region VII
IA, KS, MO, NE
Richard Bolling Federal Building
601 East 12th Street, Room 235
Kansas City, MO 64106
(816) 426-5233
Region VIII
CO, MT, ND, SD, UT, WY
Colorado State Bank Building
1600 Broadway, Suite 700
Denver, CO 80202
(303) 844-2111
Region IX
AZ, CA, HI, NV, U.S. Pacifi c Islands
75 Hawthorne Street, Suite 408
San Francisco, CA 94105
(415) 744-3501
Region X
AK, ID, OR, WA
2201 Sixth Avenue, Mail Stop RX-40
Seattle, WA 98121
(206) 615-2306
c16.indd 474 3/2/09 1:49:47 PM
 State Health Department 
 Another highly visible public entity is the state health department, which is the agency 
generally charged with overseeing health care organizations ’ right to do business. Not 
surprisingly, the approach taken by individual states varies tremendously and is often 
refl ective of the culture of the state with respect to regulation. These activities include 
reviewing activities that are regularly scheduled, conducting independent inspections 
or surveys, forming deemed status relationships with private accrediting bodies, or 
simply reacting to tragic or highly publicized events. 
 In some states, the inspection is directed toward high - priority areas such as credentials review and privileging programs; others take a collaborative approach that 
might include The Joint Commission and state medical association as a part of the 
review process. 
 VOLUNTARY SURVEYING BODIES 
 To evaluate and improve their quality of care, health care organizations voluntarily 
request that outside agencies accredit them. 
 The Joint Commission 
 In 1951, the American College of Physicians, the American Hospital Association, the 
American Medical Association, and the Canadian Medical Association joined with 
the American College of Surgeons to create the Joint Commission on Accreditation 
for Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO), now known simply as The Joint Commission. 
This independent, not - for - profi t organization was established for the primary purpose 
of providing voluntary accreditation. 
 The Joint Commission is a private nonprofi t organization dedicated to improving 
the quality of care in organized health care settings. The organization provides evaluation, accreditation, and consultation and establishes standards for long - term care facilities, ambulatory health care organizations, home care agencies, hospices, hospitals, 
health care delivery networks, and organizations that offer major mental health services. The Joint Commission offers accreditation to more than seventeen thousand 
health care organizations throughout the United States. 
 On - site accreditation surveys are intended to assess the extent of the health care organization ’ s compliance with applicable standards and to provide information and guidance 
to help the organization with continuing performance improvement. Surveys are conducted every three years and more frequently if a follow - up or revisit is required. 
 As new technologies and societal demands affect health care organizations, The 
Joint Commission may respond with the development of a standard that corresponds 
to identifi ed needs. 
 Consumer demands for accountability have infl uenced standards revisions and the 
evolution of new standards. The Joint Commission is a major supplier of education 
and consultation to the health care industry, and it conducts educational programs for 
accredited organizations and those seeking accreditation. 
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 475
c16.indd 475 3/2/09 1:49:47 PM
476 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 The standards for each Joint Commission accreditation program are published in 
a separate manual. The Joint Commission also publishes reference manuals, guides to 
quality improvement, accreditation survey scoring guidelines, and periodicals. It also 
publishes an offi cial monthly journal, the Joint Commission Journal on Quality 
Improvement, which is available from the organization ’ s customer service offi ce. 
 Joint Commission accreditation decisions are based on a survey and for a given 
organization will be one of the following types. 1
 Accreditation 
 This decision is awarded to a health care organization that is in compliance with all 
standards at the time of the on - site - survey or has successfully addressed requirements 
for improvement in an “ evidence of standards compliance ” (ESC) within forty - fi ve 
days following the survey. 
 Provisional Accreditation 
 This is awarded when a health care organization (1) fails to address all requirements 
for improvement in an ESC within forty - fi ve days following survey, (2) failed to 
achieve an appropriate level of sustained compliance as determined by a “ measure of 
success ” (MOS) result, or (3) fails to meet all requirements for the timely submission 
of data and information to The Joint Commission within thirty - one days of the date the 
information is due. 
 Conditional Accreditation 
 This accreditation results when a health care organization fails to be in substantial 
compliance with the standards, usually determined by the number of noncompliant 
standards that exceed established thresholds at the time of survey. The organization 
must remedy identifi ed problem areas through preparation and submission of an ESC 
or MOS and a conditional follow - up survey. It may also be awarded if the organization 
fails to meet all requirements for the timely submission of data and information to The 
Joint Commission within sixty - one days of the due date. 
 Preliminary Denial of Accreditation 
 This results when there is justifi cation to deny accreditation to the organization as usually determined by the number of noncompliant standards that exceed established 
thresholds at the time of survey. The decision is subject to appeal prior to the determination to deny accreditation; the appeal process may also result in a decision other 
than denial of accreditation. 
 Denial of Accreditation 
 This denial results when a health care organization does not permit the performance of 
any survey by The Joint Commission or fails to do one or more of the following: 
(1) meet requirements for the timely submission of data and information to The Joint 
Commission within ninety - one days of the due dates, (2) resolve a conditional accreditation status prior to withdrawing from the accreditation process, or (3) submit payment for survey fees or annual fees. 
c16.indd 476 3/2/09 1:49:48 PM
 Preliminary Accreditation 
 This results when the organization demonstrates compliance with selected standards 
in the fi rst of two surveys conducted under The Joint Commission ’ s early survey policy option 1. The decision remains in effect until one of the other offi cial accreditation 
categories is assigned, based on a complete survey against all applicable standards 
approximately six months later. 
 Accreditation Watch 
 Though not a separate accreditation decision, accreditation watch is a publicly disclosable attribute of an organization ’ s existing accreditation status. An organization is 
placed on accreditation watch when a sentinel event has occurred and a thorough and 
credible root cause analysis of the sentinel event and an action plan have not been 
completed in a specifi ed time frame. Following determination by The Joint Commission 
that the organization has conducted an acceptable root cause analysis and developed 
an acceptable action plan, the accreditation watch designation is removed from the 
organization ’ s accreditation status. 
 Refer to The Joint Commission ’ s accreditation manual for additional information 
on current accreditation decisions, policies, and procedures. 
 Benefi ts of Joint Commission accreditation for a health care organization may 
include the following: 
 Improved patient care 
 A demonstration of the organization ’ s commitment to safety and quality 
 A consultative and educational experience 
 Enhanced safety and quality improvement efforts 
 Strengthened recruitment and retention efforts 
 Substitution for federal certifi cation surveys for Medicare and Medicaid 
 Secured managed care contracts 
 Facilitation of the organization ’ s business strategies 
 Competitive advantage 
 Enhanced image to the public, purchasers, and payers 
 Fulfi lling licensure requirements in many states 
 Recognition by insurers and other third parties 
 Strengthened community confi dence 
 Standards and Performance Measurement 
 The Joint Commission ’ s standards address the organization ’ s level of performance in 
key functional areas, such as patient rights, patient treatment, and infection control. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 477
c16.indd 477 3/2/09 1:49:48 PM
478 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
The standards focus not simply on what the organization has but on what it does. 
Standards set forth performance expectations for activities that affect the safety and 
quality of patient care. If an organization does the right things and does them well, 
there is a strong likelihood that its patients will experience good outcomes. The Joint 
Commission develops its standards in consultation with health care experts, providers, 
measurement experts, purchasers, and consumers. 
 In February 1997, the commission launched ORYX, billed as “ The Next Evolution 
in Accreditation, ” to integrate the use of outcomes and other performance measurement data into the accreditation process. It is intended to be a fl exible and affordable 
approach for supporting quality improvement efforts in Joint Commission – accredited 
organizations and for increasing the value of the accreditation process. 
 A component of the ORYX initiative is the identifi cation and use of “ core measures ” — standardized performance measures that can be applied across accredited 
health care organizations in a particular accreditation program. Sets of core performance measures for each accreditation program have been identifi ed in a staggered 
approach. 
 In May 2001, the commission announced the four initial core measurements areas 
for hospitals: acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, community - acquired pneumonia, and pregnancy and related conditions. Hospitals began to collect core measure 
data for patient discharges beginning in July 2002 and for surgical infection prevention in July 2004. Also in 2004, the commission and CMS began working together to 
align measures common to both organizations. These standardized common measures, 
called “ hospital quality measures, ” are in place for acute care myocardial infarction, 
heart failure, pneumonia, and the Surgical Care Improvement Project (surgical infection prevention measures). The commission also has core measures for pregnancy and 
related conditions and children ’ s asthma care. 2
 Education and Information 
 Through its not - for - profi t subsidiary, Joint Commission Resources (JCR), The Joint 
Commission sponsors several education programs, produces publications for health 
care professionals, and provides consultation to health care organizations. JCR is committed to offering standards - related educational support for the organizations that it 
accredits and to advancing provider understanding of current concepts in performance 
measurement and improvement. 
 On its Web site, The Joint Commission provides a comprehensive guide to help 
individuals learn more about the safety and quality of Joint Commission – accredited 
health care organizations and programs throughout the United States. Quality Check 
includes each organization ’ s name, address, telephone number, accreditation decision, 
accreditation date, current accreditation status and effective date, and its most recent performance report. This report provides detailed information about an organization ’ s 
performance and how it compares to similar organizations. Printed performance reports 
are available through the customer service center. 3
c16.indd 478 3/2/09 1:49:48 PM
 American Osteopathic Association 
 The American Osteopathic Association has been accrediting health care facilities 
in the United States for more than fi fty years. Since 1965, the AOA has had deemed 
status authority from CMS to survey hospitals under the Medicare CoPs. The AOA is 
one of only three voluntary accreditation programs in the United States authorized by 
CMS to survey hospitals under Medicare. The AOA conducts an on - site survey to verify compliance with published AOA standards. The AOA has also developed published 
accreditation requirements in the areas of ambulatory care and surgery, mental health, 
substance abuse, and physical rehabilitation medicine facilities. 
 Det Norske Veritas Healthcare, Inc. (DNVHC) 
CMS, announced in the September 29, 2008 Federal Register that effective September 
26, 2008 through September 26, 2012 they were recognizing DNVHC as an approved 
national accrediting program for hospitals seeking to participate in the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs. DNVHC ’ s accreditation process combines CMS conditions of participation with ISO 9001:2000, a collection of standards for quality management systems. 
DNVHC ’ s process is called the National Integrated Accreditation for Healthcare organizations and was designed to streamline the accreditation process, identifying ways to 
make continual improvements. Information of ISO 9001:2000 is offered below. 
 National Committee for Quality Assurance 
 The National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is a private, not - for - profi t 
organization that assesses and reports on the quality of managed care plans. NCQA ’ s 
mission is to provide information to purchasers and consumers of managed health care 
to distinguish the health plan ’ s quality. NCQA has led national efforts to promote 
accountability for managed care health plans. 
 The managed care organization (MCO) accreditation program is voluntary. 
Currently, nearly half of the health maintenance organizations (HMOs) in the United 
States participate in the NCQA accreditation process. For an organization to become 
accredited by NCQA, it must go through a survey and meet standards that are designed 
to evaluate the health plan ’ s administrative and clinical systems. 
 The health plan must also submit specifi c data as part of the accreditation process. 
During an accreditation survey, health plans must provide data on specifi c areas from 
the following fi ve categories: 
 Access and service to plan 
 Qualifi ed providers in plan 
 Staying healthy: preventive health measures 
 Getting better: effective treatments, drugs, and devices 
 Living with illness: management of chronic illness 
■
■
■
■
■
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 479
c16.indd 479 3/2/09 1:49:49 PM
480 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 NCQA has expanded its accreditation programs in response to the demands for 
evaluation and accountability of sectors of the health care delivery system. In addition 
to accreditation of HMOs, NCQA also accredits managed behavioral health care organizations and preferred provider organizations (PPOs). The PPO accreditation program is designed to recognize and acknowledge health care PPO organizations that 
focus on access, network quality, and customer service. 
 NCQA also provides accreditation standards for disease management and new 
health plans and was awarded a contract to operate an accreditation program to ensure 
that the Veterans Administration medical centers are complying with the VA and other 
relevant federal regulations designed to protect human subjects of research. 
 Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set 
 NCQA has been viewed as a leader in health plan performance measurement since 
1991. The Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS) was developed 
by NCQA as a group of specifi c standard measures for comparing health plans. The 
HEDIS data set includes more than fi fty performance measures. A consumer survey 
and a survey to evaluate parents ’ experiences with their children ’ s care are included in 
the survey process. 
 HEDIS evaluates the results that a health plan achieves in dozens of key areas of 
care and service, including immunization rates, cholesterol management, and member 
satisfaction. The results of HEDIS data are published and made available to prospective health plan purchasers and to the general public. 4
 ISO 9001:2000 
 The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is composed of 149 member 
countries, with each country entitled to one vote. The United States ’ representative to the 
ISO is the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The intent of the ISO is to create a universal approach to evaluating, managing, and directing quality based on global 
standards. ISO quality management standards were fi rst published in 1987 as a quality 
management system. ISO publishes a set of standards that outlines procedures to establish performance standards, designate responsibilities, organize processes, and demand 
management accountability. The focus of ISO standards is to encourage continuous performance improvement and documentation of processes and procedures. ISO standards 
are intended to apply to a wide range of industries and are not industry - specifi c. 
 The intent of the standards is to help organizations achieve quality outcomes and 
results based on a consistent, reliable, and cost - effi cient model. The ISO standards are 
used throughout the world by service industries, manufacturing, environmental industries, space and aviation industries, and their suppliers. 
 In recent years, the health care industry has recognized ISO standards as both an 
alternative and an adjunct to existing quality management systems. Perhaps the greatest infl uence of the ISO for the health care industry has been the growing movement 
for ISO - certifi ed industry organizations to require ISO certifi cation from suppliers, 
c16.indd 480 3/2/09 1:49:49 PM
including health care providers. Health care providers and payers, viewed as major 
tier - one suppliers to organizations around the world, are responding accordingly to 
this requirement. 
 The ISO standards support business process improvement for all industries. The 
health care industry worldwide has increasingly embraced the ISO standards as an 
alternative to existing quality management systems. 
 Why Adopt ISO 9001:2000 in Health Care? 
 Health care organizations choose to adopt ISO 9001:2000 standards for several reasons. An organization ’ s decision to do so might include the following considerations: 
 To comply with customer requirements for ISO 9001:2000 
 To compete in global and domestic markets 
 To improve the existing quality management system 
 To minimize repetitive auditing by accrediting organizations 
 To improve subcontractor and vendor performance 
 The benefi ts of ISO certifi cation for health care organizations include the following: 
 Enhanced understanding of quality management throughout the organization 
 A mechanism to improve documentation of process and procedure 
 A tool to strengthen and improve supplier and customer confi dence 
 Cost savings and improved profi tability 
 Improved organizational awareness of quality 
 Strengthened continuous performance improvement 
 Complying with ISO 9001:2000 standards does not indicate that every product or 
service meets the customers ’ requirements, only that the quality system in use is capable of meeting them. Consistently measuring customer satisfaction and striving continually to improve processes are the keys to a successful quality management 
system. 
 What is the ISO9001:2000 Series? 
 The core of the ISO 9001:2000 Quality Systems Standard is a series of international 
standards that provide guidance in developing and implementing an effective quality 
management system. Not specifi c to any particular product or service, these standards 
are applicable to both manufacturing and service industries. The ISO 9001 standard, 
directed at service industries, is the most common standard applied to health care 
organizations. This standard is a model with which organizations (both manufacturing 
and service) certify their quality systems, from initial design and development of a 
desired product or service through production, installation, and servicing. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 481
c16.indd 481 3/2/09 1:49:50 PM
482 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 What Do the ISO Standards Include? 
 ISO 9001 applies to the service industry, which includes all aspects of the health care 
delivery system. The ISO standards are a series of clauses that identify elements of 
performance required for ISO certifi cation; however, the clauses do not stipulate how 
an organization must reach compliance thresholds. Table 16.2 summarizes the major 
requirements of the standard. A copy of the standards can be ordered from the 
American Society for Quality. 
TABLE 16.2. Major Requirements of ISO 9001 Standards
4. Quality management system
4.2.1 General
4.2 Documentation requirements
4.2.2 Quality manual
4.2.3 Control of documents
4.2.4 Control of records
5 Management responsibility
5.1 Management commitment
5.2 Customer focus
5.3 Quality policy
5.4 Planning
5.4.1 Quality objectives
5.4.2 QMS planning
5.5 Responsibility, authority, and communication
5.5.1 Responsibility and authority
c16.indd 482 3/2/09 1:49:50 PM
5.5.2 Management representative
5.5.3 Internal communication
5.6 Management review
5.6.1 General
5.6.2 Review input
5.6.3 Review output
6 Resource management
6.1 Provision of resources
6.2 Human resources
6.2.1 General
6.2.2 Competence, awareness, and training
6.3 Infrastructure
6.4 Work environment
7 Product realization requirements
7.1 Planning of product realization
7.2 Customer-related processes
7.2.1 Determination of requirements related to the product
7.2.2 Review of requirements related to the product
7.2.3 Customer communication
7.3.1 Design and development planning
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 483
(Continued)
c16.indd 483 3/2/09 1:49:50 PM
484 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
TABLE 16.2. (Continued)
7.3.2 Design and development inputs
7.3.3 Design and development outputs
7.3.4 Design and development review
7.3.5 Design and development verifi cation
7.3.6 Design and development validation
7.3.7 Control of design and development changes
7.4 Purchasing
7.4.1 Purchasing process
7.4.2 Purchasing information
7.4.3 Verifi cation of purchased product
7.5 Production and service provision
7.5.1 Control of production and service provision
7.5.2 Validation of processes for production and service provision
7.5.3 Identifi cation and traceability
7.5.4 Customer property
7.5.5 Preservation of product
7.6 Control of monitoring and measuring devices
 A quality management system refers to the activities carried out within an organization to satisfy the quality - related expectations of customers. To ensure that a quality 
management system is in place, customers or regulatory agencies may insist that the 
c16.indd 484 3/2/09 1:49:51 PM
organization demonstrate that the quality management system conforms to ISO quality system models. 
Auditing ISOStandards A “ fi rst - party ” audit is performed by individuals in the organizations. “ Second - party ” audits are performed by the customer or an independent 
auditor. “ Third - party ” audits are performed by a registrar who comes into the organization to verify that a system is in place. When a third - party registrar fi nds that an 
organization fulfi lls the requirements of the ISO standards, the organization becomes 
 “ registered ” and receives a certifi cate that indicates that registration is complete. 
 ISO registration requires annual audits to monitor continuing compliance. Overall, 
it has been well demonstrated that if a health care provider is ISO - qualifi ed or registered, any other survey process is simpler and less costly regarding both preparation 
and compliance demonstration. Although ISO registration is not intended to replace 
Joint Commission or NCQA accreditation, it does make the compliance demonstration process appreciably less diffi cult, time - consuming, and costly. 
 Many health care organizations have turned to ISO registration as an effi cient 
mechanism to demonstrate the presence and functioning capacity of a quality management system that is working throughout the organization. 
Steps to ISORegistration The following is a generic process that health care organizations may follow to achieve ISO - quality system registration. 
 Phase I: Organizing for Registration 
 Obtain management commitment. 
 Establish a steering committee. 
 Begin internal quality auditing. 
 Select a registrar. 
 Phase II: Preparing for Registration 
 Document existing processes with procedures and work instructions. 
 Identify areas that need improvement. 
 Adopt improved procedures and work instructions. 
 Prepare the quality manual. 
 Apply to your registrar for an assessment. 
 Consider a preassessment. 
 Conduct a “ dress rehearsal ” audit. 
 Submit the revised manual to the registrar. 
 Modify and fi nalize quality practices; train personnel. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 485
c16.indd 485 3/2/09 1:49:51 PM
486 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 Phase III: Experiencing the ISO Registration Audit 
 Arrange for your registrar to conduct the assessment and identify fi ndings 
(discrepancies). 
 Respond to fi ndings. 
 Submit to the registrar for review the corrective actions you will take. 
 Receive the registration certifi cate. 
 Phase IV: Continuing ISO Registration Through Surveillance Audits 
 Maintain quality practice to ensure continuing compliance. 
 Notify your registrar of major changes in practice. 
 Arrange for the registrar to conduct semiannual surveillance audits. 
 Continue to improve. 
 College of American Pathologists 
 The College of American Pathologists (CAP) is a medical society that serves more than 
fi fteen thousand physician members and laboratories throughout the world. Established 
in 1922, CAP is the world ’ s largest association composed exclusively of pathologists. It 
is widely considered the leader in providing laboratory quality improvement programs. 
 CAP published the fi rst laboratory standards in 1951. In 1964, CAP performed the 
fi rst laboratory accreditation, and by 1979, was designated as the offi cial laboratory 
accreditation program. 
 CAP ’ s mission is to represent the interests of patients, the public, and pathologists by 
fostering excellence in the practice of pathology and in laboratory medicine worldwide. 
 Clinical Laboratories Quality Standards — CLIA Program 
 The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) regulates all laboratory testing 
(except research) performed on humans in the U.S. through the Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments (CLIA). The Division of Laboratory Services, within the 
Survey and Certifi cation Group, under the Center for Medicaid and State Operations 
(CMSO) has the responsibility for implementing the CLIA Program. 
 The objective of the CLIA program is to ensure quality laboratory testing. They 
include specifi cations for quality control, quality assurance, patient test management, 
personnel, and profi ciency testing. Although all clinical laboratories must be properly 
certifi ed to receive Medicare or Medicaid payments, CLIA has no direct Medicare or 
Medicaid program responsibilities 
 The CLIA regulations establish minimum standards for laboratory practice and 
quality. These regulations concern all laboratory testing used for the assessment of 
human health or the diagnosis, prevention, or treatment of disease. CLIA applies to 
every laboratory and testing site in the United States, even if only a few basic tests are 
performed as part of physical examinations. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 486 3/2/09 1:49:51 PM
 Some simple tests are waived from specifi c CLIA requirements. If a laboratory 
performs only these tests, the laboratory can obtain a certifi cate of waiver (CLIA 
waiver registration) to show that the laboratory is exempt from specifi c CLIA requirements. The following laboratory procedures are among the tests exempted from specifi c CLIA standards. 5
 Dipstick or tablet urinalysis (nonautomated) 
 Fecal occult blood 
 Ovulation test using visual color comparison 
 Urine pregnancy test using visual color comparison 
 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
 Hemoglobin by copper sulfate method 
 Spun microhematocrit 
 Blood glucose using certain devices cleared by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) specifi cally for home use 
 Whole blood hemoglobin assays 
 A laboratory with a certifi cate of waiver will not be inspected routinely. The laboratory may be inspected as part of complaint investigations and on a random basis to 
determine whether only the waived tests are being performed. CLIA registration certifi cates are valid for a maximum of two years or until such time as an inspection can 
be conducted to determine program compliance, whichever is shorter. 
 Certifi cates are issued to laboratories that comply with the CLIA standards. 
Certifi cates of accreditation are issued to those that comply with department - approved, 
private, nonprofi t accreditation programs. In addition, in states with federally 
approved licensure programs, a laboratory may obtain a state license in lieu of a certificate or certifi cate of accreditation. If a laboratory is located in a state with an approved 
program and the laboratory obtains a state license, it is only necessary to comply with 
the state rules, not the federal CLIA regulations. 
 In choosing which type of certifi cation to seek, you may consider factors such as 
cost, convenience, professional affi liations, and other considerations beyond the scope 
of this discussion. The major costs to all laboratories involve fees for certifi cation and 
compliance and enrollment in profi ciency testing programs. These costs will vary, 
depending on the amount of testing conducted in the laboratory and on the types of 
programs in which the laboratory enrolls. 6
 (For more information, see Chapter 10 .) 
 Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities 
 The Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF) is a private, 
not - for - profi t organization that accredits programs and services in adult day services, 
behavioral health, employment, community services, and medical rehabilitation. CARF 
develops and maintains practical and relevant standards of quality for such programs. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
Voluntary Surveying Bodies 487
c16.indd 487 3/2/09 1:49:52 PM
488 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 The commission was formed in 1966 by two national organizations — the 
Association of Rehabilitation Centers and the National Association of Sheltered 
Workshops and Homebound Programs — who agreed to pool their interests to ensure 
quality in rehabilitation facilities. 
 CARF aims to promote the quality, value, and optimal outcomes of services through 
a consultative accreditation process that centers on enhancing the lives of the people 
who are served. Facilities accredited by CARF demonstrate that they have substantially 
met nationally recognized standards for quality of services, including customer service. 
The standards are developed by the fi eld, which consists of the people served, rehabilitation professionals, and purchasers of services. The CARF standards are applied through 
a peer review process to determine how well an organization is serving its consumers. 
 Every year, the CARF standards are reviewed and new ones are developed to keep 
pace with changing conditions and current consumer needs. CARF ’ s accreditation, 
research, and educational activities are conducted in accordance with the commission ’ s 
core values and standards. In addition, CARF is committed to the following goals: 
 The continuous improvement of both organizational management and service 
delivery 
 Diversity and cultural competency in all CARF activities and associations 
 Recognizing organizations that achieve accreditation through a consultative peer 
review process and demonstrating their commitment to the continuous improvement of their programs and services with a focus on the needs and outcomes of the 
people served 
 Conducting accreditation research that emphasizes outcomes measurement and 
management and providing information on common program strengths and on 
areas that need improvement 
 Providing consultation, education, training, and publications that support organizations in achieving and maintaining accreditation of their programs and services 
 In 1997, CARF and The Joint Commission initiated a combined accreditation survey process to freestanding rehabilitation hospitals. The CARF standards refl ect the 
Standard Conformance Rating System. A standards manual and survey preparation 
guide are available directly from CARF. 
 In 2003, CARF acquired the Continuing Care Accreditation Commission (CCAC). 
The CCAC is the nation ’ s only accrediting body for continuing care retirement communities and other types of aging services networks. CARF - CCAC implemented new 
standards in 2005 that are organized according to the ASPIRE to Excellence framework. The six basic categories of the framework are (1) assessing the environment; (2) 
strategy development; (3) person - served focus; (4) implementing the plan, processes, 
and programs for the person served; (5) reviewing results; and (6) evaluating results and 
progress of a strategy. 
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 488 3/2/09 1:49:52 PM
 American Association for Accreditation of Ambulatory 
Surgery Facilities 
 The American Association for Accreditation of Ambulatory Surgery Facilities 
(AAAASF) is a voluntary program of accreditation in surgery facilities to ensure quality and excellence in care to patients. This organization originated from the fi eld of 
offi ce - based plastic surgery facilities. The focus of the AAAASF is identifying the 
practical matters surrounding offi ce - based surgery. The AAAASF is unique in that it 
precludes physicians of different specialties from sharing a facility. The surveyors are 
often offi ce - based surgical providers. The AAAASF has recently authorized anesthesiologists, nurses, and other specialties to serve as surveyors. 
 Regulations for the AAAASF survey are very specifi c. They include the following 
major areas of the offi ce - based ambulatory surgery practice: 
 Defi nition of facility classes 
 General environment 
 Operating room environment, policy, and procedures 
 Recovery room environment, policy, and procedures 
 General safety in the facility 
 Blood and medications 
 Medical records 
 Quality assessment and improvement 
 Personnel 
 Governance 
 URAC 
URAC is a nonprofi t organization founded in 1990 to establish standards for the managed care industry. It was originally incorporated as the Utilization Review 
Accreditation Commission, but the name was shortened to URAC in 1996 when the 
commission began accrediting other types of organizations, such as health plans and 
PPOs. URAC sometimes uses an alternative corporate name, the American 
Accreditation HealthCare Commission, Inc. This name is sometimes used on URAC 
certifi cates and other written communications to help explain what URAC does. 
 URAC membership includes representation from a variety of constituencies 
affected by managed care: employers, consumers, regulators, health care providers, 
workers ’ compensation, and the managed care industries. Member organizations of 
URAC participate in the development of standards and are eligible to sit on the board 
of directors. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
URAC 489
c16.indd 489 3/2/09 1:49:52 PM
490 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 URAC offers twenty - two accreditation and certifi cation programs for managed 
health care organizations: 
 Case Management 
 Claims Processing 
 Consumer Education and Support 
 Core Accreditation 
 Credentials Support Certifi cation 
 Credentials Verifi cation Organization (CVO) 
 Disease Management 
 Drug Therapy Management 
 Health Call Center 
 Health Content and Personal Health Management Providers Accreditation 
 Health Network 
 Health Plan 
 Health Provider Credentialing 
 Health Utilization Management 
 Health Web Site 
 HIPAA Privacy 
 HIPPA Security 
 Independent Review Organization 
 Medicare Advantage Deeming Program 
 Primary Benefi t Management 
 Vendor Certifi cation 
 Workers ’ Compensation Utilization Management 
 Any organization that meets URAC ’ s survey eligibility criteria may apply for an 
accreditation survey. The following types of organizations have undergone URAC ’ s 
survey for accreditation: 
 Ambulatory health care clinics 
 Multispeciality group practices 
 Ambulatory surgery centers 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 490 3/2/09 1:49:53 PM
 Occupational health services 
 College and university health services 
 Offi ce surgery centers and practices 
 Community health centers 
 Oral and maxillofacial surgeons ’ offi ces 
 Dental group practices 
 Podiatrist offi ces 
 Diagnostic imaging centers 
 Radiation oncology centers 
 Endoscopy centers 
 Single - specialty group practices 
 Health maintenance organizations 
 Surgical recovery centers 
 Indian health centers 
 Urgent or immediate care centers 
 Managed care organizations 
 Once a managed care organization decides to seek accreditation from URAC, it 
must obtain application materials from URAC and submit documentation of compliance with each standard. This documentation is reviewed by a member of the URAC 
accreditation staff who works with the applicant to resolve any issues that have been 
identifi ed. The URAC staff follows up with a site visit to the applicant to ensure that 
operations are consistent with the documentation that was submitted. Finally, the 
application is reviewed by the accreditation committee and the executive committee, 
which are composed of representatives of URAC ’ s member organizations. 
 To date, URAC has issued more than twelve hundred accreditation certifi cates to 
more than three hundred organizations doing business in all fi fty states. In addition, 
regulators in more than half of the states recognize URAC ’ s accreditation standards in 
the regulatory process. In addition to its commitment to evaluating and accrediting 
managed health care organizations, URAC participates in several research projects 
related to performance improvement in the health care system. 
 URAC has also published several books and reports to help people understand the 
many complex regulations, requirements, codes, and laws related to the health care delivery system, including The Survey of State Health Utilization Review Laws and Regulations,
The PPO Guide, Case Management State Laws: A 50 - State Survey of Health and Insurance 
Statutory Codes, and Models of Care: Case Studies in Healthcare Delivery Innovation. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
URAC 491
c16.indd 491 3/2/09 1:49:53 PM
492 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 To support its mission to educate the public about quality and best practices in 
health care, URAC conducts a variety of educational seminars throughout the country. 
 Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care 
 The Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC), incorporated 
in 1979, is a nonprofi t corporation that serves as an advocate for the provision and documentation of high - quality health services in ambulatory health care organizations. 
AAAHC accreditation is a voluntary process that involves several steps. The core areas 
addressed by AAAHC are the following: 
 Patient rights 
 Governance 
 Administration 
 Quality of care 
 Quality management and improvement 
 Medical records 
 Professional improvement 
 Facilities and environment 
 Other adjunct standards may also apply, depending on the entity undergoing the 
accreditation. 
 Once an organization has decided to pursue AAAHC accreditation, it conducts a 
self - assessment using published AAAHC guidelines and standards. The next step is to 
participate in an on - site survey conducted by trained AAAHC surveyors. Following 
the on - site survey, the accreditation team makes an accreditation recommendation that 
is reviewed by the AAAHC board of directors. The board determines the fi nal accreditation. AAAHC accreditation may be awarded for six months, one year, or three years, 
depending on the level of compliance with the published standards. 
 The AAAHC is dedicated to educating providers in both quality improvement and 
accreditation standards and procedures. Educational sessions are held throughout the 
year. To date, more than eighteen hundred organizations nationwide have been accredited by the AAAHC. 
 Accreditation offers quantitative and intangible benefi ts to an ambulatory surgery 
center beyond public recognition alone. The letter of accreditation can enhance a 
health care center ’ s success by providing a process by which the organization examines its internal practices and controls. The added value of accreditation is in the ability to strengthen public confi dence as the organization has voluntarily submitted to an 
external review and evaluation. 
 The AAAHC has worked collaboratively with health care accrediting organizations and has been approved by the American Medical Association ’ s physician credentialing program to provide “ environment of care ” surveys. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 492 3/2/09 1:49:54 PM
 Community Health Accreditation Program 
 The Community Health Accreditation Program (CHAP) provides accreditation services for the home care industry. CHAP accreditation is valued as a standard to determine the level of quality and excellence provided to home care patients. CHAP was 
the fi rst home care accrediting organization in the nation to receive deeming authority 
from CMS. By approving CHAP for deeming authority in May 1992, CMS certifi ed 
that the CHAP standards of excellence met or exceeded CMS ’ s own standards for 
Medicare certifi cation. 
 A home care agency that is accredited by CHAP is less likely to receive a routine 
inspection by the Medicare state survey agency. CHAP is also recognized by the state 
of New Jersey ’ s Medicaid program. 
 CHAP accredits all home - and community - based health care organizations. 
CHAP is different from other accrediting organizations in that it specializes in home 
care and community health. The CHAP survey includes a site visit and review based 
on four key principles: (1) that an organization ’ s structure and function consistently 
support its consumer - oriented philosophy and purpose; (2) that it consistently provides high - quality services and products; (3) that it has adequate human, fi nancial, 
and physical resources effectively organized to accomplish its stated purpose; and (4) 
that it is positioned for long - term viability. These core standards are pertinent to all 
types of organizations. 
 Service - specifi c standards, also based on the four key principles, are used for each 
of the different services and programs. These service - specifi c standards cover the following areas: 
 Adult day care services 
 Community nursing centers 
 Community rehabilitation centers 
 Home care aide services 
 Home dialysis services 
 Home health services 
 Home infusion therapy 
 Home medical equipment 
 Hospice care 
 Pharmacy services 
 Private - duty nursing 
 Public health services 
 Supplemental staffi ng 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
URAC 493
c16.indd 493 3/2/09 1:49:54 PM
494 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 National Commission on Correctional Health Care 
 The health practitioners employed in correctional settings face unique challenges: 
strict security regulations, overcrowding in facilities, and the legal and public health 
issues related to providing health care to an incarcerated population. 
 The National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) offers a voluntary health services accreditation program and a certifi cation program to recognize the 
special knowledge and skills required to provide health care in the correctional setting. 
All correctional health care professionals are eligible to participate in the certifi cation 
program. Eligible participants include physicians, nurses, mental health workers, 
dentists, and other professionals such as attorneys, administrators, and health information technicians. NCCHC offers continuing certifi cation and advanced certifi cation for 
participants that have exceeded the basic certifi cation standards. 
 In 2004, NCCHC introduced an accreditation program for opioid treatment programs in correctional facilities. Accreditation by NCCHC enables these programs to 
obtain legally required certifi cation from HHS ’ s Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration (SAMHSA). NCCHC is the only SAMHSA - authorized 
accrediting body that focuses on corrections. 
 Commission on Dental Accreditation 
 The Commission on Dental Accreditation (CODA) operates under the auspices of the 
American Dental Association. CODA serves the public by establishing, maintaining 
and applying standards that ensure the quality and continuous improvement of dental and 
dental - related education and refl ect the evolving practice of dentistry. The scope of the 
Commission on Dental Accreditation encompasses dental, advanced dental and allied 
dental education programs. 
 The Commission on Dental Accreditation publishes standards for dental practice 
professionals and offers an accrediting program specifi cally for dental education programs and clinical training programs. An accreditation classifi cation granted to a program provides evidence to the educational institution, a licensing body, the federal 
government, or other government agencies that at the time of evaluation, the developing 
education program appears to have the potential for meeting the standards set forth in the 
requirements for an accredited education program for that area. 
 The Commission of Dental Accreditation also publishes accreditation standards in 
the following areas: 
 Dental public health 
 Endodontics 
 General dentistry 
 General practice residency 
 Oral and maxillofacial pathology 
 Oral and maxillofacial radiology 
■
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 494 3/2/09 1:49:54 PM
 Oral and maxillofacial surgery 
 Orthodontics and dentofacial orthopedics 
 Pediatric dentistry 
 Periodontics 
 Prosthodontics 
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
 The Food and Drug Administration is one of the oldest U.S. consumer protection 
agencies. The agency is responsible for the manufacture, import, transport, storage, 
and sale of about $ 1 trillion worth of products each year. The FDA is a public health 
agency, charged with protecting American consumers by enforcing the federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act and several related public health laws. The FDA is an agency 
in the Public Health Service, which is a part of HHS. 
 It is the responsibility of the FDA to manage the manufacturing, labeling, and distribution of the following products: 
 Food 
 Cosmetics 
 Medicines 
 Medical devices 
 Blood supply 
 Radiation - emitting products 
 Animal feed 
 Animal drugs 
 The FDA provides investigators and inspectors to visit more than sixteen thousand 
facilities a year. For any company found violating the laws that the FDA enforces, the 
FDA ensures the company will voluntarily correct the problem or recall a faulty product from the market. Recall is usually the fastest and most effective manner to protect 
the public from an unsafe product. This is also a very costly and time - consuming process. The FDA does not issue recalls unless it believes that the public safety is 
threatened. 
 If a company will not or cannot correct a threat to public safety, the FDA has jurisdiction to impose legal sanctions. The agency can go to court to force a company to 
stop selling a product and can issue a demand that products already produced and distributed be seized and destroyed. The FDA has authority to hold imported products if 
warranted. The agency can impose criminal penalties, including prison sentences, 
against manufacturers and distributors in violation of the laws enforced by the FDA. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
URAC 495
c16.indd 495 3/2/09 1:49:55 PM
496 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 In addition to its oversight authorities, the FDA provides scientifi c research and 
testing of products. The National Center for Toxicological Research, which investigates the biological effects of widely used chemicals, is operated by the FDA. Assessing 
risks and weighing risks against benefi ts is a primary focus of the FDA ’ s pubic health 
protection duties. The FDA scrutiny of drugs and devices does not end once a product 
is on the market; the agency continues to collect and analyze reports on drugs and 
devices. 
 U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
 The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) was established by Title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and began operating on July 2, 1965. The mission 
of the EEOC is to promote equal opportunity in employment through administrative 
and judicial enforcement of the federal civil rights laws and through education and 
technical assistance. The EEOC enforces the principal federal statutes prohibiting 
employment discrimination, which include the following: 
 Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, which prohibits employment discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin 
 The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 as amended (ADEA), which 
prohibits employment discrimination against individuals forty years of age and 
older 
 The Equal Pay Act of 1963 (EPA), which prohibits discrimination on the basis of 
gender in compensation for substantially similar work under similar conditions 
 Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), which prohibits 
employment discrimination on the basis of disability in both the public and private 
sectors, excluding the federal government 
 The Civil Rights Act of 1991, which includes provisions for monetary damages in 
cases of intentional discrimination and clarifi es provisions regarding disparate 
impact actions 
 Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended, which prohibits 
employment discrimination against federal employees with disabilities 
 The EEOC maintains offi ces throughout the United States. Individuals who believe 
that they have been subject to discrimination in relation to their employment may 
fi le an administrative charge. Furthermore, individual EEOC commissioners may initiate charges that the discrimination laws have been violated. Once a claim is fi led, the 
EEOC initiates an investigation to determine if there is “ reasonable cause ” to believe 
that discrimination has occurred. The EEOC must then seek to conciliate the charge to 
reach a voluntary resolution between the charging party and the respondent. In the 
event that conciliation is not successful, the EEOC may bring suit in federal court. 
Whenever the EEOC concludes its processing of a case, or earlier at the request of a 
■
■
■
■
■
■
c16.indd 496 3/2/09 1:49:55 PM
charging party, it issues a “ notice of right to sue, ” which enables the charging party to 
bring an individual action in court. 
 The EEOC also issues regulatory and other forms of guidance interpreting the 
laws that it enforces. The EEOC is responsible for the federal sector employment discrimination program, provides funding and support to state and local fair employment 
practices agencies (FEPAs), and conducts broad - based outreach and technical assistance programs. 
 In February 1996, the EEOC approved its National Enforcement Plan (NEP). This 
plan sets forth a framework for the EEOC ’ s enforcement strategy as follows: 
 Prevention of discrimination through education and outreach 
 Voluntary resolution of disputes when possible 
 Strong and fair enforcement when resolution fails 
 SUMMARY 
 Based on historical experience of the U.S. health care industry, it is likely that the 
future of health care will be subject to an even more highly regulated environment. 
Private organizations, ombudsmen organizations, and consumer watchdog organizations continue to demand information and accountability from the health care industry 
regarding patient safety issues, cost, reimbursement, and credentialing and peer review 
activities. 
 Many states are exploring the extent to which they may disclose specifi c health 
care provider information related to credentialing and event reporting in health care 
organizations. The rapid growth in health care costs has led government agencies and 
private organizations to begin rethinking their position on the release of actual data 
and statistics for hospitals, clinics, and practitioners. Internet access to information and 
data has driven consumers and health care professionals to explore how data can be 
retrieved and reviewed. 
 There is no easy way to maintain an understanding of the many standards and regulations facing the health care industry. It takes a great deal of time to identify the standards and understand how they affect a specifi c organization. It will behoove the health 
care risk management professional to know where to fi nd standards information and to 
be viewed as a resource within the organization. 
 Given the trend for expanding government oversight in the health care industry, it 
is safe to anticipate that the health care industry will continue to be subject to increased 
demands for health care provider and payer accountability, including compliance with 
published standards and regulations. 
 It is also reasonable to expect government, regulatory, and accrediting bodies to 
expand requirements for the health care industry. Compliance program components 
will be crucial to the future of the health care delivery system. The primary areas of 
concern for risk management relate to patient safety, patient rights, governance, 
■
■
■
Summary 497
c16.indd 497 3/2/09 1:49:55 PM
498 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 product safety, provider qualifi cations, and fi scal responsibility (of both payers and 
providers). 
 The movement toward increased managed care contracting and selection of providers will necessitate strong programs of compliance and formal quality management 
processes to identify, mediate, and reduce risks through the implementation of loss 
prevention programs. 
 Fraud and abuse have become focal points for the government, with both criminal 
and civil monetary penalties being assessed for violations. The threat of criminal charges, 
resulting in prison sentences, will result in growing fear and concern that health care 
programs are properly established and carried out under the direction and oversight of 
governing boards. 
 Accreditation and certifi cation of health care programs are expected to develop in 
the areas of networks, independent contractors, and employer purchasing groups. 
Enhanced participation of consumer groups and public interest groups will also drive 
this process of ensuring that the industry is responsive to recognized areas of risk and 
loss. 
 New areas of risks for consideration will include health e - commerce, confi dentiality of data, unauthorized access and disclosure of patient data, provider qualifi cations, 
and customer satisfaction. As the population ages, the health care industry will increasingly focus on resources directed at wellness rather than acute and episodic illness and 
treatment. This shift will result in both providers and payers being faced with decreasing fi nancial resources to ensure compliance with administrative and clinical program 
requirements. 
 It is imperative that health care organizations identify effi cient and effective methods for achieving compliance and satisfying the multitude of oversight requirements. In 
the future, there must be a continued focus on evaluation of existing risk management 
programs with an eye toward the development of policies, procedures, and programs to 
safeguard data and compliance efforts. Performance measures and tracking of risk -
 related data require sophisticated information systems. The health care organizations of 
the future must address the information requirements and respond accordingly. 
 Managing risks is an organizational responsibility. The shift to managing enterprise risks should prompt the health care risk management professional to focus on 
serving the organization as a reliable resource for a variety of compliance issues. 
Organizations working together as a team will obtain the best results. 
 KEY TERMS 
 Age discrimination 
 Home health care 
 Managed care 
 Managed care organization 
 Quality Improvement Organization 
 Quality of care 
 Regulation 
 Statute 
c16.indd 498 3/2/09 1:49:56 PM
 ACRONYMS 
 AAAASF 
 AAAHC 
 ADA 
 ANSI 
 AOA 
 CAP 
 CARF 
 CCAC 
 CHAP 
 CLIA 
 CMS 
 EEOC 
 EPA 
 FDA 
 HEDIS 
 HHS 
 HMO 
 ISO 
 JCR 
 MCO 
 NCCHC 
 NCQA 
 PPO 
 QIO 
 SCHIP 
 URAC 
NOTES 
 1. The Joint Commission. Facts About Accreditation Decisions for 2008. http://www
.jointcommission.org/AboutUs/Fact_Sheets/08_accreditation_decisions.htm 
 2. The Joint Commission. Facts About ORYX for Hospitals. http://www.jointcom
mission.org/AccreditationPrograms/Hospitals/ORYX/oryx_facts.htm 
 3. The Joint Commission. Contact Us: Quick Reference. http://www.jointcommis
sion.org/AboutUs/ContactUs/ 
 4. National Committee for Quality Assurance. HEDIS and Quality Measurement.
 http://ncqa.org/tabid/59/Default.aspx 
 5. For a full listing of waived CLIA tests, see Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services. How to Obtain a CLIA Certifi cate of Waiver, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/
CLIA/downloads/HowObtainCertifi cateofWaiver.pdf 
 6. A copy of the Federal Register containing the CLIA standards for laboratories can 
be ordered for a fee from National Technical Information Services, 5285 Port 
Royal Road, Springfi eld, VA 22161; (800) 553 - 6847. Specify the date of the issue 
that you are requesting (February 28, 1992) and your choice of paper or microfi che format. Enclose a check or money order payable to the Superintendent of 
Documents. Credit card orders can also be placed by calling the order desk at 
(202) 783 - 3238 or by faxing to (202) 512 - 2250. In addition, you may view and 
photocopy or download the Federal Register document at most libraries designated as U.S. government depository libraries and at many other public and academic libraries throughout the country; see U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 
CLIA: Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments, http://www.fda.gov/
cdrh/clia/ 
Notes 499
c16.indd 499 3/2/09 1:49:56 PM
500 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 SUGGESTED READING 
 Crago , M. G. “ Meeting Patient Expectations. ” Quality Progress , 2002 , 35 ( 9 ), 41 – 43 . 
 Dillon , L. R. “ Healthcare and ISO 9000: An Interview with Dr. Michael Crago (Part 
II). ” Infusion, 2002 , 8 ( 5 ), 36 – 41 . 
 Gross , S. Of Foxes and Hen Houses. Westport, Conn.: Quorum Books, 1984 . 
 Institute of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st 
Century . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2001 . 
 “ Medicare Service Pushes Certifi cation to ISO 9001. ” Quality Progress, 2002 , 35 (3). 
Pare , M. A. (ed.). Certifi cation and Accreditation Programs Directory: A Descriptive 
Guide to National Voluntary Certifi cation and Accreditation Programs for 
Professionals . Detroit : Gale Group, 1995 . 
c16.indd 500 3/2/09 1:49:57 PM
 APPENDIX 16.1 
ACCREDITATION AND LICENSURE ORGANIZATIONS, SURVEYING 
BODIES, AND GOVERNMENT AGENCIES 
Appendix 16.1 501
 Accreditation Association for Ambulatory 
Health Care, 3201 Old Glenview 
Road, Suite 300, Wilmette, IL 60091; 
(847) 853 - 6060; Fax: (847) 853 -
 9028; http://www.aaahc.org 
 American Association for Accreditation 
of Ambulatory Surgery Facilities, 
5101 Washington Street, Suite 2F, 
Gurnee, IL 60031; (888) 545 - 5222; 
Fax: (847) 775 - 1985; http://www
.aaaasf.org/ 
 American Dental Association –
 Commission of Dental Accreditation, 
211 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, 
IL 60611; (312) 440 - 2500; Fax: (312) 
440 - 2800; http://www.ada.org 
 American Osteopathic Association, 142 
East Ontario Street, Chicago, IL 60611; 
(800) 621 - 1773; Fax: (312) 202 - 8200; 
 http://www.am - osteo - assn.org 
 American Society for Quality, 600 North 
Plankinton Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 
53203; (800) 248 - 1946; Fax: (414) 
272 - 1734; http://www.asq.org 
 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services, 7500 Security Boulevard, 
Baltimore, MD 21244; (877) 267 -
 2323; TTY: (866) 226 - 1819; http://
www.cms.hhs.gov 
 College of American Pathologists, 325 
Waukegan Road, Northfi eld, IL 
60093; (800) 323 - 4040; Fax: (847) 
832 - 7000; http://www.cap.org 
 Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities, 4891 East Grant 
Road, Tucson, AZ 85712; (520) 325 -
 1044; Fax: (520) 318 - 1129; http://
www.carf.org 
 Community Health Accreditation Program, Inc., 39 Broadway, Suite 710, 
New York, NY 10006; (800) 656 -
 9656; Fax: (212) 480 - 8832; http://
www.chapinc.org 
 International Organization for Standardization, Central Secretariat, 1 rue de 
Varembe, Case Postale 56, CH - 1211 
Geneva 20, Switzerland; (141 - 22) 
749 - 0111; http://www.iso.org 
 The Joint Commission, One Renaissance 
Boulevard, Oakbrook Terrace, IL 
60181; (630) 792 - 5000; Fax: (630) 
792 - 5005; http://jointcommission.org 
 National Commission on Correctional 
Health Care, 1145 West Diversey 
Parkway, Chicago, IL 60614; (773) 
880 - 1460; Fax: (773) 880 - 2424; 
 http://www.ncchc.org 
 National Committee for Quality Assu rance, 2000 L Street N.W., Suite 500, 
Washington, DC 20036; (202) 955 -
 3500; Fax: (202) 955 - 3599; http://
www.ncqa.org 
 URAC, 1220 L Street N.W., Suite 400, 
Washington, DC 20005; (202) 216 -
 9010; Fax: (202) 216 - 9006; http://
www.urac.org 
c16.indd 501 3/2/09 1:49:57 PM
502 Accreditation, Licensure, Certifi cation, and Surveying Bodies
 U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission, 1801 L Street N.W., 
Washington, DC 20507; (202) 663 -
 4900; http://www.eeoc.gov 
 U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 5600 
Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857; 
(888) 463 - 6332; http://www.fda.gov 
c16.indd 502 3/2/09 1:49:57 PM
503
CHAPTER
 17
EMERGENCY 
MANAGEMENT 
 MICHAEL L. RAWSON,HARLAN Y. HAMMOND 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to identify the four steps involved in emergency management 
■ To be able to describe the purpose for using a vulnerability analysis chart 
■ To be able to explain why written emergency plans are drafted 
■ To be able to identify the fi ve major functions established by the health
care facility in using the incident command system 
■ To be able to list and explain the postloss issues the risk management
professional should consider when developing a response plan 
c17.indd 503 3/2/09 1:52:23 PM
504 Emergency Management
 It is Monday morning, and as you answer the phone in your Nashville offi ce, you are 
told that the fi rst fl oor of your fl agship hospital in Houston is under three feet of water, 
thanks to tropical storm Dorothy and the resulting fl ooding. Your day has just begun, 
however, as the next call brings news that your system ’ s long - term care center in 
Little Rock has been without water and sewer service for six hours due to Dorothy, 
with little hope that services will be restored soon. As you turn on the Weather 
Channel, you note that Dorothy is heading northeast and has remained stronger than 
was forecast by weather experts. Three additional facilities in your system are directly 
in its path, including the offi ce building where you currently sit. You reach for your 
system emergency response plan wondering what direction it offers for this type of 
emergency. 
 Health care facilities (HCFs) face many scenarios that might require an emergency response. Some are internal conditions limited to the HCF itself, which are typically man - made. Examples include bomb threats, terrorism, hostage situations, release 
of hazardous materials, loss of medical gases, fi res, loss of utilities, or communication 
system failures. Others faced are external to the HCF and can damage or destroy the 
infrastructure of the area around the facility. Weather disasters, landslides, fl oods, 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, infectious diseases, accidents involving mass transit, 
structural collapses, explosions, chemical spills, civil disobedience, and war are examples of external conditions that may require an emergency response. Both internal and 
external conditions can cause mass casualties and can also put the ongoing operations 
of the HCF in question. Since September 11, 2001, much has been published on emergency management, and more is being learned each day as scenarios are examined and 
reexamined. This chapter will address key basic elements of emergency management 
but will not cover all possibilities and contingencies. The goal is to offer suffi cient 
information for HCF risk management professionals to assess whether their emergency management plan is comprehensive yet fl exible enough to address any number 
of emergencies, regardless of type, size, or scope. 
 Besides not wanting to be caught unprepared when an emergency happens, there 
are other reasons for keeping response plans current. The HCF ’ s commitment to comply 
with federal, state, community, and regulatory requirements for responding to emergencies is a compelling motivation to maintain an effective, up - to - date plan. The guidelines, requirements, and recommendations of organizations such as the Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), The Joint Commission, the National Fire 
Protection Agency (NFPA), and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) add complexity to designing an appropriate plan. Beyond compliance, however, is the risk 
management responsibility to prepare the HCF to manage and recover from emergencies that do occur. Clearly, this presents a risk management opportunity at its fullest. 
c17.indd 504 3/2/09 1:52:24 PM
 THE STEPS OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 The foundation for preparing a workable plan is understanding what steps are involved 
in emergency management. There are several variations on how to describe these steps, 
but all seem to fi t into the following four categories: 1
Prevention. Establish robust internal reporting systems to enable information 
about key risks to fl ow freely upward. Take warnings seriously. Foster a management culture that is open to hearing bad news and knows how to respond to it. 
Planning and preparation. Maintain an effective emergency response plan that 
addresses all key functions of response and recovery. Rehearse the plan. Ensure 
that management understands how roles may differ when the emergency plan is 
activated. 
Implementation and response. Know how to activate the emergency response plan 
and how to recognize the differing roles that people will assume when responding 
to the emergency. Ensure the readiness of your public information offi cer to manage media relations. 
Recovery. Get the HCF operational as quickly as possible. Initiate and manage the 
process of fi nancial recovery. Minimize the effects on the workforce, which can 
be severe and long - lasting. 
 Attention to each of these steps, regardless of the size or confi guration of the health 
care organization, can result in a plan that will provide a valued resource at the 
moment it is most needed. A more in - depth discussion of each of these steps follows. 
■
■
■
■
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Health care organizations have to be prepared to respond to both internal and 
external emergencies. Both types can affect operations through damage to or 
destruction of the infrastructure, mass casualties, and a decreased or inaccessible 
workforce.
 ■ The best prevention starts with an assessment and understanding of the types of 
risks inherent in health care facilities that make them susceptible to emergencies.
 ■ Prevention efforts will be meaningless unless human resources are available and 
trained to implement the right steps at the right time.
 ■ Prevention or mitigation of fi nancial loss to the health care facility from a disaster 
starts with a review of the risk fi nancing program to uncover gaps in preloss coverage and allow time to discuss fi ndings and evaluate fi nancing options with senior 
leadership.
The Steps of Emergency Management 505
c17.indd 505 3/2/09 1:52:24 PM
506 Emergency Management
 PREVENTION 
 The best prevention starts with an assessment and understanding of the types of risk 
inherent in HCFs that make them susceptible to emergency situations. The Vulnerability 
Analysis Chart shown in Exhibit 17.1 can help HCFs identify where to focus preventive efforts to maximize the benefi ts from the resources invested. “ Prevention is the 
cornerstone of public and occupational health. ” 2
 By evaluating vulnerabilities and taking appropriate preventive action, loss can be minimized in an emergency. A framework for prevention planning is provided later in this chapter. 
EXHIBIT 17.1. Vulnerability Analysis Chart
MANAGEMENT
ORIENTATION/
REVIEW
EMPLOYEE
ORIENTATION/
REVIEW
CONTRACTOR
ORIENTATION/
REVIEW
COMMUNITY/MEDIA
ORIENTATION/
REVIEW
MANAGEMENT
TABLETOP
EXERCISE
RESPONSE TEAM
TABLETOP
EXERCISE
WALKTHROUGH
DRILL
FUNCTIONAL
DRILLS
EVACUATION
DRILL
FULL-SCALE
EXERCISE
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency. Emergency Management Guide for 
Business and Industry: A Step-by-Step Approach to Emergency Planning, Response and 
Recovery for Companies of All Sizes. Washington, D.C.: FEMA, 1993, p. 66
c17.indd 506 3/2/09 1:52:25 PM
 Design and Location 
 The location of the HCF has a direct relationship to its vulnerability to loss. Most 
HCFs cannot change locations easily, so mitigating vulnerabilities by implementing 
appropriate architectural design elements becomes critical. A few examples follow on 
how these two aspects work together. 
 Earthquake Unless your HCF was constructed after the most recent seismic code was 
enacted, your facility was most likely built to a lower (albeit approved at the time) construction standard, which might make it more susceptible to an earthquake. The costs 
of retrofi tting a building to bring it into compliance with a higher seismic code are signifi cant and often not affordable. Even so, each addition, upgrade, rehabilitation, or 
replacement to current standards will help the HCF survive an earthquake while meeting the goal of compliance with current building codes. Architects can advise how best 
to incorporate current seismic standards into any construction plans. Property insurers 
can also be helpful in identifying what can be done to mitigate the potential damage to 
the physical plant, short of replacing the HCF outright. 
 Another design element to consider is having suffi cient space to store vital earthquake supplies, including food, water, drugs, and other medical supplies, for individuals 
at the HCF when an earthquake strikes or who might seek shelter after the earthquake. 
 Flood The location of your HCF may make it vulnerable to fl ooding. Again, assuming 
that it is not feasible to change location, the incorporation of design elements to prevent or mitigate loss should be considered; these include directing water fl ow away 
from the HCF using drainage channels, earth or concrete aqueducts and barriers, or 
other means, and using sandbags in strategic locations to impede and divert water fl ow. 
Keep equipment and materials on hand with the appropriate procedures in place to 
facilitate the sandbag operation. Also consider where in the HCF expensive equipment 
and supplies can be housed to protect them from potential water damage, such as moving them to a higher fl oor. The insurance company providing your fl ood damage coverage will also have loss prevention techniques to share. 
Biological Terrorism The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), offers 
resource materials on protecting facilities from chemical, biological, and radiological 
attacks. There are no guarantees to prevent terrorist attacks; however, there are steps to 
minimize their effect. The NIOSH recommendations are multifaceted. They suggest 
starting with the simple step of knowing your building. This includes knowing the 
condition of your mechanical equipment, what fi ltration systems are in place and how 
well they work, whether the HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) system 
responds to manual fi re alarms, how the HVAC system is controlled, how air fl ows 
though the building, where the outdoor air louvers are located, and whether the roof is 
accessible from adjacent structures or landscaping. You can protect the outdoor air 
intakes where airborne agents can be introduced into your facility by relocating them, 
Prevention 507
c17.indd 507 3/2/09 1:52:26 PM
508 Emergency Management
redesigning them to minimize public accessibility (the higher on the building the 
better), or establishing a security zone around the intakes. These steps, when accompanied by appropriate security surveillance (adding security lighting, surveillance 
cameras, and additional security patrols of the area), could deter harmful activity or 
detect its potential earlier to minimize resulting harm. 3
 Training 
 Preventive efforts will be meaningless unless human resources are available and trained 
to implement the right steps at the right time. For example, if HCF staff are trained to 
recognize and respond to clinical symptoms of biological agents introduced into the 
air system, lives can be saved. Training should include the steps necessary to protect 
not only themselves but also their patients from the harmful effects of those agents. 
Training on how to initiate the HCF ’ s emergency response plan in case of an attack is 
critical. A tool developed to keep track of training is presented in Exhibit 17.2 . 
EXHIBIT 17.2. Training Drills and Exercises Schedule
aThe lower the score, the better.
TYPE OF EMERGENCY Probability
Human
Impact
Property
Impact
Business
Impact
Internal
Resources
External
Resources Total
5 1 5 1 5 1 High Low High Impact Low Impact Weak
Resources
a
Source: Federal Emergency Management Agency. Emergency Management Guide for 
Business and Industry: A Step-by-Step Approach to Emergency Planning, Response and 
Recovery for Companies of All Sizes. Washington, D.C.: FEMA, 1993, p. 67.
c17.indd 508 3/2/09 1:52:26 PM
 Local Emergency Planning Councils 
 Some people mistakenly believe that a local hospital or HCF should take the lead in 
responding to community emergencies, when in reality the response is properly 
mounted by community leaders in a coordinated effort. Active participation by the 
HCF with local emergency planning councils (LEPCs) can help defi ne the appropriate boundaries for the HCF ’ s emergency response plan. By knowing what community 
resources will be available in an emergency, the HCF can avoid duplicating resources 
and focus on providing necessary assistance. Identifying what role each organization will 
play in a complementary response effort will thus avoid unnecessary competition and 
duplication. More information on working with LEPCs will be addressed later in 
the chapter. 
 Essential Service Providers 
 To ensure the continuation of essential services such as electricity, water, gas, oil, 
phone, garbage, and sewer for an HCF requires the ongoing commitment by local service providers in advance of the emergency. This commitment will necessitate an 
understanding by the service providers of the nature and types of emergency scenarios 
that can occur in the HCF, along with the HCF ’ s role. HCFs should discuss and explain 
their need to be a priority when emergency service is needed. With this understanding 
and up - front commitment by local service providers, HCFs are being proactive in mitigating future losses. Essential service providers should be invited to visit the HCF as 
often as needed to become familiar with how utility services are confi gured and where 
main switches and other key components are located. Keep the relationship between 
the HCF and the service providers strong and productive so as to promote a quick and 
willing response when it becomes needed. 
 Insurance 
 A good start to prevent fi nancial loss to the organization is to review what insurance is 
in place and identify coverage gaps that may exist pertaining to key vulnerabilities. If 
there are gaps in the insurance coverage, identify whether those gaps can be closed 
and at what price. 
 A local emergency could affect several types of insurance carried by the HCF, 
such as those noted here. 
Property and Business Interruption These policies are most often written using an 
 “ all risk ” form, which covers all physical damage perils other than those specifi cally 
excluded. Although the burden is on the insurance company to prove that the peril is 
not covered, several terrorism - related clauses have been added back to the core policy: electronic data processing, decontamination expenses, service interruption, ordinance or law coverage, civil authority, ingress and egress coverage, terrorism, and 
contingent business interruption. Typically, a sublimit — a coverage amount less than 
that provided for other claims under the policy — applies to these provisions. Other 
Prevention 509
c17.indd 509 3/2/09 1:52:27 PM
510 Emergency Management
exclusions that can relate to terrorism are nuclear reaction or nuclear radiation, hostile or warlike action in time of peace or war, dishonest acts, and pollution. 4
 It is 
important to review this coverage with the broker or insurance representative to learn 
the extent to which the policy contains sublimits and exclusions and what can be 
done to address any gaps they might create. See Chapter 13 for more information on 
basic principles and insurance coverage. 
 Directors ’and Offi cers ’Liability If the directors or offi cers are sued alleging negligence in overseeing the HCF ’ s efforts to appropriately prepare for and respond to an 
emergency, this coverage would apply. A key issue would be to what extent the limits 
available to the directors or offi cers are eroded by other covered losses, such as D & O 
entity losses, employment practices liability, or fi duciary liability. Clearly, each HCF 
should procure limits suffi cient to cover probable losses in all risk categories covered 
by the policy. 
General, Professional, and Auto Liability Each of these insurance coverages likely 
contains exclusions specifi c to certain catastrophic exposures. In our current environment, though, one might see a suit claiming that an omission on the part of the HCF to 
plan appropriately for an emergency resulted in injury or death. Depending on policy 
language, legal fees may or may not be covered and reimbursed to the HCF. 
 Workers ’Compensation In the September 11, 2001, World Trade Center attack, this 
coverage was very high profi le. With so many people killed, injured, or emotionally 
scarred, the total loss to carriers was catastrophic. 5
 Claims under this program are of 
three major types for those who witnessed and survived the disaster: (1) physical - 
mental claims, which typically involve a physical injury that precipitates a mental 
disability; (2) mental - physical claims, which involve mental stress that causes a physical disability; and (3) mental - mental claims, which involve psychiatric neuroses 
alleged to have developed without physical trauma. 6
 Aviation Since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, terrorism exclusions in aviation policies have become commonplace. In some cases, however, limits for terrorism 
can still be purchased for an additional premium. 
Closing Gaps Any gaps in the HCF ’ s insurance coverage should be discussed with 
senior management. Part of this discussion should include options to close the gap in 
coverage, including the terms, conditions, and cost. All discussions regarding gaps 
in coverage (including decisions not to implement recommendations to cure gaps found) 
should be documented and preserved and revisited at the time of coverage renewal or if 
the HCF ’ s vulnerability to loss increases or decreases during the year. Part of this documentation should be the rationale behind the decision to implement or not implement 
recommendations presented. To assist in this process, the risk management professional should prepare a cost - benefi t analysis of the recommendation. This analysis 
c17.indd 510 3/2/09 1:52:27 PM
will highlight possible reasons for not implementing an alternative, including high 
cost, limited coverage, reduced markets, or restrictive language. 
 Risk management professionals should also have a thorough understanding of the 
conditions contained in each insurance policy, such as reporting requirements (what to 
report, to whom, how, and when). This will avoid having a claim denied on the basis 
of a reporting technicality. 
 PLANNING AND PREPARATION 
 It has been said that emergency planners should “ plan for the worst and hope for the 
best. ” Planning for the worst implies that planners review, evaluate, and develop contingencies for all possible emergencies. However, planning based on worst - case 
assumptions frequently results in written plans that are lengthy, detailed, cumbersome, and costly to produce and maintain. Lengthy plans are seldom read and rarely 
understood. 
 In this section, information, suggestions, and resources will be provided to allow 
planners to write emergency management plans that are easily read, quickly understood, and rapidly implemented. 
 Emergency Management Planning 
 HCF leaders must assume accountability for ensuring that emergency management 
plans are developed, written, and communicated to the organization. They should 
assign the development of the plan to one or more persons familiar with the facility 
and the organization who possess appropriate writing and communication skills. Once 
written, the plan should be reviewed, accepted, and approved by the organizational 
leaders, including executive leadership, board of directors, and the medical staff. 
 The plan writers must have access to a committee that represents departments critical to the success of the plan, such as the emergency department, nursing, medical 
staff, security, and those who are familiar with the building, operations and the environment. The plan will be accepted more quickly if the key stakeholders have had the 
opportunity to provide input during its development. 
 Hazard Vulnerability Analysis 
 An “ all risk ” hazard vulnerability analysis should be performed using available HCF 
and community resources. Emergency preparedness plans are unique, mainly because 
each HCF is in a specifi c community or neighborhood. A good plan for one HCF may 
be inadequate elsewhere. At a minimum, the plan should be updated annually (or 
whenever environmental or staffi ng changes make it necessary), communicated to all 
managers and employees, and thoroughly tested and evaluated. 
 The American Society for Healthcare Engineering (ASHE) has developed an effective tool for conducting a hazard vulnerability analysis, presented in Exhibit 17.3 . 
Planning and Preparation 511
c17.indd 511 3/2/09 1:52:27 PM
512 Emergency Management
EXHIBIT 17.3. Hazard Vulnerability Analysis
INSTRUCTIONS:
Evaluate every potential event in each of the three categories of probability, risk, and 
preparedness. Add additional events as necessary.
Issues to consider for probability include, but are not limited to:
1. Known risk
2. Historical data
3. Manufacturer/vendor statistics
Issues to consider for risk include, but are not limited to:
1. Threat to life and/or health
2. Disruption of services
3. Damage/failure possibilities
4. Loss of community trust
5. Financial impact
6. Legal issues
Issues to consider for preparedness include, but are not limited to:
1. Status of current plans
2. Training status
3. Insurance
4. Availability of back-up systems
5. Community resources
Multiply the ratings for each event in the area of probability, risk, and preparedness. The 
total values, in descending order, will represent the events most in need of organization 
focus and resources for emergency planning. Determine a value below which no action 
is necessary. Acceptance of risk is at the discretion of the organization.
EVENT PROBABILITY RISK PREPAREDNESS TOTAL
LIFE HEALTH/ HIGH MOD LOW
HIGH MED LOW NONE THREAT SAFETY DISRUPTION DISRUPTION DISRUPTION POOR FAIR GOOD
SCORE 3 2 1 0 5 4 3 2 1 3 2 1
NATURAL 
EVENTS
Hurricane
Tornado
Severe 
Thunderstorm
Snow Fall
c17.indd 512 3/2/09 1:52:28 PM
NATURAL 
EVENTS
Blizzard
Ice Storm
Earthquake
Tidal Wave
Temperature 
Extremes
Drought
Flood, External
Wild Fire
Landslide
Volcano
Epidemic
TECHNOLOGICAL 
EVENTS
Electrical Failure
Generator Failure
Transportation 
Failure
Fuel Shortage
Natural Gas 
Failure
Water Failure
Sewer Failure
Steam Failure
Fire Alarm Failure
Communications 
Failure
Medical Gas 
Failure
Medical Vacuum 
Failure
HVAC Failure
Information 
Systems Failure
Fire, Internal
Flood, Internal
Hazmat Exposure
Internal
(Continued)
Planning and Preparation 513
c17.indd 513 3/2/09 1:52:28 PM
514 Emergency Management
EXHIBIT 17.3. (Continued)
EVENT PROBABILITY RISK PREPAREDNESS TOTAL
LIFE HEALTH/ HIGH MOD LOW
HIGH MED LOW NONE THREAT SAFETY DISRUPTION DISRUPTION DISRUPTION POOR FAIR GOOD
SCORE 3 2 1 0 5 4 3 2 1 3 2 1
Unavailability 
of Supplies
Structural 
Damage
HUMAN 
EVENTS
Mass Casualty
Incident 
(trauma)
Mass Casualty 
Incident 
(medical)
Mass Casualty 
Incident 
(hazmat)
Hazmat 
Exposure, 
External
Terrorism, 
Chemical
Terrorism, 
Biological
VIP Situation
Infant 
Abduction
Hostage 
Situation
Civil 
Disturbance
Labor Action
Forensic 
Admission
Bomb Threat
Reprinted with permission from the American Society for Healthcare Engineering of the American Hospital Association, Hazard
Vulnerability Analysis, February 21, 2001, written by Susan B. McLaughlin, MBA, CHSP, MT(CASP) SC, Pages 10–13.
©2000 American Society for Healthcare Engineering Developed by SBM Consulting, Ltd.
c17.indd 514 3/2/09 1:52:30 PM
 Community Planning 
 Health care facilities must participate in community planning efforts. The Joint 
Commission, under Environment of Care Standard EC 4.10, 7
 requires Joint Commission –
 accredited organizations to use and coordinate with community emergency planning 
and management agencies when developing and testing their plans. In addition, the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) require community coordination 
under 42 CFR 482:55(b) (2). To help meet the regulatory and accreditation standards 
and guidelines, each HCF should be represented on the local emergency planning council. Participating in the LEPC allows the facility to understand community expectations 
and to prepare for hazards and events identifi ed by community and state agencies. 
 HCFs have traditionally prepared for a variety of disasters. Past events experienced by 
the HCF often dictate the direction of planning efforts. California prepares for earthquakes, 
Florida for hurricanes, and Montana for snowstorms. The Joint Commission now requires, 
under EC 4.10, planning based on a hazard vulnerability analysis performed by the HCF. 
This analysis will include many of the emergencies currently identifi ed but might also 
reveal others that should be evaluated. The ASHE tool in Exhibit 17.3 can assist in this 
effort; although The Joint Commission does not require its use, the tool and its methodology meet the commission ’ s requirements. Regardless of the form or tool used, HCFs 
should include in their analysis the elements of probability, risk, and preparedness. 
 The analysis must include natural, technological, and human events and internal 
and external vulnerabilities and risks. Once prioritized, the facility can then focus on the 
hazards with the highest probability of occurrence and the greatest fi nancial impact. 
 Emergency planners are challenged to consider a variety of emergencies, including the threat of a bioterrorism attack. The CDC and local health departments have 
established reporting criteria and systems to assist in the early detection of such an 
attack. (Refer to the NIOSH recommendations mentioned earlier in this chapter 
on how buildings can be protected from a bioterrorism attack.) Insurance companies 
can assist by bringing experts in to help review and strengthen the planning process. 
 Community Resources 
 The importance of HCF participation in the LEPC cannot be overemphasized. HCF 
leaders should appoint one or more persons to represent the HCF on the LEPC. This 
appointment should be documented in the minutes and annual report of the environment of care committee (safety committee). The HCF representative to the LEPC 
should report regularly on LEPC developments to the environment of care committee 
and other committees as needed. 
 Typically, LEPCs are called together and chaired by a government offi cial. On occasion, the HCF leader may be asked to chair the LEPC. This may require signifi cant political sensitivity, as the HCF may be one of several competing HCFs participating on the 
LEPC. Whether in a leadership role or simply as an active participant, it will be key to 
the LEPC ’ s success for the HCF leader to provide active input regarding what resources 
and capabilities the HCF has available to respond to a community emergency. In return, 
Planning and Preparation 515
c17.indd 515 3/2/09 1:52:31 PM
516 Emergency Management
the HCF understands community expectations for its services and what community 
resources will be available to the HCF in time of an emergency. It also provides a forum 
for alerting community leaders if expectations for the HCF exceed its capability. 
 Community planning should include coordination between the health care facility 
and community resources such as the following: 
 Emergency medical services 
 Public safety agencies, such as law enforcement and fi re 
 Utilities (electric, gas, propane, telephone, cellular telephone, water, sewer, and 
garbage collection) 
 Suppliers (food, medical supplies, offi ce supplies, and so on) 
 Contractors (maintenance, housekeeping, food service, and so on) 
 Agreement to restore essential services temporarily lost by the HCF was mentioned earlier in the chapter. For example, many cellular phone companies will routinely restrict or limit service for subscribers during an emergency to allow public 
service agencies to communicate. Has the HCF been granted priority as a public service customer? What phones are designated for priority service, meaning that they will 
not be turned off or restricted during an emergency? 
 A valuable community resource often overlooked is the amateur radio operators ’ 
network. Amateur radio operators are often members of volunteer emergency communication groups. One group organized in many communities is known as Amateur 
Radio Emergency Services (ARES). ARES makes use of amateur radio to provide 
disaster services. When phone service is interrupted by a disaster, amateur radios have 
the ability and means to communicate. HCF emergency planners should contact local 
amateur radio operating groups for assistance in establishing emergency communication networks between HCFs, public safety offi cers, and the community. 
 Other Resources 
 Other community, governmental, and private resources exist to help public and private 
organizations succeed with emergency management. Consider contacting all of the 
following: 
 Local, county, and state departments of health 
 Local building departments and inspectors 
 Federal agencies including the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
 Insurance companies 
 Risk management consulting fi rms 
 These organizations have valuable information that can assist in organizing an 
effective and comprehensive plan. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
c17.indd 516 3/2/09 1:52:32 PM
 Incident Command System 
 The Joint Commission, governmental regulatory agencies, and other standard or code -
 writing organizations require (or recommend) that HCFs create written plans to address 
different emergencies (see Exhibit 17.4 ). Emergencies ranging from single - car accidents to large - scale disasters or terrorist activity require cooperation among several 
agencies, other HCFs, and health care providers. 
EXHIBIT 17.4. Emergency Management Planning—Standards 
and Regulations
When developing an emergency management plan HCFs must take into account the 
requirements imposed by JCAHO and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations and National 
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) codes and standards must also be taken into 
account, as well as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Strategic Plan 
for Preparedness and Response to biological and chemical terrorism. The American 
Institute of Architects (AIA) has also issued certain guidelines for design and construction of facilities in locations where there is a recognized potential for certain natural 
disasters. These requirement include:
A. JCAHO Standards Environment of Care (EC)1
1. Provide processes to:
 a. Initiate a plan.
 b. Integrate the HCF’s role with community-wide emergency response 
agencies, including who is in charge.
 c. Notify external authorities.
 d. Notify, identify, and assign personnel during emergencies.
 e. Manage the following:
 i. Patients, staff, and staff and family support activities
 ii. Logistics of critical supplies
 iii. Security
 iv. Interaction with media
 f. Evacuate entire HCF.
(Continued)
Planning and Preparation 517
c17.indd 517 3/2/09 1:52:32 PM
518 Emergency Management
EXHIBIT 17.4. (Continued)
 g. Establish alternative care sites, including processes to:
 i. Manage patient necessities
 ii. Track patients
 iii. Communicate between HCF and alternate site
 iv. Transport patients, personnel, and equipment
 h. Continue or reestablish operations after a disaster.
2. Identify:
 a. Alternative means of providing essential building utilities, including electricity, 
water, ventilation fuel, medical gas, and vacuum systems.
 b. Back internal and external communications systems.
 c. Nuclear, chemical, and biological decontamination facilities.
 d. Alternate roles and responsibilities for personnel (such as non-clinical staff) 
during emergencies, including a command structure consistent with that 
used by the community (for example, an incident command system).
3. Establish:
 a. Education and training of personnel, including biannual drills.
 b. Performance monitoring of personnel knowledge.
 c. Annual plan evaluation.
B. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Requirements.
 EPA’s Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act2
 relates to the 
release of hazardous substances, including biological and other disease-causing 
agents, which cause an emergency.
1. Each state must establish an Emergency Response Commission.
2. States divide into local emergency planning committees (LEPCs).
3. Hospitals designated by the LEPC to handle victims of a hazardous substance 
emergency must have an emergency response plan.
C. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Requirement
 OSHA requires HCFs to prepare plans to deal with certain man-made disasters, 
including hazardous-substance emergencies, ethylene oxide releases, and fi res. Plans must 
address, at a minimum, emergency escape procedures, procedures for employees who 
c17.indd 518 3/2/09 1:52:32 PM
stay to perform critical operations, and procedures to account for all employees after an 
emergency.3
D. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
 CDC's Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Program coordinates implementation of the national preparedness and response plan for biological and chemical terrorism.4
 HCFs must coordinate with state and local public health agencies to ensure 
they are properly coordinating their own efforts with the national plan.
E. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), American Institute of Architects 
(AIA)
 The NFPA health care facilities standard states that HCFs should have a total program for responding to any disaster that could reasonably occur.5
 AIA provides facility planning and design guidelines for disasters, whether they 
are natural, nuclear, biological, or chemical. The guidelines require:
1. Wind- and earthquake-resistant designs
2. Suitable location for new facilities
3. Adequate storage capacity, or a function program contingency plan, to ensure a 
day's supply of the following:
 a. Food
 b. Sterile supplies
 c. Pharmacy supplies
 d. Linens
 e. Water for sanitation
4. Emergency radio communication system that operates independently of the 
facility
1
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. “Emergency 
Preparedness Management Plan.” In: Comprehensive Accreditation Manual for Hospitals. Oakbrook Terrace, Ill.: JCAHO, 2001, EC 1.4.
2
42 U.S.C. 11001 et seq.
3
29 C.F.R. 1910.38.
4
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Biological and Chemical Terrorism: 
Strategic Plan for Preparedness and Response.” MMWER, April 21, 2000, 49(RR-4).
5
National Fire Protection Association. Standard for Healthcare Facilities. Quincy, 
Mass.: NFPA, 2000.
Planning and Preparation 519
c17.indd 519 3/2/09 1:52:33 PM
520 Emergency Management
 Considering the number of hospitals, agencies, and organizations potentially 
involved in an event, a standard and common emergency management system was 
needed. This has resulted in adoption of the Incident Command System (ICS) by 
regulatory agencies and public response organizations alike. 
 ICS was originally developed by an interagency workgroup known as FIRESCOPE 
(Firefi ghting Resources of California Organized for Potential Emergencies) after several large wildfi res in the early 1970s demonstrated the need for interagency cooperation. Since then, FEMA, the NFPA, and state and local public safety agencies have 
adopted ICS as a standard. NFPA Standard 99 states, “ The emergency management 
committee shall model the emergency management plan on the incident command 
system (ICS) in coordination with local emergency response agencies. ” 8
 Although initially developed to respond to major wildfi res, ICS principles apply 
to any emergency or mass casualty event. Emergencies occur without advance notice, 
develop rapidly, and grow in size and complexity. Often several agencies and organizations respond simultaneously, each with its own specialty or responsibility. 
 These and other factors make ICS an effective health care management tool in 
response to an emergency event. In 1991, Orange County, California, used ICS principles to develop the Hospital Emergency Incident Command System (HEICS). HEICS 
is the joint property of the State of California Emergency Medical Services Authority 
and the San Mateo County Health Services Agency Emergency Medical Services but 
is available free of charge to health care facilities at the Web site http://www.emsa.ca.
gov . Also available is a smaller version, called the Medical Aid Station Incident 
Command System (MASICS), for freestanding clinics and medical complexes. 
 Many HCFs and organizations have taken the basic ICS system and adapted it to 
the health care emergency response environment. Although HEICS is the standard, 
other examples may be found on the Internet. 
 ICS in Health Care Facilities 
 The ICS command structure uses the existing HCF organization to establish fi ve major 
functions: (1) command, (2) operations, (3) planning, (4) logistics, and (5) fi nance and 
administration. 
 These functions, or elements within each function, can fl ex to apply effectively to 
a minor emergency or manage response to a major disaster. While the HCF can adapt 
the ICS organization to meet its specifi c needs, several duties are common to each 
function and should be identifi able in all emergency responses. 
Command. The command function is the hub of the ICS. It determines where the 
incident command is located. It provides direction, order, and control of the organization when the ICS becomes active. Because information fl ows into the ICS 
from multiple sources, the incident commander (IC) should have advisers designated to help formulate responses to issues brought to the ICS for resolution. 
These advisers may include the safety or security offi cer, the public information 
offi cer, the liaison offi cer, and others as needed. 
■
c17.indd 520 3/2/09 1:52:33 PM
Planning. The planning function is responsible for gathering and reporting information about the event, establishing a labor pool, providing staff support services, 
and monitoring recovery - planning activities. The planning function is typically a 
recordkeeper, providing an accurate account of activities and responses. 
Operations. The operations function coordinates all patient care activities, directs 
emergency care operations, and supports evacuation procedures under the direction of the medical control offi cer. 
Logistics. The logistics function supports facility operations by managing the utility systems and securing and distributing supplies needed for patient care operations. It coordinates meeting transportation requirements, oversees food service 
operations, and implements damage control activities as needed. 
Finance and administration. This function provides fi nancial resources for 
response needs, tracks expenses, and charges for cost recovery. It coordinates 
activities for liability control and claims management. 
 Large - scale events usually require that each function be established as a separate 
entity. Each of the fi ve functions can be subdivided into several sections as needed. 
During a small event, not all functions or sections may be needed. One person may 
manage a number of functions or sections, whereas in a large - scale disaster, all functions or sections will require one or more persons. 
 Ideally, the CEO will assume the role of incident commander. Realistically, the 
CEO is often away from the facility when an emergency occurs. In the CEO ’ s absence, 
the administrator on call, nursing supervisor, or another designated leader must temporarily assume ICS leadership. Upon arrival, the CEO should take over the IC role. This 
order of leadership should be documented in the written plan. All persons who might 
serve in the incident commander role must be regularly trained on the basics of incident command and must be familiar with the location and contents of the written plan. 
 The effectiveness of ICS is most frequently demonstrated by its ability to expand 
and contract based on the level of emergency and the number of resources required. 
Physicians and nurses are needed to treat patients; administrative and clerical personnel may be used in several functions as the emergency develops. Security personnel 
are generally kept in a staff position reporting to the incident commander and not used 
to fi ll ICS positions. This allows the security manager and offi cers to fulfi ll their role 
in building security, crowd control, and so on. 
 Emergency Operations Center 
 The emergency operations center (EOC) serves as the centralized management center 
for emergency operations. This is where ICS activities are coordinated and disseminated. Regardless of size, every facility should designate an EOC where decision makers can gather during an emergency. 
 The EOC should be located in an area of the HCF not likely to be involved in the 
incident but near enough to allow effi cient communication with those responding to 
■
■
■
■
Planning and Preparation 521
c17.indd 521 3/2/09 1:52:33 PM
522 Emergency Management
the emergency. An alternative location should be identifi ed in the event that the primary location is not available. 
 Each facility must determine its requirements for an EOC based on the ICS functions needed and the number of people involved. The EOC should be equipped with 
communication equipment, reference materials, activity logs, and tools necessary to 
respond quickly and appropriately to an emergency. 
 Operational Issues 
 Planning for emergency events requires considering operational issues beyond the 
basic care and treatment of patients and the safety of patients, employees, and visitors. 
The emergency planner should consider the following points: 
Employee Support Employees are the HCF ’ s most valuable assets. Employees will 
respond more effectively if they know that their families are safe during the emergency. Health care facilities should write procedures to help employees contact and 
verify the well - being of family members. This process should include employees who 
are working at the time of the emergency and those called back to the HCF to assist. 
 Solutions include using on - site day care facilities to support families of employees. Arrangements might also be made in neighboring churches, schools, offi ces, or 
public facilities to gather employee family members. Employees called back to work 
might feel more inclined to respond if they know their family is welcome where health 
care, food, and shelter are available. Consider also how employees will communicate 
with their families to learn of their status and needs, assuming telephone communication is interrupted or limited due to increased patient care needs. Beyond employees, it 
is important to consider the families of physicians and volunteers. The ability to retain 
and call in essential patient care providers and support personnel may depend on the 
effectiveness of planning in this area. 
 Consider special services and accommodations the HCF could provide for employees and their families during an emergency, including cash advances, salary continuation, fl exible or reduced work hours, crisis counseling, and care packages (including 
clothing, food, and personal items). 
 It is essential that all employees be accounted for when an emergency strikes, 
especially if there is damage to the HCF or if evacuation becomes necessary. Having a 
predetermined place to meet can help with this responsibility. Holding individual 
department leaders accountable to determine the location and well - being of each 
employee is essential. If there are employee injuries, they should be handled appropriately and compassionately by benefi ts and workers ’ compensation teams. If there are 
employee deaths, plan for surviving family members to be supported by HCF leaders, 
and assign responsibility for working with the employees ’ families in submitting 
appropriate claims for death benefi ts. 
Mutual Aid Agreements To avoid confusion and confl ict in an emergency, establish 
mutual aid agreements with local responders, HCFs, and businesses. These agreements 
c17.indd 522 3/2/09 1:52:34 PM
should defi ne or identify the type of assistance available, the chain of command for 
activating the agreement, and communication procedures. Include these agencies and 
facilities in training exercises whenever possible. 
 Security Emergency planners must consider the role of security during the event. 
Planning must include procedures for facility security, staffi ng, and resource allocation. Examples of specifi c areas where additional planning might be needed include 
the following: 
 How will you lock down the facility with limited security resources available to 
lock the doors and monitor entrances? 
 What effect will increased security have on your operations? Is it more diffi cult 
for employees, physicians, and visitors to access your HCF? How will it affect 
vendors who deliver essential supplies and materials? When limitations are put 
into place that change the daily routine, can you implement effective communication and directional signage to help minimize the inconvenience? 
 If you close or evacuate buildings, how do you protect against vandalism? 
 What staff are available to assist in crowd control, media activity, and vehicle and 
traffi c control? 
 Are employees and volunteers trained to perform security - related duties? Have 
you planned for increased security staffi ng for ongoing operations during 
emergencies? 
Service Reduction Planners must consider what services the facility will continue to 
operate during an emergency. A multivehicle traffi c accident will not limit range of 
services, but a major earthquake might overwhelm the facility due to structural damage or increased activity in the emergency room. Questions of whether day care centers, physician offi ces, clinics, and so on will continue to operate and who will make 
the decision to temporarily close specifi c sites must be considered as plans are 
written. 
Training Training is vital to the success of emergency planning. Do employees, physicians, and volunteers understand their individual and department responsibilities once an 
emergency is declared? How are staff trained regarding their responsibilities? When is the 
training conducted and at what intervals? How are program and plan changes communicated to staff, physicians, and volunteers? Is your training program documented? 
Integrated Delivery Systems Integrated delivery systems (IDSs) have a distinct 
opportunity to manage an emergency by shifting resources from one HCF to another. 
Aid in recovery can be promoted within the health system. Staff, supplies, and equipment can be moved to aid the facility most affected by the emergency. Following the 
Northridge, California, earthquake on January 17, 1994, staff at the central offi ce of 
■
■
■
■
■
Planning and Preparation 523
c17.indd 523 3/2/09 1:52:34 PM
524 Emergency Management
one IDS was heard to say, “ We didn ’ t know what to do or how to help, even though we 
knew one of our hospitals had been hit hard. ” In this case, resources were available but 
not organized in a manner suffi cient to offer the hospital in crisis any assistance. 
 Multihospital systems should evaluate communication plans and identify how 
resources, including personnel, can be adjusted and relocated during times of emergency. 
 Drills and Practice Events 
 The plan is of little use if not tested before a real emergency occurs. Regulatory agencies require HCFs to periodically test and evaluate their emergency management plans. 
These requirements specify that each health care organization conduct an emergency 
preparedness drill twice each year. Currently, The Joint Commission specifi es no less 
than four months and no more than eight months between drills. The Joint Commission 
further requires that one drill annually involve the infl ux of real or simulated patients. 
 Tabletop drills are an effective tool and can help evaluate planning effectiveness at 
minimal expense and inconvenience to the HCF staff. Tabletop drills can be organized 
using previous emergencies the HCF has experienced. Participants are given a designated scenario and then discuss how they and their teams will respond. Additional suggestions and options are given to each of the participants as the discussion takes place to 
provide them with more understanding of how their response affects other members of 
the emergency response team and the overall recovery success of the HCF. Under Joint 
Commission standards, tabletop drills do not fulfi ll the requirement for a biannual drill. 
 Evaluation As soon as possible after the drill, incident commanders, observers, and 
other HCF leaders should meet and evaluate the drill or actual event, looking for both 
successes and failures. Hospital leaders and others involved in the drill should be 
asked for observations and recommendations. Community responders (EMTs, police, 
fi re department, and so on) should be involved in the critique. 
 Disaster drills should use observers familiar with the organization ’ s plan and 
should be able to evaluate response accordingly. Observers should be briefed before 
the drill and provided with a checklist to help organize observations. 
Good, Bad, and Ugly An effective critique will identify good, bad, and ugly circumstances or events. Those identifi ed as “ bad ” and “ ugly ” should have a corresponding corrective action plan developed, completion date established, and responsible individuals 
identifi ed. Corrective actions should be reviewed during the next drill to ensure that they 
have been implemented effectively. It is important to document the drill, the critique, 
and the resultant corrective actions. If it is not documented, change will seldom result. 
Job Well Done In our haste to get through a drill, we often fail to recognize efforts of 
staff, physicians, and volunteers. Congratulate participants for a job well done. Health 
care workers are famous for expending extraordinary efforts in the most demanding 
circumstances, and yet they often receive little credit for such efforts. “ Well done ” 
and “ thank you ” go far to build support for the HCF ’ s emergency response efforts. 
c17.indd 524 3/2/09 1:52:35 PM
 IMPLEMENTATION AND RESPONSE 
 HCFs, clinics, and physician offi ces are routinely confronted by events that many 
might classify as disasters. Due to training and planning, most events involving multiple patients come and go as part of a normal day ’ s work. Nevertheless, most health 
care workers know that the potential for a major event involving signifi cant numbers 
of patients and damage to the HCF is very real — not if, but when! 
 Planning and training must establish the foundation on which each worker can 
offer a meaningful response. Although the plan cannot possibly anticipate or answer 
all potential emergency events, it does give the assurance that a plan exists with a starting point and a way to expand to meet unexpected circumstances that arise. 
 Command and Control 
 Typically, the incident commander will be the senior management person available. As 
additional personnel arrive, command will transfer based on who has primary authority 
for overall control of the incident. At transfer of command, the outgoing IC must give the 
incoming IC a full briefi ng and notify all staff of the change in command. As incidents 
grow, the IC may delegate authority for performing certain activities to others, as required. 
When expansion is required, the IC will establish the other staff positions as needed. 
 Safety 
 The IC ’ s fi rst priority is always the safety of patients, staff, and the public. Effective 
communication processes are essential to fulfi ll this priority. Early in the emergency 
management process, the IC should identify an individual to handle communications 
to both internal and external audiences. 
Internal Communication Maintain a continual fl ow of updated information to medical staff, managers and employees, and trustees, governing boards, and volunteers. 
External Communication To exercise media and community leadership, do the 
following: 
 Identify one available spokesperson. 
 Determine where your media briefi ng area will be. 
 Encourage rapid approval of press releases through the command center. If you do 
not have the information requested or cannot answer a question, say so. You can 
always get back later with what has been requested. Do not let accuracy suffer in 
a rush to provide information. Inaccuracy and mixed messages can create misunderstandings that are diffi cult to correct. 
 Conduct regular briefi ngs. 
 Coordinate with government agencies and organizations. 
 Test media plans in practice drills. 
■
■
■
■
■
■
Implementation and Response 525
c17.indd 525 3/2/09 1:52:35 PM
526 Emergency Management
 RECOVERY 
 Much planning time and effort is spent organizing how to respond to the emergency 
event. Planners must also consider how the organization will recover from the event. 
As plans are written, consider the following issues: 
 Who will inspect your HCF to determine whether it is structurally sound and safe 
to occupy? Who will inspect incoming utilities systems to ensure their safety? 
Local building inspectors can be very helpful in developing a plan for your HCF 
on what to check and whom to involve. 
 Who will make the decision to close the incident command center? Who will take 
the logs and notes created and summarize the event to facilitate future improvement and media interaction? 
 How will the fi nancial impact of the event be documented? Is the fi nance department ready with a system to track the costs associated with providing emergency 
patient care? How will you prepare evidence to assert a business interruption 
claim? How will you document repairs made to your facility to assert a property 
damage claim? Should you have a third - party consultant retained to help with 
asserting insurance and governmental claims? 
 How will the organization help its employees recover? Will additional counseling 
resources be brought in to help with the emotional trauma and grieving some people will experience? Will senior management provide continued updates on how 
the HCF is recovering to promote a feeling of job security among employees? 
Will recognition be given for the extraordinary efforts made by staff? Will staff 
members who have worked for extended hours have time off to rest and recover? 
 If the HCF must be closed in whole or in part while repairs are made, how will 
management keep staff informed of progress? When ready to reopen, will the 
HCF have the labor pool needed to initiate operations? Does the business interruption policy provide salary continuation to keep essential staff paid during the HCF 
reconstruction? 
 Is the public relations team prepared to keep media apprised on recovery progress? 
 Naturally, returning the HCF to its usual and customary service level is the objective, but this cannot be accomplished without addressing key safety, human resource, 
and fi nancial issues. 
 SUMMARY 
 By carefully addressing prevention, planning and preparation, implementation and 
response, and recovery (the four steps of emergency management), the HCF will be 
better prepared to initiate an effective response to and recovery from an emergency. 
The challenge is to make this a dynamic process. Perhaps a rally cry of “ Remember 
■
■
■
■
■
■
c17.indd 526 3/2/09 1:52:35 PM
9/11! ” or “ Remember the hurricanes of 2005 ” will help remind us that emergencies 
happen throughout the world and that we cannot lose our focus of being ready to 
respond. Develop and document the plan, train employees and leaders, rehearse the 
plan, and change it to incorporate what is learned along the way. Keep the plan as simple and fl exible as possible, ensuring that each person knows his or her respective role 
to enable a successful response. By staying ready, our HCFs will be safe places for 
patients and employees, and they will be able to provide essential patient care in the 
face of emergencies. When the next tropical storm approaches, we won ’ t be left wondering what to do but can instead follow the steps identifi ed in our plan to respond 
appropriately. 
 ACRONYMS 
 ARES 
 CDC 
 CMS 
 EOC 
 FEMA 
 FIRESCOPE 
 HCF 
 HEICS 
 HVAC 
 IC 
 ICS 
 LEPC 
 NFPA 
 NIOSH 
 OSHA 
 KEY TERMS 
 Emergency management planning 
 Environment of care 
 Hospital Emergency Incident
 Command System 
 Implementation 
 Incident commander 
 Incident command system 
 Preparation 
 Prevention 
 Recovery 
 Response 
 Vulnerability analysis 
 NOTES 
 1. Bremer, L. P., III. “ Corporate Governance and Crisis Management. ” Directors and 
Boards, Jan. 1, 2002, p. 16. 
 2. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. Protecting 
Building Environments from Airborne Chemical, Biological, or Radiological 
Attacks . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Offi ce, 2002, p. 6. 
 3. Phillips, D. S. “ Healthcare Insurance Issues and Terrorism. ” HealthLine, May 
2002, pp. 3 – 6. 
Notes 527
c17.indd 527 3/2/09 1:52:36 PM
528 Emergency Management
 4. Ibid. 
 5. Ibid. 
 6. Ibid. 
 7. Available at http://www.jointcommission.org/NR/rdonlyres/266E870D - BEB4 –
 48CC - 9ABC - 2EC3210C8291/0/BHC2008ECChapter.pdf 
 8. National Fire Protection Association. NFPA 99: Standard for Health Care 
Facilities. Quincy, Mass.: NFPA, 2005, § 12.2.3.2. 
 RECOMMENDED WEB SITES 
 Amateur Radio Emergency Services (emergency communications): http://www.ares.org 
 Canadian Centre for Emergency Preparedness http://www.ccep.ca/cceppubl.html 
 DRI International (professional practices for business continuity planners): http://
www.drii.org 
 Federal Emergency Management Agency (education, training, and planning materials): http://www.fema.org 
 HazMat for Healthcare (handling hazardous materials emergencies, including internal 
spills and contaminated patients, in a health care environment): http://www
. hazmatforhealthcare.org 
 Institute for Biosecurity (center for the study of bioterrorism): http://www.bioterrorism
.slu.edu 
 OSHA e - Tools and Electronic Products for Compliance Assistance (stand - alone, 
 interactive, Web - based tools): http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/oshasoft/index.html 
c17.indd 528 3/2/09 1:52:36 PM
529
CHAPTER
18
OCCUPATIONAL 
SAFETY, HEALTH, AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
IMPAIRMENT 
A Brief Overview 
 JOHN C. WEST 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
■ To be able to describe the rulemaking process followed by federal agencies 
■ To be able to explain the regulatory enforcement process 
■ To be able to discuss the mechanics of a regulatory inspection 
■ To be able to describe the steps an employer can take after an inspection to 
appeal the fi ndings 
c18.indd 529 3/2/09 1:53:17 PM
530 Occupational Safety, Health, and Environmental Impairment
 Health care facilities are subject to intense levels of regulation as a result of both federal and state legislation regarding occupational safety and health and environmental 
impairment. However, legislation is rarely self - enacting or clear enough to allow for 
concrete interpretation in day - to - day practice. As a result, administrative agencies 1
typically use the legislation as a springboard for enacting rules and regulations to 
implement the legislature ’ s intent in passing the statute. It is often informative 
to understand the processes by which administrative agencies perform their work, to 
appreciate the full effects of legislation. 
 As noted, many agencies at both the state and federal levels have rules and regulations that affect the operation of health care facilities. This discussion will focus on the 
agencies that have jurisdiction over worker safety and health and environmental 
impairment. However, the processes by which these agencies accomplish their missions are, overall, similar to the ways in which other agencies accomplish their 
 missions. The chapter will also provide an overview of the safety and health concerns 
common to health care entities. 
KEY CONCEPTS
■ Legislation is rarely self-enacting or clear enough to allow for concrete interpretation in everyday practice. Administrative agencies therefore use legislation as a 
springboard for enacting rules and regulations to implement the legislature’s 
intent.
■ The Administrative Procedure Act governs the process of federal legislation.
■ The act does not require public comment before enacting a fi nal rule, but if the 
proposed rulemaking is particularly complex, an advanced notice of the proposed 
rule may be published by the agency in the Federal Register, allowing for public 
comment.
■ Not all administrative agencies have enforcement powers. Enforcement powers 
include the ability to levy fi nes and impose sanctions.
 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT 
 There are specifi c processes for rulemaking and the enforcement of regulations. If the 
rules are promulgated at the federal level, the Administrative Procedure Act (APA; 
5 USC 551 et seq.) governs the process. If the rulemaking is performed by state agencies, the process may vary according to state law, but it often follows the federal procedures. This chapter will use the federal approach as a model. 
c18.indd 530 3/2/09 1:53:18 PM
 The APA was born out of the explosive growth of administrative agencies in the 
latter half of the nineteenth century and the early part of the twentieth but was given 
particular impetus by the growth of administrative agencies during President Franklin 
Roosevelt ’ s New Deal years. 2
 By and large, it was felt that administrative agencies 
were becoming a fourth branch of government, and their internal workings were 
largely unregulated. 
 Rulemaking Processes 
 The rulemaking process today is largely governed by the APA. On certain occasions, 
agencies may decide to publish an advance notice of proposed rulemaking, especially in situations where the rule may be complex and the agency would like public 
comment before enacting the fi nal rule. This aspect of the procedure is not required 
by the APA. 
 The APA requires an agency to publish a general notice of proposed rulemaking 
in the Federal Register, unless another form of notice can be given. The agency then 
allows for public comment, which can normally be in writing or at a public hearing. 
The public also has the right to access the rulemaking record to determine the basis 
for the proposed rule. The agency is required to consider the public ’ s comments before 
publishing its fi nal rule. The comment period may vary, depending on the nature of the 
rule, but cannot be less than thirty days. 
 The fi nal rule must also be published in the Federal Register. The agency normally 
addresses all of the comments received and discusses their effect on the proposed fi nal 
rule. Sometimes fi nal rules are remarkably similar to the proposed rules, but occasionally there are marked changes. On rare occasions, agencies may withdraw proposed 
rules altogether after considering the public comments. The agency must give an effective date for the fi nal rule, which can range from months to years but cannot be less 
than thirty days. 
 Adjudicatory Process 
 Once the rules have been promulgated, the administrative agency will normally be 
charged with enforcing them. It may do this by permit approval or by adjudicative procedures, such as inspections and the assessment of fi nes and penalties. Adjudicative processes can be formal or informal. Formal processes involve hearings, a written record, 
and a fi nal decision by an arbiter (ultimately the secretary of the department) within the 
agency, which is then subject to judicial review by the courts. Informal adjudicative procedures may involve inspections and negotiations to resolve disputed issues. 
 Hearings may be held for the purposes of adjudicating matters arising under the 
regulations that have been promulgated. These are often very similar to a judicial process, with specifi cations for notice, an opportunity to be heard, the submission of evidence, a written record or transcript, and a fi nal decision. The hearing is normally 
before an employee of the agency, and levels of appeal may be available within the 
agency. The decision of the agency is subject to judicial review by a court. 
Administrative Procedure Act 531
c18.indd 531 3/2/09 1:53:18 PM
532 Occupational Safety, Health, and Environmental Impairment
 Judicial review can be founded on any number of objections to the rule or the 
enforcement of the rule. For example, the decision of the agency may have been arbitrary or capricious, or it may have been unsupported by the record. It is sometimes 
argued that the rule exceeds the statutory authority granted to the agency by the enabling 
legislation. It is also sometimes argued that the proposed rule did not give adequate 
notice of the provisions of the fi nal rule to allow for effective public comment. 3
 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT 
 Not all administrative agencies have enforcement powers. For example, neither the 
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) nor the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have enforcement powers. Their missions are 
to perform research and to educate the public and relevant industries. The Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), on the other hand, have enforcement powers that include fi nes and penalties. 
This discussion will focus on the enforcement techniques employed by OSHA because 
OSHA ’ s enforcement techniques are a major concern for health care entities. 
 Enforcement Process 
 OSHA has programs by which entities, industries, or associations can work cooperatively with it and remove some of the threat of enforcement action. OSHA ’ s Voluntary 
Protection Program (VPP) allows entities to enter into a participation agreement and 
then, after a rigorous on - site evaluation if the entity qualifi es, it can be admitted into 
the VPP. 4
 If an employer participates in a VPP, the employer may be exempted from 
programmed inspections. 
 It is also possible to enter into a collaborative agreement with OSHA through its 
Strategic Partnership Program. In this program, an industry, association, or entity 
works with OSHA to solve a particular safety or health issue. OSHA acts as a technical resource and facilitator. It is also possible to bring in other interested parties, such 
as trade unions, insurance companies, or local or state governments. The idea is to 
 create a synergy that any of the participants, working alone, may not have been able 
to achieve. 5
 For entities that do not participate in the voluntary programs, the inspection and 
enforcement processes, spelled out in the OSHA Field Inspection Reference Manual 
CPL 2.103, are as follows. 6
Preinspection Processes Inspections can be unprogrammed (following reports or 
complaints of imminent dangers) or programmed (in industries with known high -
 hazard activities). Inspections follow a priority schedule, from highest to lowest: 
reports of imminent danger; investigations of fatalities or catastrophes; follow - up 
inspections of serious violations; investigation of complaints or referrals that are not 
felt to be serious; and programmed inspections. Unless a complainant allows it, disclosure of the identity of a complainant is prohibited. Under exigent circumstances, an 
c18.indd 532 3/2/09 1:53:19 PM
inspector may obtain an inspection warrant or an administrative subpoena before 
making an inspection. Unless specifi cally authorized to do so, an inspector may not 
give advance notice of an inspection. 
Inspection Procedures Inspections, whether unprogrammed or programmed, fall into 
one of two categories: comprehensive (a complete inspection of all of the high - hazard 
areas of the establishment) or partial (limited to certain potentially high - hazard areas 
or operations at the establishment). 
 The employer has the right to refuse admittance when the inspector appears on the 
premises. If the employer refuses admittance, the inspector must get an inspection 
warrant to enter the premises. There are exceptions to this rule, however. If the circumstances are exigent, for example, if there is a known high - hazard condition or operation on the premises that places employees at risk of harm, the inspector may enter 
without a warrant. There is also no need for a warrant if the operations are in plain 
view (the operations can be seen from a public way or other areas off the employer ’ s 
premises). The employer always has the right to require a warrant; the employer ’ s consent to an inspection merely acts as a waiver of the requirement that the inspector 
obtain a warrant. Furthermore, the consent of one employer on a multiemployer work 
site (as where a construction contractor is performing renovations in a hospital) operates as valid consent for entry for the inspector. If a warrant is obtained, the inspection 
must be in accordance with the provisions of the warrant. 
 OSHA inspectors are also permitted to obtain administrative subpoenas for the 
production of records, documents, or testimony to complete an inspection. Documents 
that may be sought could include illness and injury records, exposure records, the 
written hazard communication program, the lockout - tagout program, or other records 
relevant to the employer ’ s safety and health program. 
 An inspection generally follows a set format. OSHA encourages the inspector 
and the facility to have an opening conference in which the inspector, the employer, and 
employees may participate. The inspector may be accompanied on the inspection by 
 “ walk - around representatives, ” who may be designated by the employer or employees 
(for example, union representatives or members of a safety committee). The inspector 
may collect samples (for example, air samples); take measurements, as for noise levels; or take photographs while inspecting the premises. Inspectors also have the right 
to interview employees in private, which may include interviews off the employer ’ s 
premises. OSHA encourages inspectors to provide advice on the abatement of hazards 
during the inspection. 
Postinspection Procedures There are specifi c procedures that must be followed after 
an inspection. If the inspector recommends that a citation be issued, the inspector must 
prescribe an abatement period, which must be a reasonable amount of time but does 
not usually exceed thirty days for safety violations. Abatement periods may be longer 
for health violations because these might require structural changes to the workplace. 
The employer may contest the issuance of the citation, the length of the abatement 
Administrative Enforcement 533
c18.indd 533 3/2/09 1:53:19 PM
534 Occupational Safety, Health, and Environmental Impairment
period, or both. A notice of contest must be fi led within fi fteen days of the receipt of 
the citation. The running of the abatement period is stayed during the period of a pending contest. 
 Employers may use several techniques to reduce the risk presented by the hazard. 
The most desirable abatement technique is to use engineering controls, which 
removes the hazard from the environment. These can be in the form of substitution, 
isolation, ventilation, or equipment modifi cation, among others. Administrative controls constitute the second tier of abatement controls. These involve reducing exposure 
to the hazard through manipulation of the work schedule (for example, limiting the 
amount of time that someone can be in a high - noise environment). Work practice controls involve changes in the manner in which the work is performed, such as improvements in sanitation and hygiene practices. These should be implemented in the 
 foregoing priority, if feasible. OSHA considers an abatement control “ feasible ” if it 
 “ can be accomplished by the employer. ” Personal protective equipment (PPE) is not 
considered an abatement procedure because its use does not reduce the risk of exposure to the hazard. PPE may be used only if there is no feasible abatement control. 
Citations are issued in the same manner as for other forms of legal process. 
Certifi ed mail with return receipt requested is preferred, but hand delivery is allowed. 
OSHA encourages a signed receipt for a citation whenever possible. As with other 
forms of legal process, entities must have a process in place to receive and handle citations in a timely manner. 
 OSHA has the authority to assess penalties for violations of its standards. For serious violations, the penalty may be up to $ 7,000. For willful violations, the penalty 
may not be more than $ 70,000 or less than $ 5,000. Penalties may be adjusted based on 
the gravity of the violation, on the good faith of the employer, on the employer ’ s history and experience with respect to violations, and on the size of the business (certain 
reductions are available if the employer employs 250 or fewer employees). 
 Penalties may also be imposed for failure to maintain reporting or recordkeeping 
systems. For example, the employer may be cited for failing to maintain and post the 
OSHA logs that all employers are required to maintain. The employer may also be cited 
for failing to verbally report any occupationally related employee death or the hospitalization of three or more employees within eight hours of an occurrence. Compared 
to some of the other penalties, these penalties are somewhat nominal. 
 OSHA also has the power to impose criminal penalties. Criminal penalties may be 
imposed for the willful violation of a standard, rule, or order that causes the death of an 
employee. Criminal penalties can also be imposed for giving unauthorized advance notifi -
cation of an inspection or for giving false information to an inspector. Criminal penalties 
may also be imposed, logically enough, for killing, assaulting, or hampering an inspector. 
 The employer may request an informal conference following the inspection. This 
will normally be performed within the fi fteen - day period for providing the notice of 
contest. The informal conference requires the participation of an OSHA area director. 
Area directors have the authority to enter into settlement agreements with employers. 
If the matter is not resolved at this level, the notice of contest is forwarded to the 
c18.indd 534 3/2/09 1:53:19 PM
Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission (OSHRC) for adjudication. 
If the parties are not satisfi ed with the decision of the OSHRC, the matter can be 
appealed to federal court. 
 EPA ’ s Enforcement Powers The Environmental Protection Agency has detailed its 
enforcement policies, procedures, and practices, all of which are a matter of public 
record. The structure of the EPA ’ s enforcement practices is not markedly different than 
OSHA ’ s, but the enforcement plan does differ in its details. 7
 SPECIFIC OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ISSUES 
 The primary regulatory agency with jurisdiction over occupational safety and health 
matters is, as noted previously, OSHA. OSHA has authority to promulgate standards 
pursuant to the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 USC 651 et seq.), 
which has a general - duty clause that requires that each employer furnish each employee 
with a job and a workplace that are free from recognized hazards that are causing or 
are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to employees. OSHA has full regulatory authority to enforce its standards and regulations. 
 NIOSH, by contrast, is an agency dedicated to research and education and has no 
regulatory authority. Unlike OSHA, which is part of the Department of Labor, NIOSH 
is a branch of the CDC within the Department of Health and Human Services. 8
NIOSH publishes the results of research and literature searches. Those publications 
often consist of recommendations to OSHA that a standard be developed to regulate 
exposure to a substance or abate the hazards associated with a given operation. These 
recommendations do not have the force of law, and OSHA must go through the rulemaking process to enforce them. Sometimes these recommendations are taken up 
 rapidly by OSHA, but in other cases, they might remain in the recommendation state 
for years. 9
 The CDC plays something of a tangential role in occupational safety and health, 
somewhat similar to that of NIOSH. OSHA has not hesitated to incorporate many of 
the guidance documents that the CDC has published on such topics as the prevention 
of transmission of bloodborne pathogens or the prevention of transmission of tuberculosis. The CDC ’ s guidance has had a great impact in health care in preventing transmission of hospital - acquired infections and in the adoption of public health measures 
and availability of immunizations. 10
 The EPA has inspection and enforcement powers regarding air pollution, water 
pollution, solid waste disposal, hazardous waste disposal, cleanup of contaminated 
hazardous - waste dump sites, and many other matters. The EPA has allowed the states 
to provide most of the regulation of medical or infectious waste. 11 Most of its regulations deal with environmental impairment, but the EPA does provide guidance on 
some matters that involve occupational safety and health. For example, the EPA regulates exposure to asbestos during renovation or demolition. It also provides guidance 
materials on indoor air quality and remediation of mold. 12
Specifi c Occupational Safety and Health Issues 535
c18.indd 535 3/2/09 1:53:20 PM
536 Occupational Safety, Health, and Environmental Impairment
 Specifi c Issues Regulated by OSHA 
 OSHA regulates several specifi c substances and practices. As noted previously, the 
general - duty clause in the OSHA Act requires that each employer provide employment and a working environment that are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are likely to cause death or serious physical harm to employees, but this does 
not really give OSHA free rein to cite an employer for any hazardous condition. 
OSHA must still go through the rulemaking process to set standards. The following 
substances or practices are areas of health care operations for which OSHA has set 
standards: 13 
 Acetone 
 Alcohol, ethyl (widely used) 
 Alcohol, isopropyl (widely used) 
 Alcohol, methyl (methanol or wood alcohol, used in laboratories) 
 Asbestos (formerly used in insulation) 
 Benzene (sometimes encountered in laboratories) 
 Bloodborne pathogens (HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and so on) 
 Cadmium (sometimes used in radiology or plant operations) 
 Confi ned space entry 
 Ethylene oxide (used in central processing and central sterile) 
 Formaldehyde (used in the laboratory, surgery, and morgue) 
 Hazard communications (employees ’ “ right to know ” ) 
 Hazardous waste operations and emergency response (HAZWOPER) (spill 
training) 
 Hydrogen peroxide (used in central processing and central sterile) 
 Laboratory standard (hazard communications in the laboratory) 
 Lead (used in radiology and plant operations) 
 Lockout - tagout rule (control of hazardous energy) 
 Mercury (used in various kinds of instruments and devices) 
 Methyl methacrylate (a component of bone cement) 
 Noise (encountered in equipment areas near boilers and generators) 
 Personal protective equipment (PPE) 
 Toluene (used in laboratories) 
c18.indd 536 3/2/09 1:53:20 PM
 Tuberculosis exposure (can occur in any clinical area) 
 Xylene (used in laboratories) 
 Other OSHA standards, primarily for safety, can be applied to health care, especially to nonclinical operations. These include standards that regulate such things as 
walking and working surfaces, wooden ladders, metal ladders, and welding, to name a 
few. These standards have wide applicability to any industry and are too numerous to 
mention in a treatise of this sort. 14
 Other Health Hazards Not Specifi cally Regulated by OSHA 
 Once outside the realm of OSHA regulation, trying to determine all safety and health 
hazards faced by health care workers becomes less straightforward. Some are 
known hazards, some are suspected hazards, and there are some that could be hazards, 
but we simply do not know enough about them at this time to make a determination. 
 These issues include the following: 15
 Compressed gases (used in surgery and laboratory) 
 Ergonomics and musculoskeletal disorders (an issue anywhere that lifting and 
transferring occurs) 
 Extremely low - frequency electric and magnetic fi elds (exist wherever electricity 
is present) 
 Flammable liquids (fi re hazards due to bulk storage) 
 Glutaraldehyde (used for cold sterilization of certain equipment, such as 
endoscopes) 
 Hazardous drugs, such as chemotherapeutic drugs 
 Indoor air quality 
 Lasers (optical hazards) 
 Laser or electrocautery plume (smoke from surgical procedures) 
 Latex sensitivity (present in materials made from natural rubber) 
 Mold and fungus (an issue whenever materials can get and stay wet) 
 Radiation 
 Video display terminals 
 Waste anesthetic gases (WAG) (for example, nitrous oxide) 
 Workplace violence 
 OSHA has not promulgated standards on these issues, so they should not be the 
subject of an OSHA inspection. However, the risks associated with some of these 
Specifi c Occupational Safety and Health Issues 537
c18.indd 537 3/2/09 1:53:20 PM
538 Occupational Safety, Health, and Environmental Impairment
 substances or conditions are real, and employers would be well advised to manage the 
risks to the extent that it is feasible to do so. 
 Specifi c Issues Regulated by EPA 
 The EPA tends, as a general rule, to regulate materials and activities outside of buildings. For example, although OSHA regulates ethylene oxide exposure to employees 
inside a building, the EPA regulates its discharge into the atmosphere. OSHA is very 
much concerned about protection of human health at the individual level. The EPA is 
also concerned about the protection of human health, but it is more concerned about 
protection of populations by controlling environmental contamination. 
 The primary statutes by which EPA has been given the authority to regulate environmental impairment are as follows: 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. The Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act (RCRA; 42 USC 6901 et seq.) gives the EPA the authority to regulate the dumping of solid and hazardous waste. It also provides the EPA with the 
authority to regulate underground storage tanks (USTs). It should be noted that 
the RCRA applies to currently active sites but not to abandoned sites. 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act.
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability 
Act (CERCLA; 42 USC 9601 et seq.) is also known as the Superfund. It imposes 
liability on landowners and past landowners of contaminated waste sites for the 
costs of cleaning up the site. A current landowner can be liable for the costs of 
cleaning up a Superfund site unless the landowner can show that it did not dump 
materials on the site, that all dumping on the site has ceased, and that it took the 
land without knowledge of past dumping practices (the “ innocent landowner ” 
defense). Whenever land that has ever been used for commercial purposes is 
acquired, it is extremely important that an environmental assessment for past contamination be performed. 
Clean Air Act. The Clean Air Act (42 USC 7401 et seq.) was originally passed in 
1970 and has been amended since then. It gives the EPA the power to implement 
the National Ambient Air Quality standards to address air pollution. The EPA regulates medical waste incineration under the Clean Air Act. 
Toxic Substances Control Act. The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA; 15 
USC 2601 et seq.) gives the EPA the authority to track and control the toxic or 
potentially toxic chemicals used by industry. 
 Some of the specifi c areas that are regulated by the EPA that are or should be of 
concern to health care organizations include the following: 16
 Aboveground storage tanks 
 Asbestos release (during renovation or demolition) 
■
■
■
■
c18.indd 538 3/2/09 1:53:21 PM
 Disposal of hazardous waste (any waste that readily ignites, is corrosive, is reactive, or is toxic) 
 Medical waste incineration 
 Superfund liability for environment contamination 
 USTs (if at least 10 percent of tank volume is below ground) 
 The EPA also has the power to regulate medical waste under the RCRA but has 
largely delegated the regulation of this material to the states. 17
 SUMMARY 
 As noted at the beginning of this chapter, this discussion is meant as an overview of 
the topic. If more detail is required, it can be easily found on the Internet at the Web 
sites identifi ed in the endnotes. 
 Occupational safety and health can be a signifi cant issue for health care entities. 
The failure to manage this risk can lead to increased workers ’ compensation costs, dissatisfaction among workers, property damage, and the potential for administrative 
fi nes and penalties. Managing these risks appropriately can lead to improved productivity, improved morale, and improved community relations. 
 Environmental impairment claims can be enormously expensive if not managed 
appropriately. For example, if a contaminant gets into sources of groundwater, it can 
take millions of dollars, or generations, for the hazard to be abated. Environmental 
impairment is important because this is the only planet that we have. 
 Finally, violations of any of the administrative regulations do not just carry fi nes 
and penalties. There are also potential criminal penalties that can be imposed. In 
today ’ s environment, with CEOs going to jail for fraudulent accounting and other sins, 
this is not an exposure to be taken lightly. 