How to improve medication access for chronic illnesses
ANDREAS SEITERPRASHANT YADAVAUSTEN DAVIS | SEPTEMBER 22 , 2021
This page in : English
Image
Health worker Dinatu Kpaji at the Wamba Health Center in Nigeria . Photo : Dasan Bobo / World Bank
Non-communicable diseases ( NCDs ) have been increasing as a proportion disease burden for many years – and in nearly every part of the world . In all but the poorest countries , NCDs are now a public health priority . The World Bank , in partnership with Access Accelerated , is working with more than 30 countries to help them better understand their NCD burden – and develop strategies to prevent , control and improve services at primary care level . 

Many chronic diseases , such as cardiovascular diseases , diabetes , chronic respiratory diseases including asthma and some cancers , are manageable with pharmaceuticals – delivered through strong primary health systems that can enhance and extend life . However , many people living with NCDs – most notably in lower-income countries – struggle to get early and effective diagnosis , and access the affordable quality medicines they need . 

Higher costs , reduced access

Studies in more than 40 countries have shown that , in both the public and private sector , generic medicines for the treatment of chronic diseases are generally harder to find than acute disease medicines ( as NCD Alliance reports )  . In many countries , out-of-pocket prices for NCD medicines far exceed actual procurement prices . The result : patients either go without treatment , or their families fall into poverty . 

If governments could reliably source quality medicines at an affordable price , it would obviously create potential for the expansion of services and treatment to a broader section of the public . To expand equitable access to medicines , some have suggested setting up mechanisms that pool the procurement of NCD medicines . 

Pooled procurement seeks to aggregate market demand and enhance demand transparency . It can give producers easier market entry and buyers greater negotiating power to secure quality and supply assurance at affordable prices . In principle , pooled procurement can also reduce transaction costs , consolidate fragmented markets , and allow for more accurate collection of market data . 

Models of success

Some global pooled procurement initiatives have improved access to HIV / AIDS and malaria treatments – particularly in lower- and middle-income countries . 

The Global Fund ’ s Pooled Procurement Mechanism , for example , has “ managed approximately US$1 billion in orders , serving grant implementers in 63 countries ,  ” and it generated an estimated US$174 million in cost savings for HIV and malaria-related treatments and diagnostics in 2019 alone . 

Similarly , the PAHO Strategic Fund , a regional initiative has served 49 entities in 35 countries with more than US$ 580 million worth of essential medicines procured since 2018 . 

Impediments to pooled procurement

But applying those models to NCD medicines is not as simple as it sounds . 

As one of us ( PY ) said at July 2021 WHO-hosted webinar on pooled procurement for NCD medicines , the leap to directly apply pooled procurement mechanisms from other therapeutic areas might be more complicated than many might imagine . There are no magic bullets to improve access to NCD medicines . There are vastly more medicines for NCDs ( excluding those for cancer ) and many more manufacturers than for example for HIV or tuberculosis . There is competition at the global and regional level , which in principle can drive down prices and increase efficiencies . But , when you look at the number of manufacturers that are registered in countries , then the market structure changes . For some drugs , many global manufacturers are registered , and for others , very few are registered . 

Ultimately , the market is failing for a different set of reasons – many of which relate to local demand and procurement capacity and policies . And so , we need different solutions – often changing from country to country . 

Pooled procurement of NCD medicines is also hobbled by a lack of resources . In many countries there is little , if any , public money for NCDs . 

Inefficiencies of government procurement and supply chain management – which are common in many low-income countries – can easily cancel out benefits of pooled procurement . There are many examples of centrally managed public procurement and supply systems suffering from leakage , losses due to expired medicines and lack of inventory management systems that can match central supply with demand at health facility level . 

Larger countries may opt out of regional pools if they already benefit from economies of scale , and that can weaken the pool ’ s bargaining power . 

Opportunities worth pursuing

But what if we try to address the issue at the point where most patients get their medicines – the private pharmacy ? 

Studies in Africa have shown that retail prices are high because the market is fragmented , with many middlemen in the supply chain who make money on every transactional link in that chain . Increasingly , local entrepreneurs are consolidating the market into pharmacy chains that aggregate demand and buy directly from importers or manufacturers , allowing for lower prices and higher supply security . 

For example , a pharmacy chain called mPharma ( covered in a World Bank blog post last year is a potential partner for governments . Several more such innovators are covered in a recent report from Salient Advisory . 

Governments interested in better access to NCD medicines could contract with such private pharmacy chains to negotiate framework contracts for government health facilities .  Another would allow patients to get selected medicines from retail pharmacies at agreed prices . But these solutions should be developed within a framework of well-defined and prioritized basic packages of care – algorithmic treatment – and with insurance and private service providers to ensure coherent diagnosis and treatment protocols . 

Bringing markets together would then mean governments or donors could essentially subsidize the purchase of medicines to the poor or uninsured through vouchers or mobile apps .  Civil society organizations such as the NCD Alliance can help monitor compliance and empower their members with knowledge and tools to utilize the new model . 

While “ traditional ” pooled public procurement should not be entirely ruled out as a solution , we believe that in many places the NCD challenge can only work in the long term when we muster the courage to try something new : that is , work at scale and across public and private sectors . 