New insights into quality of care for girls and women facing the complications of unsafe abortion
26 January 2022 Departmental news Reading time : 2 min ( 636 words ) 
Too many girls and women continue to die and to face both the short and long-term negative consequences of unsafe abortion – yet information is lacking on how health care providers and systems can best provide quality care for girls and women with abortion-related complications . 

Logo of the HRP special programmeIn recognition of this research gap , HRP , WHO and partners have conducted a research study across 17 countries in the African , Latin American and Caribbean regions , to gather evidence on the provision , experience and quality of care – The WHO and HRP multi-country survey on abortion ( MCS-A )  . 

A special supplement has today been launched which highlights the work done as part of this study in 11 sub-Saharan African countries . Published in the International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics ( IJGO )  , the supplement includes seven research articles and an editorial . 

Improving understanding on what works in relation to the clinical management and care of girls and women who face abortion-related complications , is crucial for ensuring their health and well-being . These newly published papers give a significant insight into both the clinical provision of care , as well as the quality of care as experienced by women in the sub-Saharan African region . They also explore the experiences of adolescents as well as women accessing care in insecure environments . 

Özge Tunçalp , Medical Officer at WHO and HRP comments ,  “ This supplement shows how far we still have to go in ensuring quality , respectful post-abortion care for all ; it also proves how much we can learn when we commit to working together . Across 11 countries , knowledge has been gained and research capacity has been strengthened . A stronger research community is better able to listen , ask and answer questions , working together for a future where every woman and girl achieves the highest standard of sexual and reproductive health and rights .  ” 

Through the WHO and HRP multi-country study on abortion , data were collected on over 23 , 000 women attending health facilities with abortion-related complications . While most of these women had mild or moderate abortion-related complications , there were still many who had severe or potentially life-threatening complications , particularly in sub-Saharan Africa . A comprehensive approach to abortion and post-abortion care , includes clinical-care , self-care , task-sharing for the provision of care , as well as a supportive health system within an enabling legal environment . This is critical for ensuring high quality abortion care , which incorporates access to a range of affordable and acceptable contraception options - key for safeguarding human rights to health and to bodily autonomy . 

The papers in the supplement show however , that countries need to move fast to ensure healthcare providers and systems can give such quality care for girls and women . The editorial highlights important actions that decision-makers in the sub-Saharan Africa region can take to make a difference , which emphasize : 

Increasing access to high-quality abortion services at all levels of healthcare . 
Ensuring approaches to improve quality of post-abortion care are based on evidence – and to perhaps include supervision to ensure that : healthcare providers use recommended practices ; to audit availability of equipment and supplies ; and to conduct clinical audits such as near-miss case reviews to better understand the reasons behind health complications or negative outcomes . 
Identifying and using interventions which go beyond the health system – including addressing harmful beliefs held by healthcare providers ; recognizing and addressing constraints of health systems ; and ensuring girls and women are empowered . 
The authors of the editorial of the supplement , Professors Seni Kouanda and Zahida Qureshi , conclude with these hopeful words ,  “ While we still face many challenges and obstacles to ensuring access to high-quality abortion and post-abortion care for all women , we believe that efforts such as the MCS-A in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean represent an important step forward , and hope that the work presented throughout this Supplement will help inspire innovations and insights to help fulfil women ’ s reproductive rights .  ” 