Pandemic failures show path to a stronger healthcare system
ELENA STERLIN | OCTOBER 14 , 2021
This page in : English
Conducting research in Togo . Photo Credit : Erick Kaglan / World Bank
The pandemic continues to expose major weaknesses with the existing global health care system , in particular equitable access to vaccines . The situation is most severe in Africa , a continent that imports 99 percent of the vaccines it consumes , and where only a small fraction of the population has been able to get the vaccine so far . The solution is not only to make sure more vaccines are available for Africa , but to start making them there .  

Building local manufacturing capacity

Building manufacturing capacity locally is vital , and it ’ s a priority for the International Finance Corporation ( IFC )  , which supports private sector development in emerging markets as part of the World Bank Group ’ s overall mission . Meeting today ’ s needs matters , but we also need to be prepared for future health crises , and this is driving our efforts on the African continent , both in looking to develop more localized vaccine production and in strengthening health care systems overall .  

Recently , we mobilized $713 million in joint funding—together with German , French and U . S . development agencies—for Aspen Pharmacare , a South Africa-based manufacturer that is making the Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine . That ’ s an important step , but Africa needs more . Manufacturers and leaders in Africa want to be able to not only produce under fill-and-finish contracts , but also manufacture vaccine substances . We ’ ve embarked on some innovative initiatives to help . 

Together with other international funders , we ’ re collaborating with the Institut Pasteur de Dakar ( IPD )  , a vaccine maker and nonprofit health care foundation mandated to support public health improvements in Africa , to help it start a manufacturing hub for COVID-19 and other vaccines . In September we signed a memorandum of understanding with the Center for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations ( CEPI ) to boost vaccine production in low- and middle-income countries , among other initiatives . 

Collaborations , like the one with CEPI ,  require upfront work to identify opportunities and analyze what is needed for a project to launch and be funded , whether by us or another investor . In Rwanda , for example , we ’ re analyzing current capabilities to inform us what to do . Last month , we signed a collaboration agreement with the Rwanda Development Board to develop vaccine manufacturing capacity in Rwanda and contribute to expanding vaccine production in Africa . 

Success requires close cooperation

Ensuring adequate provision of medical supplies and pharmaceuticals , including vaccines , is necessary to protect people from the pandemic , but it is hardly sufficient . It is obvious that countries need trained health care professionals , the right diagnostics , and well-functioning health care systems to properly battle the pandemic .  The World Bank Group , through its health operations , is helping countries across the globe to strengthen their health care systems . In many countries , public-private sector cooperation is an important element . For instance , to quickly fill gaps in the provision of certain health care services , such as diagnostic tests for COVID-19 , governments can contract with the private sector . IFC is facilitating this in Africa where it teamed up with several of its international counterparts to fund Cerba Lancet Africa to add new diagnostic facilities , prioritizing poor and fragile countries with limited diagnostic services . 

In addition , we are sharing with governments our expertise on how to contract with the private sector . An ongoing project in Uzbekistan , for instance , is aimed at improving the quality and volume of the country ’ s dialysis services , an important aspect contributing to a stronger health care system . On the human capital side , since 2018 we have deployed our IQ-Healthcare team of advisors to dozens of hospitals and clinics to guide staff in everything from infection control protocols to establishing smart medical equipment purchase practices . In all , IFC financial support for the health care services sector has totaled $3 . 8 billion during the pandemic . 

As we start to see positive signals in the fight against COVID-19 in emerging markets , we should draw lessons from the failures we have seen . They can point us to the path we need to take to create stronger , more rapidly responsive systems which through more diverse and locally sustained supply chains create better and more equitable outcomes . 