Obesity and US Fire Service: Managing Weight Healthfully in 2017

Weight issues are a significant problem among firefighters, in fact more of a problem than among the general public. Given that Americans are not known for being in peak physical condition, it is clear that firefighters are facing a significant issue. Some studies estimate that more than 70 percent of firefighters are either overweight or obese.
Despite the highly physical nature of the job — and in some cases, because of it — weight problems can cause serious health concerns for firefighters. Obesity can overwork the heart, increasing the likelihood of high blood pressure and other chronic cardiac issues. When stress coupled with extreme physical exertion play out on top of these issues, the results can be fatal. It is estimated that cardiovascular events such as heart attack are responsible for the death of more than half the firefighters who lose their lives while on duty.
If you are obese or overweight, 2017 offers you a chance to get to a healthier version of yourself. Here’s what you need to know.
Sleep Matters
Not only have studies shown that we may eat more the day after we do not get enough sleep, but 24-hour shifts can also negatively impact your heart. Though you cannot control whether or not your sleep will be interrupted while you are on shift, you can focus on getting good sleep when you are home and on shifts when you are not called into the field.
You can:
Have a dark, quiet place to sleep.
Avoid electronics (e.g., watching TV or looking at your phone) in the hours before bed.
Avoid eating or smoking in the hours before bed.
Avoid working out before bed.
Healthy Eating
There is no way around it: You have to change how you eat. Though this means cutting out fried foods, triple servings, extra sugar, and copious amounts of alcohol, it also means piling on the good stuff: lots of fresh fruits and vegetables, lean proteins, and whole grains — the kinds of foods that do not have an ingredients list.
To avoid feeling like you have to deprive yourself or count calories, start by doing things like:
Covering half your plate with produce at every meal
Choosing fruit or a vegetable first for a snack
Eating fruit as a dessert
Cutting out alcohol
Get Up
Moving more will boost your metabolism and help you to feel better and sleep better, which in turn will help you to lose weight more quickly and be more effective on the job.
You can:
Take a short walk every day.
Do weight-bearing exercises with a friend.
Park further away from the store.
Stand while you are reading or watching TV.
Do sit-ups or pushups during commercial breaks.
Take Action in 2017
If you are struggling with obesity or weight management, do not wait for a “good time” to get started creating and executing a plan to manage it. Talk to your family doctor today, and start getting healthy.