Supporting vaccine rollout in developing countries
JUAN PABLO URIBE | DECEMBER 15 , 2021
This page in : English
Image credit : iStock / Getty Images Plus / Inside Creative House 


Equitable access to vaccines is key to stop the spread of COVID-19 , yet just 4% of people in low-income countries are vaccinated . 

To save lives around the world , COVID-19 vaccines must be shared more equitably and become widely available in low- and middle-income countries . However , obtaining enough vaccines is only the first hurdle . To get shots into arms rapidly , developing countries have to be prepared and equipped for mass vaccination . Following a needs assessment conducted in more than 140 countries , the World Bank committed USD 20 billion to help countries purchase vaccine doses and strengthen their health infrastructure to prepare for vaccination rollout . 

A complex and massive task

Large-scale immunization campaigns involve complicated operations from the moment vaccines arrive at the border until they reach their intended recipients . After identifying the most vulnerable people and setting priorities , countries need to boost their health infrastructure , equip health centers , expand storage and cold chains while also training the health workers who will carry out the vaccination . Transport to remote areas often requires complex logistical planning . 
 
 
 " By explaining the benefits of vaccination , countries can combat misinformation and improve vaccination uptake .  " 


Supporting countries and addressing specific needs 

Beyond access to vaccines , needs vary from one country to the next . In Ecuador , for example , the World Bank financing is helping the country to purchase vaccines , manage supply chains and logistics for storage and handling , and provide PPE for health workers . In Nepal , World Bank financing helps strengthen the health system and procure diagnostic tests , laboratory equipment and therapeutics . The country is also expanding surveillance and monitoring – crucial to track vaccination progress – using digital technology . 

Overcoming vaccine hesitancy

Community engagement and outreach are critical to the success of COVID-19 vaccination campaigns . By explaining the benefits of vaccination , countries can combat misinformation and improve vaccination uptake . After early immunization efforts faced resistance , Cote d ’ Ivoire launched an awareness-raising drive , enlisting the help of media influencers , religious and community leaders and local elected officials to reach the population . Within a few weeks , daily vaccination rates increased tenfold . With just 4% of people vaccinated in low-income countries , efforts to prevent the spread of COVID-19 and mitigate its impact are still ongoing . We will continue to work with countries and partners like the COVAX facility and the Africa Vaccine Acquisition Trust to make life saving vaccines available to all everywhere . 