Feasible actions to expand COVID-19 vaccine supply before the end of 2021
MAMTA MURTHITRISTAN REED | SEPTEMBER 24 , 2021
This page in : English
2
Image
Delivering vaccine supplies in Kenya . 
For a 2nd challenging year , the United Nations General Assembly is meeting in the shadow of a pandemic . Fully vaccinating every country against COVID-19 is the urgent issue on the agenda , and not just because of the lives and livelihoods immediately at stake . Access to vaccines would allow delegates from low- and middle-income economies to meet their counterparts in person safely , to work more effectively on long term issues like climate change , future pandemics , and poverty . 

Though the world is now administering about 1 billion vaccine doses per month , access is still highly unequal . Multilateral initiatives including the African Vaccine Acquisition Trust and COVAX , established to procure vaccines for low- and middle-income countries , have contracted with a subset of developers that are facing production delays and export restrictions . Vaccine donations have not filled the gap , with less than one-quarter of pledges for 2021 delivered , and more donations delayed until 2022 as high-income economies prioritize their own populations . 

In August , we quantified the impact of six policy and regulatory measures to increase vaccine supply , accounting for these constraints . While many forecasts suggest supply is ramping up , there have been setbacks . Continued lack of transparency in supply and delivery schedules means that it is hard to know for sure . Our measures will expand available supply by year-end . 


Three measures to accelerate regulatory approvals , optimize production capacity across firms , and adjust generous dosage thresholds are not zero-sum , and do not require high-income countries to swap delivery dates with low- and middle-income countries . These are : 

Fast-tracking regulatory approval of effective vaccines . Vaccine importers rely on the WHO emergency use listing ( EUL ) to assure quality . Optimistic supply forecasts often include vaccine candidates that have not yet received WHO EUL , or production capacity for listed candidates that has not been inspected by international authorities . For instance , Brazil , China , Russia , and Thailand have licensed capacity to produce the AstraZeneca vaccine . However , if these facilities do not request WHO inspections , this cannot be exported easily . Only about 10 percent of the 4 billion dose annual production capacity of China ’ s Sinopharm and Sinovac has been authorized by the WHO . Inspecting these facilities requires expert inspectors to travel ( at times with 14 day quarantines ) and WHO has relied on consultants that are in short supply . Commitments of human resources from stringent regulatory authorities like the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration ( TGA )  , the European Medicines Agency ( EMA )  , and the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) could help WHO fast-track inspections as emerging markets scale their production capacity . 
Repurposing production capacity to effective vaccines . Not all COVID-19 vaccine development efforts have resulted in highly effective vaccines , but vaccine development has resulted in capacity to produce vaccines . An example is CureVac , a developer that accepted funds from the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations ( CEPI )  , the European Investment Bank , and the German and United Kingdom governments to build a network capable of producing 300 million doses in 2021 . Unfortunately , the CureVac vaccine is less effective than required for regulatory approval . While the firm plans to hold on to this capacity and develop another candidate , a greater return on public funds could be achieved by reallocating CureVac ’ s supplies to developers of effective mRNA vaccines through the COVAX marketplace . 
Authorizing half doses without compromising efficacy . The effectiveness of vaccines does not necessarily depend on the size of a dose in a linear fashion . While initial doses chosen in clinical trials can be large given a reasonable desire to demonstrate effectiveness , dosing can be adjusted downward . In the case of yellow fever , the WHO ’ s Strategic Advisory Group of Experts ( SAGE ) has recommended dose fractionation down to one-fifth of the standard dose to overcome scarcity in emergencies . Moderna scientists have shown that a 50µg rather than a 100µg dose provides the same immunity response . Regulators could authorize half doses of Moderna , doubling available supply , as well commission more research on the fractionation of this and other vaccines , as Brazil is doing with the Oxford / AstraZeneca vaccine . 
Three other measures involve reconfiguring the prioritization of low-risk groups , to allow the vulnerable in every country to have their first dose .  We ’ ve received feedback that these measures might be more politically challenging to undertake than the three above , however the science is clear that they would reduce global mortality . Further , some regulators are not convinced there is benefit from providing first doses or boosters to certain low-risk groups at all . 

The measures are : 

Postponing boosters for adults with healthy immune systems . While vaccine manufacturers have a profit motive to market third doses to those willing to pay , an FDA expert advisory panel has said there is insufficient evidence that boosters would provide a health benefit to healthy adults . The health benefit of initial doses however is well known . 
Postponing doses for those with confirmed prior infection . Prior infection confers immunity through the same mechanism that vaccines do . Regulators could adopt the French approach and delay vaccinations for those with prior confirmed COVID-19 infection . 
Postponing doses for adolescents and children . This is perhaps the most politically challenging option , given parents ’ strong desire to protect their kids . Nonetheless , the risk of mortality and severe illness for those under age 18 is extremely low compared to health care workers and the elderly in low- and middle-income countries . On this basis , a United Kingdom advisory panel does not recommend immunizing children ages 12-15 , judging that the risk of side effects in this age group outweighs the health benefit . 
Our analysis does not rule out other scenarios . Economies could reserve supplies to vaccinate only 80 percent rather than 100 percent of their eligible populations . India has announced plans to relax export restrictions constraining COVAX ’ s supply , though it is unclear by how much . Production could expand more rapidly than anticipated , despite current delays . 

But we don ’ t need to wait and hope for these scenarios to play out . Six actions to expand supply could be implemented immediately and save lives . 

We hope that delegates give them , and others , full consideration . 