Global hunger continues to rise , new UN report says
821 million people now hungry and over 150 million children stunted , putting hunger eradication goal at risk
11 September 2018 News release Rome Reading time : 4 min ( 1153 words ) 
العربية
中文
Français
Русский
Español
New evidence continues to signal that the number of hungry people in the world is growing , reaching 821 million in 2017 or one in every nine people , according to The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2018 released today . Limited progress is also being made in addressing the multiple forms of malnutrition , ranging from child stunting to adult obesity , putting the health of hundreds of millions of people at risk . 

Hunger has been on the rise over the past three years , returning to levels from a decade ago . This reversal in progress sends a clear warning that more must be done and urgently if the Sustainable Development Goal of Zero Hunger is to be achieved by 2030 . 

The situation is worsening in South America and most regions of Africa , while the decreasing trend in undernourishment that characterized Asia seems to be slowing down significantly . 

The annual UN report found that climate variability affecting rainfall patterns and agricultural seasons , and climate extremes such as droughts and floods , are among the key drivers behind the rise in hunger , together with conflict and economic slowdowns .  
 
 “ The alarming signs of increasing food insecurity and high levels of different forms of malnutrition are a clear warning that there is considerable work to be done to make sure we ‘ leave no one behind ’ on the road towards achieving the SDG goals on food security and improved nutrition ,  ” the heads of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO )  , the International Fund for Agricultural Development ( IFAD )  , the UN Children ' s Fund ( UNICEF )  , the World Food Programme ( WFP ) and WHO warned in their joint foreword to the report .  
 
 “ If we are to achieve a world without hunger and malnutrition in all its forms by 2030 , it is imperative that we accelerate and scale up actions to strengthen the resilience and adaptive capacity of food systems and people ’ s livelihoods in response to climate variability and extremes ,  ” the leaders said .  



The impact of climate variability and extremes on hunger 

Changes in climate are already undermining production of major crops such as wheat , rice and maize in tropical and temperate regions and , without building climate resilience , this is expected to worsen as temperatures increase and become more extreme .  

Analysis in the report shows that the prevalence and number of undernourished people tend to be higher in countries highly exposed to climate extremes . Undernourishment is higher again when exposure to climate extremes is compounded by a high proportion of the population depending on agricultural systems that are highly sensitive to rainfall and temperature variability .  

Temperature anomalies over agricultural cropping areas continued to be higher than the long-term mean throughout 2011–2016 , leading to more frequent spells of extreme heat in the last five years . The nature of rainfall seasons is also changing , such as the late or early start of rainy seasons and the unequal distribution of rainfall within a season . 

The harm to agricultural production contributes to shortfalls in food availability , with knock-on effects causing food price hikes and income losses that reduce people ’ s access to food .  



Slow progress on ending all forms of malnutrition 

Poor progress has been made in reducing child stunting , the report says , with nearly 151 million children aged under 5 too short for their age due to malnutrition in 2017 , compared to 165 million in 2012 . Globally , Africa and Asia accounted for 39% and 55% of all stunted children , respectively . 

Prevalence of child wasting remains extremely high in Asia where almost 1 in 10 children under five has low weight for their height , compared to just one in 100 in Latin America and the Caribbean . 

The report describes as “ shameful ” the fact that one in three women of reproductive age globally is affected by anaemia , which has significant health and development consequences for both women and their children . No region has shown a decline in anaemia among women of reproductive age , and the prevalence in Africa and Asia is nearly three times higher than in North America . 

Rates of exclusive breastfeeding in Africa and Asia are 1 . 5 times higher than those in North America where only 26% of infants under 6 months receive breastmilk exclusively .  



The other side of hunger : obesity on the rise 

Adult obesity is worsening , and more than one in eight adults in the world is obese . The problem is most significant in North America , but Africa and Asia are also experiencing an upward trend , the report shows . 

Undernutrition and obesity coexist in many countries , and can even be seen side by side in the same household . Poor access to nutritious food due to its higher cost , the stress of living with food insecurity , and physiological adaptations to food deprivation help explain why food-insecure families may have a higher risk of overweight and obesity .  



Call for action

The report calls for implementing and scaling up interventions aimed at guaranteeing access to nutritious foods and breaking the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition . Policies must pay special attention to groups who are the most vulnerable to the harmful consequences of poor food access : infants , children aged under five , school-aged children , adolescent girls , and women . 

At the same time , a sustainable shift must be made towards nutrition-sensitive agriculture and food systems that can provide safe and high-quality food for all . 

The report also calls for greater efforts to build climate resilience through policies that promote climate change adaptation and mitigation , and disaster risk reduction .  



Key facts and figures

Number of hungry people in the world in 2017 : 821 million or 1 in every 9 people
in Asia : 515 million
in Africa : 256 . 5 million
in Latin America and the Caribbean : 39 million
Children under 5 affected by stunting ( low height-for-age )  : 150 . 8 million ( 22 . 2% ) 
Children under 5 affected by wasting ( low weight-for-height )  : 50 . 5 million ( 7 . 5% ) 
Children under 5 who are overweight ( high weight-for-height )  : 38 . 3 million ( 5 . 6% ) 
Percentage of women of reproductive age affected by anaemia : 32 . 8%
Percentage of infants aged below 6 months who were exclusively breastfed : 40 . 7%
Adults who are obese : 672 million ( 13% or 1 in 8 adults )  . 


Note to editors

The heads of agencies issuing today ' s report are : 

José Graziano da Silva , Director-General of FAO
Gilbert F . Houngbo , President of IFAD
Henrietta H . Fore , Executive Director of UNICEF
David Beasley , Executive Director of WFP and
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus , Director-General of WHO . 
The report is part of tracking progress towards Sustainable Development Goal 2-Zero Hunger , which aims to end hunger , promote food security and end all forms of malnutrition by 2030 . The report also tracks progress on six of the seven World Health Assembly global nutrition targets . 


Last year ’ s report observed that three factors are behind the recent rise in hunger : conflict , climate and economic slowdowns , and provided an in-depth study of the role of conflict . This year ’ s report focuses on the role of climate variability and extremes to explain the observed trends in food security . The attribution of climate variations and extremes to climate change is beyond the 