Genetically modified foods are here to stay
GM foods have been a source of controversy over the years with concerns over human health, ecotoxicity and general god-meddling tomfoolery

GM foods are here to stay…
The process of genetically engineering an organism by inserting the DNA from one species into the genome (genetic code) of another, and therefore imbuing the organism with new characteristics produces a genetically modified organism (GMO), from which, GM foods are derived. Commercially available GM foods are plant-based, but there is a future in GM animal products.
As of 2015, 28 countries were producing GM plants on “over 10% of the world’s arable land”. The US and Brazil produce the overwhelming majority; Europe has a relatively small amount of GM groups grown on its soil with Spain and Portugal being the main GM food producers within Europe. Nineteen EU states recently opted out of GM crop growth including Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. England has remained open to the potential of future GM crop growth.
We are all neophobes at heart
Despite the potential benefits of GM foods, there continues to be apprehension around their use. As discussed in my previous article on cultured meat, mankind is evolutionarily predisposed to be cautious of new foods. Foods that do not fit in with an individual’s perception of ‘conventional’ will likely be met with suspicion. Research has shown that consumers scepticism of GM foods is such that many will pay extra to have GM-free than to purchase GM foods. Cultural factors play a strong role in the degree of scepticism with Italian consumers with high traditional culinary values showing increased sensitivity to the potential risks of bioengineered food. Interestingly, second-generation GM foods — those that are aimed at improving nutritional qualities of food as opposed to increasing efficiencies in production have shown to be more appealing to consumers, possibly because the benefits such as improved nutrition or taste, or longer shelf-life are more tangible to consumers.
‘Natural’ genetic engineering
The selective breeding of plants and animals has been carried out since the dawn of agriculture around 10,000 years ago. Agronomic aims of genetically modifying certain characteristics such as higher crop yield or larger fruits and seeds underpin modern farming. The birth of genetically engineered organisms as we know it today stems from the mid-20th century with the discovery of genetic material transfer and, of course, the renowned DNA double helix discovery of Watson and Crick. The field has blossomed since the 1990s with the launch of the human genome projects and the first GM foods being commercialised.
Living in a biotech world
Technologies that enhance the efficiency of crop yields are essential to feed humanity. For example, without the Haber-Bosch process that converts nitrogen and hydrogen into ammonia as nutrients for plants, it is estimated that crop production could only feed half the global population.
We have finite limitations in terms of arable land so increasing, or at least maintaining, crop efficiency is paramount. Pressure on arable land is compounded by factors such as urbanisation, land desertification and climate change. Currently, most GM crops are engineered to improve yield and / or resistance to disease or herbicides, bringing benefits most saliently to producers, but indirectly to consumers, too. The utilisation of GM crops has facilitated huge increases in production without an increase in land footprint. Without GMO technologies, EU farmers (with their comparatively small dependence on GMOs) would require an additional 32% of land to produce the same quantity of food. GM foods facilitate more food with less. Less land, less pesticides, less water.
Superfoods
With the genetic modification of foodstuffs, it is possible to bioengineer the nutritional profile or allergenic properties of what we eat. There are some wonderful examples of GMO technology developed to combat nutritional deficits. A striking example is that of Golden Rice, a rice species bioengineered using genes from the daffodil and a bacterium to impart the rice with Vitamin A. Vitamin A deficiency affects around 140 million children, predominantly in developing countries. This deficiency results in blindness and an increase in mortality rate. Enhanced nutrition at the simplest level has the potential to improve the lives of those most in need.
GMO-No
The main concerns raised are the propensity to invoke allergic reactions, the possibility to transfer genes from GM food to human, and the transfer of genes from GM crops to wild species “contaminating” the natural biosphere.
Two decades ago, the bioengineered corn, StarLink, which had only approval as animal feed was found within food products leading to a huge recall with a particularly notable settlement of $60 million in damages going to the Taco Bell brand. The protein used in StarLink sticks in the digestive tract causing strong allergic reactions. Moving on twenty years, the current safety assessments and protocol involved in the development of GMOs means that the allergenic potential is negligible in GM foods. Whereas traditional crops grown through breeding are rarely tested for allergenicity.
Genetic transfer
Concerns surrounding the potential transfer of genes from GMOs into traditional crops continues to be central to the debate due to its potential impact on food safety and food security. Some experts believing that an increase in GM foods could cause dependence of developing countries on industrial / post-industrial ones.
“The environmental impact of GM crops is important concerning creating food security in developing countries. Genetically modified crops can potentially fail to germinate; kill organisms other than pests that are beneficial to plants and reduce soil fertility, and potentially transfer insecticidal properties or virus resistance to wild relatives of the crop species.”
Kaiser Jamil, an internationally renowned biotechnologist and president of the Third World Organization for Women in Science
The transfer of GMO genes into the human genome is very unlikely. Whilst the presence of “food-DNA” can be detected in the human (or animal) blood, there is “limited evidence that dietary DNA can integrate into the genome” through the gut, and certainly, no evidence suggesting that any DNA uptake converts into the expression of any particular feature — i.e. no GM-food consumer has sprouted any leaves. This said, the walls of the digestive tract are not a total barrier against DNA fragments. However, humans have been exposed to food-DNA in their diet for millennia, and there is no evidence that GM foods have a higher propensity for uptake than traditional foods. It is worth noting that research in this area is still ongoing and conclusions are yet to be reached.
Ecological concerns
The rise of GM plants that are engineered to be increasingly resistant to various pests and weeds, creates a high propensity for the evolution of resistant species which will overcome the GM barrier thus “nullifying” the benefits of the GMO. Similarly, if an increase in herbicide usage on herbicide-resistant plants, the surrounding weeds may well become resistant to the herbicide in time. Some ecologists have also raised concerns about the potential of pest-resistant crops harming colonies of other insects such as Monarch butterflies, but as yet, this has not proved to be an issue.
Terminator technology
Biotech firms understandably use patent protection on their GM plants (and seeds), however, this raises the concern over “privatisation of a plant’s genetic resources”. “Terminator” or seed-sterilization technology, which is genetically designed to “switch off” a plant’s ability to germinate a second time was proposed as a method of preventing infringements on intellectual property. This runs the risk of disadvantaging developing nations and the livelihoods of farmers in these nations who often depend on the seed on one crop for the next. One well-known company, Monsanto, who has developed a bit of a reputation for their sharkish business practice, were pressurised back in the late 90s to drop plans to use seed sterilisation technology. From this point, there has been no commercialised use of seed sterilisation technology.
Seed-sterilization technology has its benefits too — cross-pollination can be problematic in agriculture, for example, if a field of GMO crop cross-pollinated with a field of organic crop, it can ruin the value of the harvest. Seed sterilization can mitigate such cross-pollination and also prevent unwanted contamination of wild species.
Worth a punt
The concerns raised by experts and consumers are well-founded but not unmanageable. More research is needed in some areas, such as the effects on increasingly resistant pests and DNA transfer through the digestive tract. However, all in all, the risks of GM foods appear to be fairly minimal and work in progress. The benefits that GM foods could bring, such as increased efficiency of crop production with a smaller environmental footprint, improved nutritional profile and even tastier foods — these all seem to me like GM foods might be worth a punt.