Mental Health Issues are Consuming My Country

Photo by Amanda Dalbjörn on Unsplash
I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness — Allen Ginsberg , Howl . 
Depression and other severe forms of mental illness are slowly consuming medical students in my country of Lebanon . One after another , lives of great minds are being destroyed and brainwashed into becoming robot-like working machines . They are the prisoners of their own biased knowledge concerning mental illness , assuming that pills like antidepressants constitute the main treatment . And what is more horrible is that their seniors and psychiatrists are deeply rooted in this hungry industrial business of popping pills , knowing that it is the only way to “ balance the chemicals in their head .  ” 
Fully aware of the side effects of these medications , the students try their best not to present these adverse effects to their likewise struggling patients , thinking that this data omission would cause them less worry . In the interim , the unfortunate patients struggle all the way through their treatment , as they ’ re being bombarded with side effects that could last their entire lives , changing their brain chemistry forever . I am not saying that pills in psychiatry don ’ t help . I am saying that they are not being truthfully presented worldwide with their pros and cons , resulting in patients left with no choice but to look at these pills as life-saving magic . 
To catch up with the right terminologies in Lebanon , like in many , if not all countries , the medical system is based on the hierarchy , as follows : attendings , fellows , residents , interns , and medical students . When medical students start doing their practical rotations at the hospitals , they become interns and are called as such . Otherwise , medical students could be regarded as people with little to no exposure to hospital and clinic settings . They are supposed to be the protectors of the future generations . They are expected to know and comprehend the bigger chunk of theoretical knowledge in general medicine . That is why when they finish their degree , they get an MD — a medical diploma . Instead , in Lebanon , the majority are being used , by others and themselves , as incubators of “ medical knowledge ” and followers of pointless rules and regulations in the “ educational ” system that should first , before all else , offer them complete psychological evaluations and follow ups . 
The vast varieties of diseases that a medical student is expected to learn and read in books is overwhelming , and might easily cause anxiety , versus a student in any other field . Add to that , medical students are expected to witness their theoretical diseases in real-life practice . In fact , they are being mentally coerced to take on exhausting shifts , go through challenging exams , worry about their stupid grades , compete aggressively against each other , and care very little to how their mental and physical health are deteriorating over time . It ’ s a hierarchy that is based on a Darwinian system — survival of the fittest . The weak ones are left behind . They either drop medicine and choose something else , or drop education altogether . If we consider the feasibility to do that in expensive private universities , we would notice that many students are internalizing their problems and fears . And if we consider the economy of Lebanon , we would expect that this internalization would also occur in students who attend public universities . To put this into perspective , I will share this : 
Some time ago , a medical student from my university committed suicide — I won ’ t go into details , but mentioning it will suffice . Also , in the past few years , I have met a few others who have quit their program halfway through their education , after trying endlessly to fix their mental problems with incompetent psychiatrists . Please know this : I am not posting this to point fingers at anyone or blame anyone in particular . What I am trying to say is that we have a deleterious problem in our society and it is consuming our greatest minds slowly . It is not simply genetics or the age-old cliche that it ’ s just in our head , and an imbalance of chemicals . It ’ s coming from something deeper , and it is being inflicted on us through a society hungry for money and power — and obviously in a corrupt system that deprives people from the basic needs they deserve to get in life . I am not blaming the medical society . I am not blaming medical schools . I am simply addressing the people in charge of the whole system in Lebanon . I cry for their attention , so that they can realize that we are losing beautiful young minds ; minds that could literally save the lives of future generations to come . 
I won ’ t say how I ’ ve personally coped with my own mental health issues , because that deserves to be left for another post . What I can say is that we should start talking about these issues more often . We should know how to properly address them . We should know when to help and when to step away . There should be a methodological approach that everyone can use to help any person suffering from mental health issues . We should define and then accept the problem , and try to discover its margins in detail , before jumping in to solve it . I honestly don ’ t think that it will happen anytime soon in Lebanon , but what the hell — why not saying something about it , right ? It ’ s far better than staying silent and furious . After all , Lebanese people have a lot of things to say socio-politically , despite knowing that change won ’ t come anytime soon . I choose to focus on the psycho-medical aspect , and I do know that change happens everyday . Change needs at least one person ; and sometimes , it doesn ’ t need anyone at all . 