Food and Science

Most writing on food and science for the general public concentrates on health issues . It tends to want to justify norms for healthy eating options and choices . As is inevitable , these norms are often statistically based and the advice is aimed towards improving the health of some statistical population ; reflection the extent of responsibility of a public health authority , for example .  . 
In this publication our focus will be on enabling individual choice and the use of science to enhance the preparation and appreciation of food . Health considerations will be mostly implicit or secondary to enjoyment . However , it is also important to debunk fads , fallacies and fantasies , and realise that , in the absence of certain medical conditions or specialised sports targets , we can afford to be mostly quite relaxed about the health consequences of food consumption . 
As a sample of the approach we will take here , I want to tell you about one of the ingredients I use most frequently although one of the least by volume . It is xanthan gum . 

2 years in my kitchen cupboard and only half way through
Xanthan gum was developed as an industrial food additive to thicken , provide body or even a gel like consistency . My own use is in sauces and soups . It has no effect on taste but does provide a way to control consistency and stabilise . We word “ additive ” will cause some people concern . People who prefer “ natural ” to “ chemical ”  . Yes , chemistry is involved ; as it is in all natural biochemical processes . Xanthan was invented by Allene Rosalind Jeanes by bringing together two sugars ( glucose and sucrose ) and a species of bacteria ( Xanthomonas campestris ) in a fermentation process . It is a safe product and you will only use tiny amounts . 
So , xanthan gum thickens and is safe and tasteless . There are other ways to thicken ; oil and acid emulsions , starches , butter and cream . There is a place for all of these but often an oil acid emulsion is not sufficiently stable on its own for the dish being prepared , starches require heat and butter , as well as cream , contribute to taste in addition to a rich consistency . Three decades ago , when my metabolism worked differently , I used whipping or double cream as by favourite sauce base but , as the pounds accumulated , I decided to switch to corn flour for daily consumption . Then I discovered xanthan gum via Modernist Cuisine at Home . To make use of your xanthan gum ( I am only half way through the 250 gram batch I bought almost 2 years ago ) you will need ( and probably already have ) a blender and a container for your sauce or soup . For sauces I often use a pyrex beaker of the type well known from school chemistry . The one shown fits my blender snuggly and it can be used to serve the sauce at the table , providing a hint that some science was involved in preparing the meal . 

So , how is xanthan gum used . First you need some liquid to thicken . This will work with water but won ’ t please many as a sauce . So a flavoursome stock is a good starting point ( although seasoned wine could also be used )  . A quarter teaspoon of xanthan gum to 0 . 2 litres of fluid works well and adjustment is as simple as adding a little stock , vinegar , wine or oil , depending on the result you are trying to achieve . The stock can be vegetable , meat , fish or seafood based . If the stock is low in fat then the thickening will tend to result in a translucent appearing fluid semi-gel but by adding a little oil or fat a richer silky to creamy texture can be obtained . For daily consumption I used commercially available good quality stock powder and this works well but when time and ingredients are available fish or shellfish stocks or the juices from roasting meat provide even better results . 
I will be returning to the use of xanthan gum in further articles and provide detailed recipes but there is nothing to hinder you starting right away . A modestly priced 250g jar will last about 4 years , if you are usually cooking for two . I have , so far , used it almost exclusively in savoury dishes if anyone has success in using in desserts then I would be delighted to hear about it . 