Health equity and access : The only way to reduce health outcome disparities in India
March 12 , 2022 , 11 : 50 PM IST Amarpreet Rai in Voices , India , TOI
FACEBOOK TWITTER LINKEDIN EMAIL

Amarpreet Rai
Amarpreet Rai
Co-founder and director of operations & development , Sanrai International 
 
 “ Health equity ” means every person has equal opportunity to remain healthy and no one is disadvantaged by their income , social position , location , or other circumstances to get the best healthcare available . The absence of high quality healthcare solutions during unprecedented times like the pandemic , or even during more normal times with accidents , natural disasters , and environmental factors puts people at risk . In many nations , access to health care is dictated by many factors , including affordability of services and proximity to healthcare facilities . Fundamentally , healthcare is a human right and all people should have access to it . 

Data from the National Health Profile ( NHP ) shows that in India there is only one government employed allopathic doctor for every 10 , 189 people , and one state run hospital for every 90 , 343 people . The number of hospital beds per thousand people in India ( 0 . 5 ) is lower than some of the other emerging market countries such as Bangladesh ( 0 . 87 )  , Kenya ( 1 . 4 )  , and Chile ( 2 . 1 )  . These figures are a cause for concern . A glaring spotlight illuminated the lack of hospital beds and resources in April 2021 as the healthcare system was overwhelmed with COVID-19 patients .  Unfortunately , even when the limitation in hospital infrastructure is not national news , it still has an effect on people ’ s ability to access healthcare . 

While India is known for being the world ’ s pharma capital , its unequal healthcare system has created a situation where the wealthy have access to some of the best care in the world , and the impoverished have limited options . According to Oxfam India ’ s Inequality Report 2021 , constant underfunding of the public healthcare system in the last decade has worsened health infrastructure , not improved it even as India becomes wealthier . The lack of health equity has been a major problem for a long time . With the COVID-19 pandemic , more people than ever before are aware of what their healthcare needs and rights are , paving the way for improvements in health equity . 

Health eamarquity in India

In India , social inequality is shaped by socioeconomic status , geography , class , religion , caste , gender , and sexuality . In general , Southern states are better off compared to Northern states in terms of human development . Despite the improvements in healthcare in India , true equity remains a long way off . 

Health equity is important in India because the existing health care infrastructure has always been centred on those who can pay . There ’ s 2 types of healthcare – private and government – with vastly different services and level of quality , meaning that the access to healthcare is not equal . Even if we set aside healthcare is a fundamental human right , the cost to society of unequal healthcare is high . If people wait until the last minute before getting care , they are generally much sicker and require a much more expensive intervention . The direct costs of this are obvious in terms of needing higher cost hospital services , but also the indirect costs with respect to the human cost should not be overlooked . When people are diagnosed at a critical stage , the recovery takes longer so they are out of the workforce for longer . Chronic diseases like diabetes , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD )  , or sleep apnea are diagnosed later , delaying treatment , resulting in a lack of productivity and a shorter lifespan . These direct and indirect costs quickly add up taking a heavy toll on society . 

Managing the health of 1 . 3 billion people is complex , but there is much we can do to change the lack of healthcare equity in India . This includes improving hospital and clinic infrastructure and looking at non infrastructure based interventions like telehealth , channel non-governmental resources in the most disadvantaged areas , and engaging with people to encourage them to prioritize their health . 

When it comes to the general population , education is essential in building awareness around chronic diseases and the importance of early diagnosing . The need to increase advocacy around healthcare issues , address the challenges in improving access to healthcare , and building capacity in different communities is a must at local , regional , and national levels . 

Probable Solutions

Good healthcare should be available at affordable prices and access should extend outside of bigger cities . There are four things to focus on when a country is trying to achieve health equity : one is ensuring access to primary care , especially maternal and childcare , second is increasing education and awareness around specific diseases and the value of early diagnosing , third is finding innovative or disruptive ways to improve access to healthcare without needing costly infrastructure projects like telehealth , and fourth is working directly in underserved areas to craft hyperlocal solutions to fit their unique needs . 

Primary Health Centres , which are already found in many parts of rural India can be improved by adding to the quality and services offered . These can be great community outreach points as well for education and awareness activities on diseases that are prevalent in the population . The private healthcare sector also has a big role to play , especially in combination with another of India ’ s strengths in the IT sector . Telehealth and other remote healthcare solutions are an extremely effective intervention to improve access to high quality care . 

Understanding community needs , focusing on education and awareness , and finding disruptive solutions in healthcare delivery is the way of the future in India . Fortunately , our healthcare system is now on the verge of a revolutionary shift , triggered by an unfortunate pandemic . Our response to COVID-19 is a stark reminder to us about the urgent need of making healthcare equitable in India . We can achieve health equity for all by working together and focusing on the most vulnerable among us . After all , healthcare is a fundamental human right . 