Health financing rifts mean growing risks for a global recovery
CHRISTOPH KUROWSKIDAVID B . EVANSAJAY TANDONPATRICK HOANG-VU EOZENOUMARTIN SCHMIDTALEXANDER IRWINIRYNA POSTOLOVSKA | SEPTEMBER 21 , 2021
This page in : English
Image
Health Financing
In the months ahead , the world is likely to experience the most rapid economic growth in the aftermath of any recession in the last 80 years . This swift economic turnaround , however , doesn ’ t hide the fact that a sustained , inclusive global recovery from COVID-19 , poses complex challenges that have yet to be resolved . 

The return to growth is crucial for the recovery , but so is countries ’ ability to fund public investments . In the latest update of our paper ,  “ From Double Shock to Double Recovery ,  ” we look beyond economic growth to highlight large disparities in the capacities of countries to maintain and increase key public investments , including health over 2021 to 2026 . 

According to the IMF ’ s latest macro-fiscal projections , 126 countries will increase their per capita general government expenditure ( GGE ) above pre-COVID levels in the next five years . Yet in 52 countries , per capita GGE is projected to remain below the levels of 2019 before the pandemic hit . We call the first group “ GGE-growth countries ” and the second “ non-GGE-growth countries .  ” 

This distinction has salience for policy choices , as our paper shows . Further forms of diversity within each of the groups is also an important factor . For example , both groups include rich and poor countries . In addition , in both groups , countries show differences in the outlook across a wider range of fiscal parameters . For example , among both GGE-growth and non-GGE-growth countries prospects vary substantially for the length and depth of periods in which governments are expected to cut their spending . Growing debt service requirements will also differentially constrain countries ’ ability to invest in the welfare of people . 

Many countries are expected to decrease their government health spending

Unaddressed , these disparities in the fiscal outlook will widen rifts in the ability of countries to finance their recovery from the COVID-19 health shock . At one extreme , there are some higher-income countries in the GGE-growth group—whose already-strong health financing capacities are poised to grow further in the years ahead . At the other end are some lower-income countries in the non-GGE-growth group , whose health spending is historically weak and is likely to further diminish . 

Unless governments raise the priority assigned to health in their budgets , low-income countries ( LICs ) in the non-GGE-growth group , will see their average per capita government spending on health drop almost 12% between 2019 and 2026 to an average of $12 ( Figure 1 )  . This brings their average health spending to levels less than half what would have been expected for 2026 under trends prior to COVID-19 ( Figure 1 )  . For the lower-middle-income countries ( LMICs ) among the 52 non-GGE-growth countries , per capita general government spending on health will fall by nearly 10% between 2019 and 2026 to an average of $82 , instead of growing to $114 , as would have been expected under pre-COVID trends . 

So why don ’ t these countries direct more resources to health ? In the wake of COVID-19 , few can doubt the importance of such investments . But many of these countries simply can ’ t afford to spend adequately on health . 

Figure 1 :  Per capita government health spending , non-GGE growth LICs and LMICs ( in constant 2018 $US ) 
For most countries at the lower end of the health-financing spectrum , a return to past growth trends in per capita government spending on health is an almost impossible task .  On average , to keep their health spending growing at pre-pandemic rates , non-GGE-growth LICs , for example , would have to double the share of their government expenditure dedicated to health , from 10% pre-COVID to 20% in 2026 ; and non-GGE-growth LMICs from 8 . 1% pre-COVID to 13 . 5% in 2026 . 

Shortfalls in financing of COVID-19 vaccines , preparedness and response capabilities

Exceptional health financing commitments are needed in LICs and LMICs to return to pre-pandemic growth trends in per capita government spending on health ; yet even these levels would still be insufficient to finance investments necessary to halt the current pandemic and prevent future ones . 

An analysis of spending needs and available resources for COVID-19 vaccines makes this clear .  In LICs , the projected net growth in health spending during 2021 and 2022 will amount on average to only 45% of the countries ’ cost share of a COVID-19 vaccine roll out ( including the logistical costs of vaccine distribution but excluding support from COVAX )  .  If LICs do not return to pre-pandemic growth rates in government health spending , this share will be on average only 28 percent with non-GGE-growth countries among them lacking any incremental resources to invest in the COVID-19 vaccine roll-out . 

Similarly , the expected net growth in government health spending in LMICs over the same period will cover only 66% of these countries ’ cost share for the vaccine rollout .  If countries do not return to pre-pandemic growth rates in government health spending , this share will be on average only 43 percent . 

With the expected delays or inability to mobilize sufficient funds for a timely and effective rollout of vaccines , countries will be unable to halt the transmission of the coronavirus and the emergence of new variants .  

Likewise , countries ’ capacity to invest in strengthening preparedness and response for future pandemics will continue to fall short .  The projected net growth in government health spending in LICs and LMICs by 2026 will cover only about three-quarters of the necessary annual investment to strengthen and maintain public health preparedness and response capabilities . If LICs and LMICs do not return to pre-pandemic growth rates in health spending , this share will be on average just above 60 percent .  

Universal health coverage—a tough job just got tougher

Emerging rifts in health financing capacities are expected to have even more far-reaching destructive effects . This is because they may force cash-strapped countries into difficult either / or choices in health investment . Funding response and preparedness priorities at the cost of other essential health services would pose grave risks for a full , sustained health and economic recovery from COVID-19 . The initial COVID-19 health shock weakened non-pandemic health services in many settings , as health-system resources were redirected to the pandemic response . The Global Financing Facility ( GFF )  , which supports the continuity of essential health services as part of COVID-19 response efforts , has been sounding the alarm of this secondary health crisis for vulnerable populations . Regaining losses in progress toward universal health coverage ( UHC ) is critical for human capital development and a full return to inclusive growth . 

The original “ Double Shock , Double Recovery ” paper laid out the choices that countries have in managing their government funds to meet spending needs for health and economic recovery . The latest data indicate , however , that in many lower-income countries , choices are increasingly constrained , and the financing of a full health recovery from their own resources - increasingly out of reach . 

Acting on common interests

Rifts in countries ’ capacity to finance health were large before the pandemic—and they are widening further in its wake , creating a fault line that threatens COVID-19 recovery and health security for all . The good news is that , in contrast to geologic rifts , human action can bridge the health financing divide and prevent much of the damage it may bring . Coordinated global action that reverses the recent stagnation in development assistance for health will have positive effects far beyond the lower-income countries that benefit from it first . 

It won ’ t be easy to boost development assistance for health at a time when some wealthy donor countries are also struggling . But high-income countries , too , have a vital interest in reinforcing a global recovery that remains fragile . The World Bank Group , with the IMF , WHO , and WTO have formed a task force to accelerate access to COVID-19 vaccines , therapeutics , and diagnostics by leveraging trade solutions and multilateral finance . Only together , countries can bridge the health financing rifts to build a healthier , more secure , more prosperous future for all . 