Public Health
Interventions
Applications for Public Health
Nursing Practice
March 2001
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century 
Project Director : Mary Rippke , RN , MA
Project Coordinator : Laurel Briske , RN , MA , CPNP
Project Staff : Linda Olson Keller , RN , MS , CS , and 
Sue Strohschein , RN , MS
Administrative Assistant : Jill Simonetti
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Acknowledgments
Public Health Interventions : Applications for Public Health Nursing Practice
acknowledges the tremendous contribution made by practicing public health nurses ( PHNs ) 
and educators from Iowa , Minnesota , North Dakota , South Dakota , and Wisconsin . Special
thanks go to the graduate students who identified and analyzed relevant intervention literature . 
Forty-six practice experts and educators from those same states volunteered to serve on review
panels , devoting hours of their time and , more importantly , their practice wisdom . An additional
150 preceptors and participants from the Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st
Century project provided invaluable input for clarification and richness of the content . This
document could not have happened without them . Gratitude also goes to LaVohn Josten and
Sharon Cross , School of Nursing , University of Minnesota for their insight and evaluation
expertise . 
The interventions also reflect the talents and skills of many Minnesota Department of Health
staff . In particular we want to acknowledge our colleagues in the Section of Public Health
Nursing , Marie Margitan , Terre St . Onge , and Karen Zilliox ; Diane Jordan and the library
services ’ staff ; and Lisa Patenaude , former administrative assistant . 
We are interested in learning more about how the model is being used or adapted . If you have
comments or questions , please contact us . 
Linda Olson Keller 651 / 296-9176 linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us
Sue Strohschein 320 / 650-1078 sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Suggested citation : Public Health Nursing Section : Public Health Interventions–Applications for Public
Health Nursing Practice . St . Paul : Minnesota Department of Health , 2001 . 
Literature Search Managers
Mary Jo Chippendale , University of Minnesota
Jennifer Deschaine , Bethel College
Kathy Lammers , Winona State University
Deborah Meade , Augsburg College
Jackie Meyer , University of Iowa
Dolores Severtson , University of Wisconsin-Madison
Victoria Von Sadovszky , University of Wisconsin-Madison
Expert Panelists
Iowa
Elaine Boes , Palo Alto County Community Health Service
Nancy Faber , Worth County Public Health
Marti Franc , Des Moines Visiting Nurse Services
Penny Leake , Winneshiek County Public Health
Therese O ’ Brien , Lee County Health Department
Janet Peterson , Iowa Department of Health
Jane Schadle , Wellmark Community Health Improvement
Lu Sheehy , Skill Medical Center
Jenny Terrill , Iowa Department of Health
Minnesota 
Mary Kay Haas , Minnesota Nurses Association
Bonnie Brueshoff , Dakota County Public Health
Terre St . Onge , Minnesota Department of Health
Jean Rainbow , Minnesota Department of Health
Karen Zilliox , Minnesota Department of Health
Barb Mathees , Minnesota State University-Moorhead
Cecilia Erickson , Minneapolis Public Schools
Ane Rogers , Cass County Public Health
Rose Jost , Bloomington Health Department
Dorothea Tesch , Minnesota Department of Health
Nancy Vandenberg , Minnesota Department of Health
Ann Moorhous , Minnesota Department of Health
Mary Sheehan , Minnesota Department of Health
Penny Hatcher , Minnesota Department of Health
North Dakota
Ruth Bachmeier , Fargo Cass Public Health
Nancy Mosbaek , Minot State University
Cheryl Hagen , Fargo Cass Public Health
Kelly Schmidt , First District Health Unit–Minot
Debbie Swanson , Grand Forks Public Health Department
Barb Andrist , Upper Missouri District Health Unit
South Dakota
Nancy Fahrenwald , South Dakota State University
Darlene Bergeleen , South Dakota Department of Health
Joan Frerichs , Grant County–Milbank
Paula Gibson , South Dakota Department of Health
Wisconsin
Judy Aubey , Madison Department of Public Health
Elizabeth Giese , Division of Public Health-Wisconsin
Barbara Nelson , St . Croix Health & Human Services Department
Tim Ringhand , Chippewa County Department of Public Health
Marion Reali , Eau Claire City / County Health Department
Gretchen Sampson , Polk County Health Department
Vicki Moss , Viterbo College
Joan Theurer , Wisconsin Department of Health & Family Services
Julie Willems Van Dijk , Marathon County Health Department
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 1 Interventions
Public Health Nursing Interventions
Public health nurses ( PHNs ) work in schools , homes , clinics , jails , shelters , out of mobile vans and dog sleds . 
They work with communities , the individuals and families that compose communities , and the systems that
impact the health of those communities . Regardless of where PHNs work or whom they work with , all public
health nurses use a core set of interventions to accomplish their goals . 
Interventions are actions that PHNs take on behalf of individuals , families , systems , and 
communities to improve or protect health status . 
This framework , known as the “ intervention model ,  ” defines the scope of public health nursing practice by type
of intervention and level of practice ( systems , community , individual / family )  , rather than by the more traditional 
 “ site ” of service , that is , home visiting nurse , school nurse , occupational health nurse , clinic nurse , etc . The
intervention model describes the scope of practice by what is similar across settings and describes the work of
public health nursing at the community and systems practice levels as well as the conventional individual / family
level . These interventions are not exclusive to public health nursing as they are also used by other public health
disciplines . The public health intervention model does represent public health nursing as a specialty practice of
nursing .  ( See The Cornerstones of Public Health Nursing , Appendix A ) 
An enlarged black and white copy of the wheel can be found in Appendix B . 
1Williams , C . A .  , Highriter , M . E .  ( 1978 )  . Community health nursing–population and practice . Public Health
Reviews , 7 ( 4 )  , 201 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 2 Interventions
The Intervention Wheel
The model , or the “ intervention wheel ,  ” as it has come to be known , integrates three distinct and equally
important components : 
1 . The population-basis of all public health interventions
2 . The three levels of public health practice : 
Community
Systems
Individual / family
3 . The 17 public health interventions : 
Surveillance
Disease and Health Threat Investigation
Outreach 
Screening
Case-Finding
Referral and Follow-up
Case Management
Delegated Functions
Health Teaching
Counseling
Consultation
Collaboration
Coalition Building
Community organizing
Advocacy
Social Marketing
Policy Development and Enforcement
The model itself consists of a darkened outside ring , three inner rings and seventeen “ slices .  ” Each of the inner
rings of the model are labeled “ population-based ,  ” indicating that all public health interventions are populationbased . A population is a collection of individuals who have one or more personal or environmental
characteristics in common . 1 
A population-of-interest is a population that is essentially healthy , but who could
improve factors that promote or protect health . A population-at-risk is a population with a common identified risk
factor or risk-exposure that poses a threat to health . 
1 . Public health interventions are population-based if they focus on entire populations possessing
similar health concerns or characteristics . 
This means focusing on everyone actually or potentially impacted by the condition or who share a
similar characteristic . Population-based interventions are not limited to only those who seek service or
who are poor or otherwise vulnerable . Population-based planning always begins by identifying 
2
Population-based practice assessment , planning and evaluation model .  ( 1999 )  . CHS planning guidelines . 
Minnesota Department of Health ( attached as an Appendix )  . 
3
Institute of Medicine .  ( 1988 )  . The future of public health . Washington DC : National Academy Press . 
4
See , for instance , Evans , R . G .  ,  & Stoddard , G . L .  ( 1990 )  . Producing health , consuming health care . Social
Science and Medicine , 31 , 1347-1363 , or , Wilkinson , R .  ,  & Marmot , M .  ( 1998 )  . Social determinants of health : The
solid facts . World Health Organization . Available . 
5
Turnock , B .  ( 1997 )  . Public health : What it is and how it works . Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen Publishers . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 3 Interventions
everyone who is in the population-of-interest or the population-at-risk . For example , it is a core
public health function to assure that all children are immunized against vaccine-preventable disease . 
Even though limited resources may compel public health departments to target programs toward those
children known to be at particular risk for being under or unimmunized , the public health system
remains accountable for the immunization status of the total population of children . 
2 . Public health interventions are population-based if they are guided by an assessment of
population health status that is determined through a community health assessment process . 
A population-based model of practice analyzes health status ( risk factors , problems , protective
factors , assets ) within populations , establishes priorities , and plans , implements , and evaluates public
health programs and strategies . 2 
The importance of community assessment cannot be emphasized
enough . All public health programs are based on the needs of the community . As communities
change , so do community needs . This is why the core function of assessment is so important . 3 
Public
health agencies need to assess the health status of populations on an ongoing basis , so that public
health programs respond appropriately to new and emerging problems , concerns , and opportunities . 
3 . Public health interventions are population-based if they consider the broad determinants of
health . 
A population-based approach examines all factors that promote or prevent health . It focuses on the
entire range of factors that determine health , rather than just personal health risks or disease . 
Examples of health determinants include income and social status , housing , nutrition , employment and
working conditions , social support networks , education , neighborhood safety and violence issues , 
physical environment , personal health practices and coping skills , cultural customs and values , and
community capacity to support family and economic growth . 4 

4 . Public health interventions are population-based if they consider all levels of prevention , with
a preference for primary prevention . 
Prevention is anticipatory action taken to prevent the occurrence of an event or to minimize its effect
after it has occurred . 5 
A population approach is different from the medical model in which persons
seek treatment when they are ill or injured . Not every event is preventable , but every event does have
a preventable component . Thus , a population-based approach presumes that prevention may occur at
any point–before a problem occurs , when a problem has begun but before signs and symptoms
appear , or even after a problem has occurred . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 4 Interventions
Primary prevention both promotes health and protects against threats to health . It keeps problems
from occurring in the first place . It promotes resiliency and protective factors or reduces susceptibility
and exposure to risk factors . Primary prevention is implemented before a problem develops . It
targets essentially well populations . Primary prevention promotes health , such as building assets in
youth , or keeps problems from occurring , for example , immunizing for vaccine-preventable diseases . 
Secondary prevention detects and treats problems in their early stages . It keeps problems from
causing serious or long-term effects or from affecting others . It identifies risks or hazards and
modifies , removes , or treats them before a problem becomes mroe serious . Secondary prevention is
implemented after a problem has begun , but before signs and symptoms appear . It targets populations
that have risk factors in common . Secondary prevention detects and treats problems early , such as
screening for home safety and correcting hazards before an injury occurs . 
Tertiary prevention limits further negative effects from a problem . It keeps existing problems from
getting worse . It alleviates the effects of disease and injury and restores individuals to their optimal
level of functioning . Tertiary prevention is implemented after a disease or injury has occurred . It
targets populations who have experienced disease or injury . Tertiary prevention keeps existing
problems from getting worse , for instance , collaborating with health care providers to assure periodic
examinations to prevent complications of diabetes such as blindness , renal disease failure , and limb
amputation . 
Whenever possible , public health programs emphasize primary prevention . 
5 . Public health interventions are population-based if they consider all levels of practice . This 
concept is represented by the inner three rings of the model . The inner rings of the model
are labeled community-focused , systems-focused , and individual / family-focused . 
A population-based approach considers intervening at all possible levels of practice . Interventions
may be directed at the entire population within a community , the systems that affect the health of those
populations , and / or the individuals and families within those populations known to be at risk . 
Population-based community-focused practice changes community norms , community attitudes , 
community awareness , community practices , and community behaviors . They are directed toward
entire populations within the community or occasionally toward target groups within those populations . 
Community-focused practice is measured in terms of what proportion of the population actually
changes . 
Population-based systems-focused practice changes organizations , policies , laws , and power
structures . The focus is not directly on individuals and communities but on the systems that impact
health . Changing systems is often a more effective and long-lasting way to impact population health
than requiring change from every single individual in a community . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 5 Interventions
Population-based individual-focused practice changes knowledge , attitudes , beliefs , practices , and
behaviors of individuals . This practice level is directed at individuals , alone or as part of a family , 
class , or group . Individuals receive services because they are identified as belonging to a populationat-risk . 
Interventions at each of these levels of practice contribute to the overall goal of improving population
health status . Public health professionals determine the most appropriate level ( s ) of practice based on
community need and the availability of effective strategies and resources . No one level of practice is
more important than another ; in fact , most public health problems are addressed at all three levels , 
often simultaneously . Consider , for example , smoking rates , which continue to rise among the
adolescent population . At the community level of practice , public health nurses coordinate youth led , 
adult supported , social marketing campaigns intending to change the community norms regarding
adolescents ’ tobacco use . At the systems level of practice , public health nurses facilitate community
coalitions that advocate city councils to create stronger ordinances restricting over-the-counter youth
access to tobacco . At the individual / family practice level , public health nurses tach middle school
chemical health classes that increase knowledge about the risks of smoking , change attitudes toward
tobacco use , and improve “ refusal skills ” among youth 12-14 years of age . 
The interventions are grouped with related interventions ; these “ wedges ” are color coordinated to make them
more recognizable . For instance , in practice , the five interventions in the red ( pink ) wedge are frequently
implemented in conjunction with one another . Surveillance is often paired with disease and health event
investigation , even though either can be implemented independently . Screening frequently follows either
surveillance or disease and health event investigation and is often preceded by outreach activities in order to
maximize the number of those at risk who actually get screened . Most often , screening leads to case-finding , 
but this intervention can also be carried out independently or related directly to surveillance and disease and
health event investigation . The green wedge consists of referral and follow-up , case management , and
delegated functions–three interventions which , in practice , are often implemented together . Similarly , health
teaching , counseling , and consultation ( the blue wedge ) are more similar than they are different ; health
teaching and counseling are especially often paired . The interventions in the orange wedge –collaboration , 
coalition building , and community organizing–while distinct , are grouped together because they are all types of
collective action and all most often carried out at systems or community levels of practice . Similarly , 
advocacy , social marketing , and policy development and enforcement ( the yellow wedge ) are often
interrelated when implemented . In fact , advocacy is often viewed as a precursor to policy development ; social
marketing is seen by some as a method of carrying out advocacy . 
6Keller , Strohschein , Lia-Hoagberg ,  & Schaffer .  ( 1998 )  . Population-based public health nursing
interventions : A model from practice . Public Health Nursing , 15 ( 3 )  , 207-215 . 
7Harrell , J . A .  & Baher , E . L .  ( 1994 )  . The essential services of public health . Leadership in Public Health , 
3 ( 3 )  , 27-31 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 6 Interventions
Where did this model come from ? 
Health care reform in the 1990s challenged public health nurses to define their contribution to improving
population health . In response , the Section of Public Health Nursing at the Minnesota Department of Health
constructed a set of interventions that public health nurses use in their practice . The model began as a set of
examples of PHN practice collected in 1994 from over 200 experienced Minnesota PHNs . A panel of
practice experts from the section identified the common themes within those examples–and the initial set of
interventions ( Public Health Interventions : Examples from Public Health Nursing , October 1997 ) was created , 
depicted as spokes of a wheel . Hundreds of copies of the interventions were distributed within the state and
throughout the nation . Reports from PHNs using Interventions I suggested the framework could be quickly
adopted to both teach and enrich practice . 6 

The initial interventions framework was practice-based . In July 1998 , the Section began intensive work to
determine the evidence underlying the interventions . With the award of a grant from the federal Division of
Nursing , current public health nursing , nursing , public health , and related literature were explored to identify the
theory , research , and expert opinion supporting and enhancing the interventions . In June 1999 , forty-six public
health nursing practice experts and academics from Iowa , Minnesota , North Dakota , South Dakota , and
Wisconsin participated in a consensus meeting and created the bases of the revised intervention set . The
recommendations of the regional experts were reviewed and critiqued by a national panel of public health
nursing experts . The model withstood the challenge of rigorous examination with only a few changes to the
original set of 17 . The results of that process are presented in this document .  ( See Appendix C ) 
What Is the Relationship Between the Interventions Wheel and
the Core Public Health Functions / Essential Services ? 7
Public health nurses fulfill the public health ’ s essential services by implementing interventions to address public
health problems and opportunities identified through a community assessment . The specific set of interventions
selected and implemented will vary from community to community , from population to population , from
problem to problem , and from department to department . Additionally , PHNs will most often accomplish
these as part of a team with members from other public health disciplines and other community partners . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 7 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
How to Use This Framework : 
Population-based PHN Interventions at Three Practice Levels
Each of the seventeen interventions is presented separately , using the same format , to increase their usefulness . 
Here are the components : 
1 . Definition of an “ intervention ” and underlying assumptions . 
At the top of each intervention ’ s first page is the same set of information in a box . This box
contains the definition of an “ intervention ” and the practice assumptions which underlie it , 
regardless of where it is implemented , or at what level . This box serves as a reminder to the user
and includes : 
Definition of an Intervention : 
Interventions are actions taken by PHNs on behalf of communities and the
individuals / families living in them . 
2 . Definition of the specific intervention . 
Next is the “ definition ” of each intervention . For example : 
Screening identifies individuals with unrecognized health risk factors or
asymptomatic disease conditions in populations . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 8 Interventions
3 . Example at all practice levels . 
Under each definition are examples from public health nursing practice . The intervention is
applied at the community , systems , and individual / family levels to a given population and a
problem . For example : 
4 . Relationship to other interventions .  .  . 
Next you will find a description of the relationship of that particular intervention to the others . Remember that
interventions may be implemented alone or in conjunction with other interventions . For example : 
Case Management
Population-of-interest : All children with special health care needs and their families
Problem : Fragmented service delivery system 
Community Example : 
A PHN works with a local advocacy organization to present programs about
the rights of children under the American Disability Act ( ADA ) to various
parents groups within the community . The programs emphasize potential roles
for parents to advocate on their children ’ s behalf . 
Systems Example : 
A variety of professionals who provide services to children with special
needs , including public health nursing and school nursing , cooperatively
design a centralized intake process to simplify access to services for children
with special needs . 
Individual / Family Example : 
A PHN serves a family with a school-aged boy who uses a wheelchair due to
his cerebral palsy . The PHN assists the boy ’ s parents and their primary care
practitioner in negotiating a plan to meet the child ’ s educational and
physical needs during the school day with the school district . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Policy development and enforcement relates to a variety of other interventions . Since its intent is to bring
health issues to the attention of decision-makers for the purpose of changing laws , rules , regulations , 
ordinances , and policies , it is frequently paired with the other interventions operating predominantly at the
community or systems practice levels , such as collaboration , coalition building , and especially community
organizing . The system ’ s level of health teaching , provider education , often follows policy development and
precedes or is implemented in conjunction with policy enforcement . Advocacy is a frequent co-intervention at
this level . In contagious disease outbreaks , policy development and enforcement is frequently paired with
surveillance , disease and health event investigation , screening , outreach , case-finding , referral and followup , and case management . At the individual / family level , policy development is often paired with health
teaching , counseling , consultation , case management , and advocacy . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 9 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Counseling
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Meet the “ client ” –the individual , family , system , or community . 
2 . Explore the issues . 
3 . Identify priorities . 
4 . Establish the emotional context . 
5 . Identify alternative solutions . 
6 . Agree on a contract . 
7 . Support the individual , family , system , or community through the change . 
8 . End the relationship . 
Best Practices for Advocacy
• foster the development of the client ’ s capacity to advocate on their own behalf . 
• use mass media in conjunction with advocacy . 
• assume the adversarial role when appropriate . 
• exhibit self-confidence , strength of conviction , and a commitment to social justice . 
5 . Basic Steps
Next is a list of basic steps describing how to implement this intervention . The basic steps are
particularly useful for new PHNs or for PHNs taking on new assignments requiring new skills . 
While most of the interventions have one set of basic steps for all three levels , some 
( collaboration , referral and follow-up , case management , and health teaching ) have basic steps
for individual / family separate from those for community / systems . For example : 
6 . Best Practices 
 “ Best practices ” are derived from the theory , research , and expert opinion reviewed by the
expert panel . The best practices are a combination of what the literature suggests and the
collective wisdom of the expert panelists who considered them . A PHN ’ s success in
implementing an intervention should be increased if the best practices are considered . Best
practices foster excellence in intervention implementation . For example : 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 10 Interventions
7 . Notes from Abby .  .  . 
You will find “ Notes from Abby .  .  .  ” throughout this document .  “ Abby ” is a reallife PHN from the mid-1920s who exemplifies public health nursing . She is the
logo for the Division of Nursing grant . Her “ notes ” include resources , tips , and
related research findings for enhancing public health nursing practice . Her “ words
of wisdom ” are geared for the PHN who has had some experience with that
particular intervention . 
8 . Best Evidence
The “ best evidence ” contains citations and abstracts for the articles and texts that were reviewed by
the expert panel . This evidence supports the best practices . It is organized into review articles , 
research reports , expert opinion , and texts and monographs . The scores from the expert panelists are
included in the abstracts . An example : 
Best Evidence for Coalition Building
Review Articles
Wandersman , A .  , Goodman , R .  ,  & Butterfoss , F .  ( 1997 )  . Understanding coalitions and how they
operate : An “ open systems ” organizational framework . In M . Minkler ( Ed .  )  , Community
organizing and community building for health ( pp . 261-277 )  . New York : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
The authors suggest it is useful to think of coalitions ( and partnerships and consortia ) as organizations and
apply Katz and Kahn ’ s open-systems framework to advance the understanding of them . Coalitions are
defined as “ interorganizational , cooperative , and synergistic working alliances ”  ( p . 263 ) which serve
several purposes .  [ Note : Katz , D .  & Kahn , R .  ( 1978 )  . The social psychology of organizations ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
New York : Wiley .  ] 
Review = 34%
Research Reports
Parker , E .  , Eng , E .  , Laraia , B .  , et al .  ( 1998 )  . Coalition building for prevention : Lessons learned
from the North Carolina community-based public health initiative . J Public Health Management
Practice , 4 ( 2 )  , 25-36 . 
The authors identify six factors important to coalition functioning and success , based on findings of a fouryear observation of four separate North Carolina county coalitions funded by the Kellogg Foundation ’ s
Community-Based Public Health Initiative . Rather than focusing on a specific disease category to
prevent , this study looks at aspects of coalition development itself . The authors apply Alter and Hage ’ s
framework for conceptualizing how stages and levels of collaboration are operationalized in coalition
functioning and found the six factors which effected it . 
Qualitative = 68 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 11 Interventions
9 . How to use these interventions .  .  . 
In general , the intervention framework provides PHNs with a reasoned , systematic approach to
practice . 
‚ Use the basic steps to make sure that you are making the most effective use of your time . 
‚ Use these interventions for problem solving when you are stuck or your strategies are not
going as you had expected . 
‚ Apply the best practices for planning and evaluating public health nursing interventions . 
Specifically , this framework can be used for : 
‚ program planning to assure that all three levels of intervention are considered ( that is , have
you considered interventions at the community , systems , and individual / family levels ) 
‚ examining the scope of an agency ’ s practice
Do the programs delivered by PHNs cover the entire scope of practice ? Are
there certain interventions or levels not used ? 
‚ describing public health nursing ’ s contribution to collaboration or coalition building 
‚ explaining public health nursing to other disciplines and community members 
‚ orienting new PHN staff
‚ building and enhancing intervention skills with PHN staff 
‚ determining what changes may be evaluated ( health status or intermediate changes at the
community , systems , and individual / family levels ) as a result of the intervention . 
In addition , many schools of nursing have found this framework useful in teaching public health
nursing interventions . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 12 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Surveillance 
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
8Guidelines for evaluating surveillance systems .  ( 1988 , May 6 )  . MMWR , 37 ( S-5 )  , 1A . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 13 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : SURVEILLANCE
Definition
Surveillance describes and monitors health events through ongoing and systematic collection , 
analysis , and interpretation of health data for the purpose of planning , implementing , and evaluating
public health interventions . 8
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All children
Problem : Developmental delays that prohibit optimal growth 
Community Example : 
Parents participate in a follow-along program that identifies children from birth-48 months who
are at risk of experiencing health or developmental problems . Parents are solicited to participate
in the program at the birth of their child . The child is initially assessed at enrollment in the
program . Parents complete mailed questionnaires about their child ’ s development at 4 , 8 , 12 , 16 , 
20 , 24 , 30 , and 36 months . They return the questionnaire and are contacted if it reveals any delays . 
Those not returning questionnaires are sent two reminders . If no response is received , the PHN
contacts the family . 
Systems Example : 
The public health agency provides the central intake function for children with special needs for the entire county . 
Physicians , schools , the local follow-along program , public health nurses , social workers , and others refer children . 
Intake PHNs attend weekly meetings with the multi- disciplinary early intervention team , which includes public
health nursing , speech , occupational therapy , special ed , social work , and others . The team determines who will
coordinate the initial assessment and service plan . The PHNs ’ central intake responsibilities include compiling
quarterly reports on the types of special needs that are being referred , the timeliness of the team response , and the
types of services the child and family ultimately received . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 14 Interventions
Individual / Family Example :  [ Case-Finding ] 
The results of a questionnaire returned by a parent of an eight-month-old infant suggested possible
delays in some developmental areas . This triggered the PHN to make an appointment to see the
parents in their home . After administering the Denver Developmental Screening Tool-II , the PHN
discussed the results with the parents and answered their questions and concerns . Various referral
options for further assessment were established . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Surveillance focuses on significant health threats such as contagious diseases but is also used with other
health events such as chronic diseases , injury , and violence . Like investigation of disease and other health
events , surveillance collects and analyzes health data . Unlike investigation , however , surveillance is an
ongoing process which detects trends and seeks to identify changes in the incidence ( that is , the occurrence of
new cases over a set period of time ) and prevalence ( that is , the combined number of old and new cases at
any one point in time )  . Many texts treat surveillance and investigation of disease and health events as a single
intervention . 
Surveillance is often confused with monitoring and / or screening . It is important to differentiate . 
Surveillance .  .  . 
•is used to assess population health status
before and after health events
•looks at whole populations
Surveillance .  .  . 
•measures the population health status 
•may serve as the method to track cases
Monitoring .  .  . 
•implies a constant adjustment of what is
being done
•looks at specific groups or individuals
Screening .  .  . 
•detects previously unknown cases in a
population
•may serve as the method to find cases
9Adapted from Teutsch , S .  ,  & Churchill , R . E .  ( 1994 )  . Principles and practice of public health surveillance . 
New York : Oxford Press . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 15 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Surveillance9
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . First consider whether surveillance is appropriate for the circumstances . 
Consider some or all of the following : 
• importance of the problem as a threat to population health
• need to learn more about the problem , its patterns of occurrence , and the populations at risk
• need to establish baseline data ( very often the trigger to implement surveillance ) and determine the extent
to which available data are inadequate . 
2 . Acquire necessary knowledge of the problem , its natural course , and its aftermath
The PHN should make sure that their knowledge about the problem is up to date and complete . An
understanding of the problem ’ s “ natural course of history ” is especially important . This is the course that the
condition would predictably take if nothing were done to intercede . For example , progressive pulmonary
tuberculosis kills 50 percent of those infected within 5 years if left untreated . Dental caries continue to decay
without treatment . Children with amblyopia , without treatment , eventually lose vision in the affected eye . 
At times , urgency for public health action to prevent negative impacts on health status means making
decisions before exact causes are known . Often , PHNs must rely on epidemiological evidence that supports
strong associations between risk factors rather than waiting for research findings . 
3 . Establish clear criteria for what constitutes a “ case .  ” 
Criteria include person , place , and time ( that is , who is at risk , where the event occurs , and when it occurs )  . 
4 . Collect sufficient data from multiple valid sources . 
• Use existing data sets to provide data for surveillance whenever feasible . The PHN should consider
data readily available in your agency or community such as vital records , 
hospital-discharge data , medical-management-information and billing systems , police records , school
records , etc . 
• Check existing registries and surveys for data useful to the population-of-interest . 
• Do not reveal personal identifiers ; PHNs must assure confidentiality and protection of privacy . 
5 . Analyze data using appropriate scientific and epidemiological principles . 
The level of analysis required varies from condition to condition . In general , analyses includes such elements
as : 
• an assessment of the crude number of cases ( that is , the number of actual cases ) and rates ( the number
of cases per a given denominator , such as 100 persons or 10 , 000 or 100 , 000 ) 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 16 Interventions
• a description of the population in which the condition occurs ( for example , age , gender , race , and
ethnicity ) 
• where the condition occurs
• the period of time over which the condition occurs . 
6 . Interpret and disseminate the data in such a way that decision-makers at all levels can readily
identify and understand the implications . 
This means the dissemination plan must be developed to fit the intended data users . Disseminate the
information on a regular basis , not just during times of crisis . 
7 . Evaluate the impact of the surveillance system : 
• Was the data collected sufficient to support accurate analysis ? 
• Did it generate answers to problems ? 
• Was the information timely ? 
• Was it useful to those interested ? 
• How was the information used ? 
• How can it be made of greater use ? 
Notes from Abby
The February 2000 issue of the AAOHN Journal ( Vol . 48 , No . 2 ) includes a series of articles describing
surveillance and screening interventions as “ vital roles ” for the PHN working in occupational and environmental
health . See Pap , E .  ,  & Miller , A . Screening and surveillance : OSHA ’ s medical surveillance provisions , pp . 59-
72 ; Stone , D . Health surveillance for health care workers : A vital role for the occupational and environmental
health nurse , pp . 73-79 ; Rogers , B .  ,  & Livsey , K . Occupational health , surveillance , screening , and prevention
in occupational health nursing practice , pp . 92-99 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 17 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Classifications of Surveillance Systems
Surveillance systems usually exemplify one of each of the following classifications . For instance , a cancer
surveillance system is usually passive , ongoing , and formal . 
1 . Surveillance systems are conventionally classified as either passive or active . 
Passive : 
Systems in which the health jurisdiction ( that is , federal , state , or local health departments ) receive reports of
disease or health events from physicians or other individuals or institutions often mandated by state law . 
States ’ reportable disease systems are examples . Most surveillance systems are passive . 
Active : 
Systems in which the health jurisdiction regularly contacts reporting sources to elicit reports , including negative
reports ( that is , no cases )  . Active systems collect more complete data but are labor-intensive and , therefore , 
expensive to implement . They are usually only indicated in unusual or unpredictable circumstances , such as
evidence of a new or rarely seen pathogen . 
2 . Surveillance systems may be either ongoing or time-limited . 
Ongoing : 
Systematic collection of data over time on selected diseases or health events that impact the health of the
population . Examples include registries ( for example , immunization , birth defect , cancer ) or child maltreatment
and vulnerable adult reporting systems . Sentinel surveillance systems are special cases of surveillance that
track single key health indicators in the general or special populations . A sentinel health event is a “ case of
unnecessary disease , unnecessary disability , or untimely death whose occurrence is a warning signal that the
quality of preventive and / or medical .  .  . care may need to be improved .  ”  * For example , an infant death from
methemoglobinemia is a sentinel event for water contamination , as is the occurrence of mesothelioma for
asbestos exposure , a maternal death from any cause , or an outbreak of rubeola . 
Time-Limited : 
Systematic collection of data on specific problems or concerns for a specific time period . This may identify all
cases in order to assess the level of risk or threat or , when resources are limited , estimate the size through
sampling . Most active surveillance systems are limited systems . For example , a state instituted a “ rash ” 
surveillance system in a recent rubella outbreak among a migrant Hispanic population , but only for a few
months .  
* Seligman ,  & Frazier .  ( 1992 )  . Surveillance : The public health approach . In Baker and Monson ( Eds .  ) Public health
surveillance ( pp . 16-25 )  . NY : Vaurbstrand Reinhold . As quoted in Friis ,  & Sellars .  ( 1996 )  . Epidemiology for public health
practice ( p . 359 )  . Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen Publishers . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 18 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Classifications of Surveillance Systems ( continued ) 
3 . Surveillance systems may be formal or informal . 
Formal : 
Systems with multiple reporters , frequently mandated by law and most often at the state or federal levels of
government . Events selected for development of formal systems meet all or most of the following criteria : 
• Frequency ( that is , a combination of incidence , prevalence , mortality , and years of potential life lost 
( YPLL ) 
• Severity ( that is , case-fatality ratio , hospitalization rates , disability rates ) 
• Cost ( both direct and indirect ) 
• Preventability
• Communicability ( that is , the risk of spread from person to person ) 
• Public interest . 
Informal : 
Surveillance can also be an informal process of systematic data collection , often in conjunction with casefinding . Implementing the surveillance intervention can be as simple as regularly reviewing the case records in
your drawer or laptop to determine what similarities they might have . The PHN is a trained observer , the “ eyes
and ears on the community ,  ” always looking for events , changes , and trends in the community that may impact
population health status . 
Examples of informal surveillance include : 
• PHN day care consultants initiate a system to collect data on the prevalence and incidence of
peanut allergies in young children ( ages birth-7 ) in day care after they observe a dramatic
increase in the numbers of day care centers requesting consultation on how to respond to peanut
allergy reactions . 
• At a staff meeting , a PHN who serves children with special needs remarked on how many
children in her caseload were multiple births resulting from some sort of technology such as
fertility treatments or in vitro fertilization . Several other PHNs commented that they were seeing
the same thing in their caseloads . The PHNs decided to initiate a agency-wide data collection
system to track this data over time . 
• PHNs expand their senior clinic assessment by adding an item asking about involvement in motor
vehicle crashes after noticing the large number of residents with poor vision and hearing who still
hold drivers ’ licenses . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 19 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Surveillance and Epidemiology
Surveillance , as with the disease and other health event investigation , requires PHNs to use epidemiology , 
the science of public health . Epidemiology is “ the study of the distribution and determinants of diseases and
injuries in human populations .  ” Mausner , J . S .  & Kramer , S .  ( 1985 )  . Epidemiology : An introductory text ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
Philadelphia : WB Saunders , p . 1 . The conventional epidemiology model is the “ epidemiology triangle :  ”  [ Ibid , p . 33 ] 
• agent = whatever is thought to cause the disease or risk
• host = whatever is affected by the agent 
• environment = all the factors external to the host and agent which allow or promote the disease or risk . 
The model is commonly used to explain infectious * disease transmission , such as Lyme Disease . In this disease , 
• the agent = the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi , which is transmitted by the bite of infected deer ticks ( in
the Northeastern and North-Central US ) and western black-legged ticks ( on the Pacific Coast ) 
• the host = humans and other mammals 
• the environment = the woods and overgrown brush or residential sites bordering these areas . 
The epidemiological triangle may also be used to explain behavioral risk factors and other threats to health , such
as obesity . In this condition : 
• the agent or causal factor = an imbalance between caloric intake and kilocalories burned through
physical activity 
• the host = the person who is born with certain metabolic characteristics as well as learned ( i . e .  , 
behavioral ) characteristics such as eating and exercise habits
• the environment = all the social factors promoting overeating and underexercising , such as fast food
establishments , 32-ounce servings of soda , sedentary lifestyle , lack of safe walking trails . 
Regardless of the disease or event , using the agent-host-environment model to organize the information collected
can help identify connections or patterns . These points of connection often serve as the focal points for
prevention strategies .  
* infectious - communicable conditions ( i . e .  , diseases ) caused by microbes , such as bacteria or viruses
communicable - a condition that readily spreads from person to person
contagious - a condition that is very communicable , or which spreads rapidly from person to person 
[ From : Bacteriophage Ecology Group glossary at < www . phage . org / microbiology . htm >  ] 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 20 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Surveillance
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who developed theory blending
from the literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . IDENTIFIES AND UTILIZES SUCCESSFUL SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS . 
Best Evidence : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , 1988
Recognized attributes of successful surveillance systems include : 
‚ simplicity of design and flexibility in data collection that allow changes to the system without adding cost to the
process
‚ acceptability to those participating
‚ sensitivity , in that they detect what they are supposed to 
‚ predictiveness , or the extent to which the rates found can be trusted to apply to a larger or different group 
‚ representativeness , or the quality of the data ( including sufficiency ) 
‚ timeliness , or the speed between steps in the process . 
2 . PERFORMS THE ROLES WARRANTED BY THE SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES AND
AGENCY RESOURCES . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Roles in surveillance include leader , contributor , or user of information . At times the PHN may assume multiple
roles within the same surveillance process . If the PHN is involved in infectious disease surveillance , for instance , 
the PHN may well participate in the collection of data from suspected cases ( contributor role ) and , based on
analysis of that data , determine what appropriate next steps might be ( user role )  . 
However , PHNs should also keep in mind that implementing surveillance does not need a large and complex
system if the problem is not large and complex . Relying on data routinely collected in the course of a workday
can be extremely useful . For instance , by tracking the addresses of clients who constantly do not keep clinic
appointments and connecting them with availability of public transportation , patterns may be noted that might lead
to different conclusions than “ willful noncompliance .  ” 
The critical issue in the surveillance intervention is to assure that data collected must be consistently and reliably
recorded in order for it to be used . Remember the old axiom from nursing documentation ,  “ What doesn ’ t get
recorded doesn ’ t count .  ” The same applies here . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 21 Interventions
3 . DESIGNS SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS ( FORMAL OR INFORMAL ) THAT UTILIZE
MULTIPLE DATA SOURCES WHICH INCLUDE PERSON , PLACE AND TIME
ELEMENTS . 
Best Evidence : Teutsch & Churchill ; Valanis ; Stroup & Teutsch ; Swanson and Nies
Numerous useful data bases exist ; PHNs implementing surveillance need to be at least familiar with the following
data bases for the populations they serve : 
‚ vital statistics ( birth and death numbers and rates , marriages , and dissolutions / annulments ) 
‚ maternal and child health statistics ( fetal and infant mortality , birth weight , maternal mortality ) 
‚ census data ( population size and change , age , gender , race and ethnicity , residence location , housing stock ) 
‚ registries ( immunization , cancer , etc .  ) 
‚ surveys
‚ administrative data sets ( for example , hospital discharge data )  . 
4 . UTILIZES DATA COLLECTION METHODS THAT ARE INTEGRATED , 
COLLABORATIVE , COORDINATED , AND GENERATE USEFUL DATA . 
Best Evidence : Meservy , Bass & Toth ; Pottinger , Herwaldt & Perl ; Stroup & Teutsch ; Bakhshi ; Meriwether
Surveillance is most effective when done in conjunction with other systems in the community ( for example , the
health care system , education , or social services ) and / or with interest groups also concerned about the same
problem . Collaborating on data collection has advantages : 
‚ access to other data sets such as those routinely used by education systems or hospital or ambulatory care
facilities
‚ potential to design coordinated data collection systems among the partners from the start of a process ( rather
than each system collecting their own data )  , which insures comparability for analysis
‚ potential for shared technological capacity
‚ discussion with collaborators regarding the measures or indicators to collect invariably leads to discussion and
clarification of the reasons and concerns leading to the collection ; this , in turn , leads to a stronger product
and greater commitment among those involved . 
While all authors cited noted the advantages of collaboration , Meriwether perhaps states it most clearly . She
reports on the 1996 the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists ’ recommendation to the CDC that it
develop a national surveillance system with improved capacity and flexibility . Among the nine principles noted is
the requirement for “ collaboration within and across systems .  ” 
10 Bringing together different disciplines adds multiple perspectives to the understanding of the situation
and possible responses . It may also add confusion . The three-level model of prevention cited above is commonly
understood by most public health professionals . However , other disciplines use these same terms with very
different meanings . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 22 Interventions
5 . COLLECTS DATA WHICH SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF STRATEGIES AT
MULTIPLE LEVELS OF PREVENTION . 
Best Evidence : Meservy , Bass & Toth ; Halperin ; Spradley & Allender
Given that effectiveness of public health strategies is almost always designed with the three levels of prevention in
mind , surveillance systems should also yield data that reflect those levels– primary , secondary , and tertiary . 
Although limited resources often force public health to deal with immediate issues at the expense of long-term
prevention , the more PHNs can anticipate a disease or health event , the more likely they can design effective
counter measures . The most effective strategies , that is , primary prevention prevent an event from occurring in
the first place . The classic examples of primary prevention are vaccinating against infectious diseases , chlorinating
public water supplies to prevent pathogen growth , and promoting optimum nutrition to prevent anemia in pregnant
women . 
Not all health events are preventable . Natural disasters cannot be prevented , but public health can reduce the
severity of their impact by taking preventive measures . Building levees to control floods , for instance , or
designating tornado shelters for residents of trailer home parks lessen the impact . In these circumstances , public
health usually calls the measures “ mitigation ” rather than “ prevention .  ” 10
6 . SEEKS OUT AND UTILIZES SURVEILLANCE DATA TO INFLUENCE POLICY
DEVELOPMENT . 
Best Evidence : Stroup and Teutsch ; Mercy , Ikeda & Powell ; Peterson & Chen ; Pottinger , Herwaldt & Perl
A primary reason for implementing surveillance is to support action . Implementing and maintaining surveillance is
a waste of resources if it is not used to change something . In fact , Stroup and Teutsch suggest that the analysis , 
interpretation , and use of the data ( i . e .  , the changes ) is the defining difference between surveillance and data
collection systems ( p . 22 )  . The change may be small , such as altering agency policy on scheduling immunization
clinic hours . Or it may be large : allowing the use of public assistance funds to pay for telephone service for
families with medically fragile children results in reduced emergency room utilization , since the families can call the
emergency room first to determine whether or not the child needs to be seen . 
The literature search also revealed surveillance issues related to special populations or problems . For instance , 
Peterson and Chen report that minor changes to a case definition of undernutrition can lead to significantly
different policy paths . Similar implications for firearm-related injury prevention policy are described by Mercy , 
Ikeda , and Powell . They illustrate that , although developing useful systems is complex , once completed , such
systems are extremely useful in designing strategies at multiple levels . Pottinger and others discuss infectious
disease surveillance in a hospital setting and , in doing so , illustrate how this data is useful in establishing hospital
policy . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 23 Interventions
Notes from Abby
For PHNs interested in further developing their knowledge and skills in surveillance , CDC offers a training
manual used in conjunction with Teutsch and Churchill ’ s book . The 14-lesson web-based course is called 
 “ Surveillance in a Suitcase ,  ” and includes two work exercises . Contact : www . cdc . gov / epo / surveillancein / 
The Internet allows access to numerous data bases . For starters , take a look at the variety available from the
National Center for Health Statistics at www . cdc . gov / nchs . Many of the data bases also have direct links to
state- and county-level related data . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 24 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Surveillance
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and
academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the
end of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who
reviewed it . It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
none
Expert Opinion
Meservy , D .  , Bass , J .  ,  & Toth , W .  ( 1997 , October )  . Health surveillance : Effective components of a
successful program . AAOHN JOURNAL , 45 ( 10 )  , 500-512 . 
The authors , writing from an occupational health perspective , define occupational health surveillance as the process
of systematically monitoring the health status of worker populations to gather data about the effects of workplace
exposures and using the data to prevent illness or injury . The purpose is to link workplace exposures to adverse
health outcomes and , thus , design control measure to prevent illness and injury in other individuals ”  ( p . 500 )  . 
Screening and monitoring are seen as surveillance ’ s two major components . Surveillance is described as a special
application of the nursing process : assessment = exposures ; diagnosis = populations , rather than individuals ; 
planning = answers to the questions of who should be screened , for what , how often , what will be done with results , 
and referral mechanisms in place ; implementation = integration of health education ; evaluation = outcomes . 
Expert Opinion = 67%
Bakhshi , S .  ( 1997 )  . Framework of epidemiological principles underlying chemical incidents surveillance
plans and training implications for public health practitioners . J Public Health Medicine , 19 ( 3 )  , 333-340 . 
Describes the application of principles of the epidemiologic investigation of infectious disease to exposure to
hazardous materials . Surveillance is used synonymously with disease investigation in this article . Preliminary steps : 
1 ) Establish the “ adverse exposure factor ” through analysis of descriptive statistics related to the event ; 2 ) Determine
the appropriate geographic area and nature of the exposure , and define the population at risk ; 3 ) Determine
demographic and injury details , and produce the case definition based on the most commonly recurring symptoms
or factors ; 4 ) Determine appropriate denominators ( e . g .  , whole population or targeted )  , and calculate rates . 
Response Steps : 1 ) Establish the case definition ; 2 ) Define the population at risk , i . e .  , the population group or groups
in which the disease or problem could occur ; 3 ) Collect needed data ; 4 ) Manage collected data ; 5 ) Analyze
collected data to determine where the event is occurring , when it occurs , and its rate of occurrence ; 6 ) Develop
causal hypothesis taking into account exposure potential and dose load ; 
7 ) Evaluate . 
Expert Opinion = 51%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 25 Interventions
Halperin , W .  ( 1996 )  . The role of surveillance in the hierarchy of prevention . Am J of Industrial Medicine , 
29 , 321-323 . 
Surveillance is posed not as a prevention intervention in and of itself but “ rather a technique for collecting , analyzing , 
and using information about the intervention techniques .  ” Halperin describes surveillance in occupational health as 
 “ the systematic collection and analysis of information concerning hazards , disease , or injury for the purpose of
prevention of occupational disease or injury .  ” 
Expert Opinion = 51%
Meriwether , R .  ( 1996 )  . Blueprint for a national public health surveillance 21st century . J . Public Health
Mgmt Practice , 2 ( 4 )  , 16-23 . 
The author , a physician with the Louisiana State Health Department and a member of the Council of State and
Territorial Epidemiologists , proposes a new “ National Public Health Surveillance System ” as the conceptual framework
for all public health surveillance and assessment activities into the next century . The organizing principles include : 1 ) 
public health surveillance for any health event ( disease , condition , injury , or other outcome ) or determinant ( behavioral
and biological risk factors , exposures , and medical care ) means the ongoing collection , analysis , interpretation , and
dissemination of data for a stated public health purpose ; 2 ) public health assessment includes ongoing surveillance
activities , analytic studies to evaluate hypotheses arising form surveillance data and other sources , and program or
service evaluation ; 3 ) surveillance and assessment efforts need to be prioritized because of limited resources ; 4 ) 
adequate resources are needed ; 5 ) collaboration within and across systems will be required ; 6 ) goals differ at different
levels of the public health system and over time ; 7 ) surveillance methods and resources should be matched to
surveillance goals ; 8 ) high quality data are needed if surveillance and assessment information are to be relied upon in
public health decision making ; 9 ) confidentiality of public health surveillance data must be assured . 
Expert Opinion = 50%
Mercy , J .  , Ikeda , R .  ,  & Powell , K .  ( 1998 )  . Firearm-related injury surveillance : An overview of progress
and the challenges ahead . Am J Prev Med , 15 ( 3S )  , 6-16 . 
The authors critique current firearm-related injury surveillance systems and elaborate on special issues relating to
firearms injury data . These include : 1 ) determining the case definition ( i . e .  , the focus of the surveillance system )  : 
should it be limited to firearm-related injury , violence-related injury , or all injury ? 2 ) data collection : reliance on ICD-9-
CM E codes is not consistent and will be irrelevant ( and replaced ) when the ICD-10 is implemented ; lack of
standardization across states and within states ; lack of product-specific injury data ( that is , type of gun )  ; difficulty in
linking data systems . 
Expert Opinion = 46 . 5%
Peterson , K . E .  ,  & Chen , L . C .  ( 1990 )  . Defining undernutrition for public health purposes in the United
States . J Nutrition , 120 , 933-942 . 
This 1989 presentation on the identification and prevalence of undernutrition in the U . S . reviews both the necessity of
inconsistent definitions of undernutrition and the dilemmas that causes . The article presents a thorough review of the
impact of manipulating variables within a case definition . 
Expert Opinion = 42%
Pottinger , J .  , Herwaltdt , L . A .  ,  & Perl , T . M .  ( 1997 , July )  . Basics of surveillance—an overview . Infection
Control and Hospital Epidemiology , 18 ( 7 )  , 513-526 . 
Although this article uses cases from hospital infection control for examples , its discussion of components and
processes is relevant to other settings . Surveillance is a dynamic process for gathering , managing , analyzing , and
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 26 Interventions
reporting data on events that occur in a specific population ”  ( p . 513 )  . Its components include : 1 ) Defining the event
and the population to be studied ; 2 ) Collecting data either concurrently or retrospectively ; 3 ) Organizing and
managing the data ; 4 ) Analyzing and interpreting the data ; 5 ) Communicating the results . Specific surveillance
methods are described , including : 
1 ) Periodic surveillance : performed on a regular , scheduled , intermittent , and not ongoing basis ; 
2 ) Prevalence survey : determine the number of active cases during a specified time period ; 
3 ) Targeted surveillance : limit the scope of a process to a single population or sub-population ; 
4 ) Outbreak thresholds : determine baseline data . 
Expert Opinion = 24%
Texts and Monographs
Valanis , B .  ( 1992 )  . Disease control and surveillance . In Epidemiology in nursing and health care ( 2nd
ed .  )  . Norwalk : Appleton-Lang . 
Establishes a list of questions to be answered in preparation for planning a surveillance system : 
1 . How is a case to be defined , and what is to be reported ? 
2 . Where is the information to come from ? 
3 . Who reports it ? 
4 . Who is responsible for it ? 
5 . How frequently is it to be reported or analyzed ? 
6 . What is to be done with the raw data once it is in hand ? 
7 . How is it to be evaluated ? 
8 . Who needs the information ? 
9 . Who will evaluate the generated information ?  ( p . 312 ) 
Valanis suggests that the need for investigation is flagged when interpretation of surveillance data is impossible or
inconclusive . 
Text = 62% 
[ NOTE : Valanis heavily relied on the CDC document Guidelines for Evaluating Surveillance Systems ( 1988 , 
May 6 )  ( MMWR Supplement , 37 ( S-5 )  , 1-18 ) in preparation of her chapter . Although it was not presented to the
panel of experts for review , the following information from it is pertinent : 
Definition “ Epidemiologic surveillance is the ongoing and systematic collection , analysis , and interpretation of health
data in the process of describing and monitoring a health event . This information is used for the planning , 
implementing , and evaluation of public health interventions and programs . Surveillance data are used both to
determine the need for public health action and to assess the effectiveness of programs .  ” 
Components of a surveillance system answer the following questions : 1 ) What is the population under surveillance ? 
2 ) What is the period of time of the data collection ? 3 ) What information is collected ? 4 ) Who provides the
surveillance information ? What is the data source ? 5 ) How is the information transferred ? 6 ) How is the information
stored ? 7 ) Who analyzes the data ? 8 ) How are the data analyzed , and how often ? 
Attributes of a successful surveillance system : 1 ) simplicity ( i . e .  , the complexity of the system design and its size )  , 
2 ) flexibility ( i . e .  , the ability to adapt to changing information needs or operating conditions with little additional cost )  , 
3 ) acceptability ( i . e .  , the willingness of individuals and organizations to participate )  , 4 ) sensitivity ( i . e .  , the proportion
of cases detected by the system and its ability to detect trends )  , 5 ) predictiveness ( i . e .  , the proportion of persons
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 27 Interventions
identified as having cases who actually do have the condition under surveillance )  , 6 ) representativeness ( i . e .  , the
quality of data )  , 7 ) timeliness ( i . e .  , the speed or delay between steps in a system )  . 
Not Reviewed ] 
Teutsch , S .  ,  & Churchill , R . E .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1994 )  . Principles and Practice of Public Health Surveillance . New
York : Oxford Press . 
Chpt 1 : Historical Development– Authors point out that public health surveillance has been used since the late 1960s
as a broader concept than its earlier restricted use in relation to contagious diseases . They suggest it is inherently an
official ( i . e .  , government ) function and serves to “ tell the health officer where the problems are , who is affected , and
where programmatic and prevention activities should be directed ”  ( p . 8 )  . 
Chpt 2 : Considerations in Planning a Surveillance System– High-priority health events should be the focus of
surveillance systems , selected based on the following criteria : frequency ( e . g .  , incidence , prevalence , mortality , YPLL )  ; 
severity ( e . g .  , case-fatality ratio , hospitalization rate , disability rate )  ; cost ( direct and indirect )  ; preventability ; 
communicability ; public interest ( p . 20 )  . 
Methods for establishing a surveillance system include : 1 ) achieving a clear case definition that includes criteria for
person , place , and time , criteria to differentiate between a suspected versus a confirmed case , and epidemiological
features ; 2 ) systematic data collection ; 3 ) field testing the system ; 4 ) data analysis ; 5 ) interpretation and dissemination , 
including recommendations for action ; 6 ) evaluation . The author acknowledges that “ a clear understanding of how
policymakers , voluntary and professional groups , researchers , and other might use surveillance data is valuable in
garnering the support of these audiences for surveillance systems ”  ( p . 27 )  . 
Chpt 7 : Communicating Information for Action– Suggests adapting a model proposed by Hiebert , Ungurait , and Bohn
as the basis for communicating surveillance results and what they suggest : 1 ) establish the message ; 2 ) define the
audience ; 3 ) select the channel for communication ; 4 ) market the message by limiting it to the single over-riding
communication objective ( i . e .  , SOCO ) which should establish what is new , who is affected , and what works ; 5 ) 
evaluate the impact . 
Chpt 9 : Ethical Issues– Suggests an ethical “ checklist ” for public health surveillance : 1 ) Justify the system in terms of
maximizing potential public health benefits and minimizing public and individual harm ; 2 ) Justify use of identified data
and the maintenance of records with identifies ; 3 ) Have surveillance protocols and analytic research reviewed by
colleagues , and share data and findings with colleagues and the public health community at large ; 5 ) Assure the
protection of confidentiality of subjects ; 6 ) Inform health-care providers of conditions germane to their patients ; 7 ) 
Inform the public , the public health community , and clinicians of findings of surveillance . 
Text = 60%
Swanson , J .  ,  & Nies , M .  ( 1997 )  . Community Health Nursing ( 2nd ed .  )  . Philadelphia : W . B . Saunders , 103-
105 . 
Discusses surveillance as distinct from , but similar to , screening as a “ mechanism for the ongoing collection of health
information in a community .  ” Describes various national data sets and their use for surveillance . 
Text = 59%
Declich , S .  ,  & Carter , A . O .  ( 1994 )  . Public health surveillance : Historical origins , methods and evaluation . 
Bulletin of the WHO , 72 ( 2 )  , 285-314 . 
This document reviews the historical evolution of surveillance as distinct from epidemiology . Although both
surveillance and monitoring involve the routine and ongoing collection of data with methods which are pragmatic and
rapid , surveillance is used to assess population health status before and after an intervention of “ health events ,  ” 
whereas monitoring implies a constant adjustment of performance in relation to the results . Surveillance deals with
population health events ; monitoring looks at specific groups or individuals ( p . 288 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 28 Interventions
The authors use CDC ’ s criteria for evaluating surveillance systems . If establishing a new system , they suggest the
following components : 1 ) justifying need based on the importance of the event , the availability of prevention or
control measures , the need to learn more about the event , its patterns of occurrence and the population at risk , the
need to establish baseline data , and / or available data and alternative sources are not adequate ; 2 ) describing the
objectives ( describing the ongoing pattern of disease occurrence and / or linking with public health action and / or
studying the natural history and epidemiology of the event ; to provide information and baseline data )  ; 3 ) defining the
event and the population of concern ; 4 ) collecting and processing data ; 5 ) analyzing and interpreting data ; 6 ) 
recommending and disseminating public health action ; 7 ) personnel and other resources required ; 8 ) evaluating . 
Monograph = 48%
Spradley , B .  ,  & Allender , J .  ( 1996 )  . Control of communicable diseases : Surveillance measures . 
Community health nursing : Concepts and practice ( 4th ed .  )  . Lippincott , 507-509 . 
Surveillance is defined in the context of communicable disease control involving three steps : systematic collection
of data pertaining to the occurrence of specific diseases ; analysis and interpretation of data ; dissemination of
aggregated and processed information for the purposes of program interventions . Uses for surveillance data include
providing a well-accepted basis for planning community interventions as well as measuring change as a result of those
interventions , and identifying population groups at highest risk . 
Text = 46%
Stroup , D .  ,  & Teutsch , S .  ( 1998 )  . Statistics in public health : Qualitative approaches to public health
problems . New York : Oxford Press . 
Chpt 3 : Data Sources for Public Health ( p 39-57 ) 
Surveillance is defined as “ the ongoing and systematic collection , analysis , and interpretation of outcome-specific
data , closely integrated with the timely dissemination of those data to those responsible for preventing and controlling
disease and injury ( p . 40 )  . The authors see surveillance as one of a variety of sources of data for public health
decision making , along with vital statistics and the census ; surveys ; registries ; epidemic investigations ; research ; 
program evaluations . 
Chpt 4 : Monitoring the Health of a Population ( p 59-90 ) 
The term “ monitoring ” applies to the process used to achieve public health surveillance ( p 60 )  . Four basic types of
applications are suggested , including identifying new health problems ; characterizing geographic and demographic
distributions of health problems ; determining temporal trends of known health problems ; assessing effectiveness of
interventions or control measures for a health problem . 
Steps : 1 ) Identify the health problem and quantify the geographic and demographic distribution ; 2 ) Decide what will
be monitored , and develop good working definitions for the phenomena being monitored ( e . g .  , causal agents , risk
factors , and health problems )  ; 3 ) Establish the extent of the geographic area to be monitored ; 4 ) Establish the
frequency with which data will be collected and over what period of time ; 5 ) Establish the nature of the population
to be monitored ; 6 ) Determine how data will be managed ; 7 ) Provide for quality review of the data and its
interpretation . 
Text = 41%
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Disease & Health
Event Investigation
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
11 Examples of “ threats to health ” include acts of bioterrorism , chemical or other hazardous waste spills , and
natural disasters such as tornadoes , floods , hurricanes , earthquakes , extreme heat or cold . 
12 Not all health events are preventable . Natural disasters cannot be prevented , but public health can
reduce the severity of their impact by taking preventive measures . In these circumstances , public health usually
calls these actions “ mitigation ” rather than “ prevention .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 29 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : DISEASE AND OTHER HEALTH EVENT
INVESTIGATION
Definition
Disease and other health event investigation systematically gathers and analyzes data regarding
threats11 to the health of populations , ascertains the source of the threat , identifies cases and others
at risk , and determines control measures . 
The threats may be actual or potential . While investigation traditionally focuses on contagious diseases , it also
may be used with chronic diseases , injury , and other health events . The investigative process consists of
identifying and verifying the source of the threat ; identifying cases , their contacts , and others at risk , determining
control measures , and communicating with the public , as needed . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : Persons displaced by flooding12
Problem : Potential for disease outbreak
Community Example : 
The PHNs spend part of the day doing “ rounds ” among the rows of people living in a large
emergency shelter set up in a gymnasium . The PHNs talk to the people and ask how everything
is going , given the circumstances . They have concerns about the mental health of this
population who has gone through so much , so they assess for withdrawal , depression , and
inability to cope . While the PHNs note that most adults are coping , they observe that the
children are not coping as well . They question parents and hear stories about night terrors and
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 30 Interventions
atypical behavior . To prevent further development of problems among children , the PHNs
request child mental health counselors from the Emergency Response team . They also work with
the parents in the shelter to set up a “ toddler corner ” where children can play and act like
children . Parents take turns staffing the corner . They also set up a “ reading corner ” for older
children to simulate their school environment . 
Systems Example : 
The PHNs coordinate with local physicians and the Federal Emergency Management Agency to
collect information on contagious diseases systematically among persons who have been
displaced by massive flooding . Most people are living in a large emergency shelter in an old
armory . The group is particularly concerned about potential water-borne disease , since drinking
water is in short supply . They set up a protocol and team for immediate response to isolate all
suspected “ cases ” and to minimize the potential for disease spread . 
Individual / Family Example [ Case-Finding ]  : 
The PHNs hold a daily sick call in the emergency shelter . A mother brings in her three-year-old
with obvious signs and symptoms of chicken pox . The PHN questions the woman about
exposure , and the mother volunteers that she has received a letter from day care about chicken
pox right before the flood . The PHN asks the names of other children who attended the day
care and are also in the shelter . The PHN seeks them out to determine if they should be isolated . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Investigation is a key component of surveillance ; these two interventions are often discussed as a single
process . However , the investigation process also stands alone when broadly applied as a data gathering or 
 “ fact finding ” methodology . In addition , surveillance is prospective , looking ahead for expected events ; 
investigation is usually retrospective , or initiated in response to an unexpected event . Investigation frequently
leads to case-finding and referral and follow-up . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 31 Interventions
Notes from Abby
The PHNs commonly conduct or participate in many different types of disease and other health event
investigations in their regular practice . Examples include investigation of : 
• garbage houses
• lice and scabies
• maltreatment of vulnerable individuals
• lead
• food-borne and water-borne outbreaks
• communicable diseases , such as tuberculosis , meningitis , and giardia
• vaccine-preventable disease , such as measles , mumps , rubella , pertussis , and diphtheria
• rabies
• sexually transmitted diseases , such as gonorrhea , syphilis , and chlamydia
• chemical spills
• suicide
• cancer
• flooding , tornadoes , and other natural disasters
• asbestos
13Adapted from : Friis , R .  ,  & Sellers , T .  ( 1996 )  . Epidemiology for public health practice ( pp . 324-325 )  . 
Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen Publishing . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 32 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Disease and Other Health Event
Investigation13
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Define the problem : 
The PHN should correctly identify the disease or event and its source . This frequently requires gathering
data from multiple sources simultaneously to understand the etiology ( that is , the cause )  , natural course , 
and expected sequella ( that is , the resulting conditions of the disease or health event )  . 
2 . Establish clear criteria for what constitutes a “ case .  ” 
Criteria include : person , place , and time ; that is , who is at risk , where the event occurs , and when it
occurs . 
3 . Consider existing data . 
Determine what is currently known about identified cases in terms of persons , places , and time . Collect
and analyze data from multiple valid sources using appropriate scientific and epidemiologic principles . 
This includes both primary data ( that is , data directly obtained by the PHN ) and secondary data ( that is , 
data received from others )  . 
• Person : 
Who and how many are affected ? Who else might be affected ? Is there a connection between the
people affected and their age , sex , race , and socioeconomic status ? 
For example , in investigating playground injuries among children , are all injuries
reported or only those directly observed ? Are all injuries requiring first aid attention
reported , only those referred to a physician , or only injuries resulting in loss of school
attendance reported ? 
• Place : 
Does it matter where people live or work ? Are the cases limited to a certain area or widely
dispersed ? Does the area naturally harbor certain disease agents ? 
Again , in investigating playground injuries , does the type of equipment relate to the
types of injury ? Does the nature of the surface ( that is , grass , asphalt , or sand ) on
which the injury occurred make a difference ? Does the presence of other children also
using the equipment matter ? What other circumstances surround the injuries ? 
• Time : 
Does the time of day or association with a specific event , such as weather conditions , appear 
to make a difference ? 
For the playground injury investigation , what time of day , what weather conditions , 
and under what supervision conditions did the injuries occur ? 
14 Those PHNs working with prevention or protection from specific diseases or other threats to health , 
such as active tuberculosis , cancer clusters , hazardous exposures , or disaster response , should familiarize
themselves with protocols for specific investigations developed by the federal Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention ( CDC ) and other organizations . For reference , see the Control of Communicable Diseases Manual
published by the American Public Health Association . See also : Pope , Synder ,  & Mood .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1995 )  . Nursing , 
health , and the environment . Washington D . C . National Academy Press . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 33 Interventions
4 . Generate and analyze additional data using appropriate scientific and epidemiological
principles . 
Depending on the nature of the suspected disease or event , this may include : 
• direct observation 
• clinical data such as :  
< interviewing cases 
< performing physical assessment 
< collecting specimens .  
< reviewing available lab data . 
Specific interview and assessment protocols are often used to assure consistency in data gathering . 
5 . Determine , based on the analysis , what factors are likely to cause the problem or risk . 
Arriving at an accurate conclusion requires careful and thorough consideration ; be as sure as possible . 
Accuracy may be enhanced by : 
• reviewing and comparing reports from previous similar investigations
• conferring with others involved in the investigation
• sharing and comparing data
• carrying out secondary data collection to confirm suspicions . 
6 . Determine and communicate an appropriate response . 14
Based on the analysis and conclusions about the problem , its causes , and the conditions in which it
occurs , offer options for prevention . First , consider primary prevention options , then secondary
prevention options ( if primary prevention is infeasible )  , and , finally , tertiary prevention options ( if neither
primary or secondary prevention is possible )  . Referral and follow-up should be provided for those in
need of treatment . 
7 . Evaluate the effectiveness of any action taken . 
Determine the extent to which the problem or risk was eliminated or prevented . Calculate the resources
required and areas where greater efficiencies could be achieved . It is always useful to provide a list of 
 “ lessons learned ” applicable to future investigations . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 34 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Disease and Health Event Investigation and Epidemiology
Disease and other health event investigation , like surveillance , requires PHNs to use epidemiology , the science
of public health . Epidemiology is “ the study of the distribution and determinants of diseases and injuries in
human populations .  ”  * The conventional epidemiology model is the “ epidemiology triangle :  ”  *  * 
• agent = whatever is thought to cause the disease or risk
• host = whatever is affected by the agent 
• environment = all the factors external to the host and agent to allow or promote the disease or risk . 
The model is commonly used to explain infectious *  *  * disease transmission , such as Lyme Disease . In this
disease , 
• the agent = the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi , which is transmitted by the bite of infected deer ticks 
( in the Northeastern and North-Central U . S .  ) and western black-legged ticks ( on the Pacific Coast ) 
• the host = humans and other mammals 
• the environment = the woods and overgrown brush or residential sites bordering these areas . 
The epidemiological triangle may also be used to explain behavioral risk factors and other threats to health , such
as obesity . In this condition : 
• the agent or causal factor = an imbalance between caloric intake and kilocalories burned through
physical activity 
• the host = a person who is born with certain metabolic characteristics , as well as learned ( i . e .  , 
behavioral ) characteristics such as eating and exercise habits
• the environment = all the social factors promoting overeating and underexercising , such as fast food
establishments , 32-ounce servings of soda , sedentary lifestyle , lack of safe walking trails . 
Regardless of the disease or event , using the agent-host-environment model to organize information collected
can help identify connections or patterns . These points of connection often serve as the focal points of
prevention strategies . 
Bacteriophage Ecology Group glossary @  < www . phage . org / microbiology . htm >  
* Mausner , J . S .  & Kramer , S .  ( 1985 )  . Epidemiology : An introductory text ( 2nd ed .  )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders , p . 1 .  
*  * p . 33 .  
*  *  * infectious - communicable conditions ( i . e .  , diseases ) caused by microbes , such as bacteria or viruses
communicable - a condition that readily spreads from person to person
contagious - a condition that is very communicable , or which spreads rapidly from person to person
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 35 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Disease and Other Health Event
Investigation
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When
PHNs consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices
come from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence
from the literature with their practice expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking
or particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . ESTABLISHES WHAT CONSTITUTES A “ CASE .  ” 
Best Evidence : Valanis
Criteria considered for infectious or environmentally related cases are commonly found in the literature . While
the set below may not fit all problems or risks the PHN may wish to investigate , subsets could be adapted : 
‚ date of onset
‚ precipitating factors , or anything that happened before the disease or health event that may have
contributed
‚ date of likely exposure
‚ symptoms or evidence of cause for concern
‚ duration of symptoms 
‚ age
In addition , use as specific a name or label for the problem or threat as possible . Spend sufficient time
researching the problem or threat to know how it is commonly named by experts . For instance ,  “ motor vehicle
crashes ” is more specific than “ car accidents .  ” Also , if confirming laboratory tests or other scientific
measures are available , use them . For instance , a serum titer for rubella antibody is more conclusive evidence
of a pregnant woman ’ s immunity than is her memory of having the disease as a child . 
2 . CONSIDERS WHETHER INVESTIGATION IS THE APPROPRIATE INTERVENTION
GIVEN THE CIRCUMSTANCES . 
Best Evidence : Hinman
Appropriateness of implementing investigation depends on the following criteria : 
A . Assess whether the threat to health poses significant risk to individuals beyond those directly
affected . 
‚ If the threat is an infectious agent , is it communicable and under what circumstances ? For
instance , measles , which is a person-to-person airborne transmission , presents a greater urgency
for investigation than rabies , which is transmitted by direct contact . 
‚ Is it a new or unexpected agent for this population or this geographic area ? 
The lowly mosquito serves as a marker , for instance , for disease threat migration . 
‚ Is the threat limited to a single location or widely dispersed ? 
For example , Lyme disease is limited to habitats that harbor deer ticks or western black-legged
ticks . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 36 Interventions
B . Determine which persons or groups are at greatest risk , where they are located , and what
barriers will make it difficult to find them . 
Estimate how many persons or groups will need to be investigated to be confident that you have
sufficient data to draw conclusions . 
C . Determine if it is realistic to investigate everyone who should be investigated , or if a sample
would be appropriate . 
Although the preference is to investigate everyone , resources often prohibit this . Considerations for
determining a sample include : 
‚ Is a particular age cohort , such as the very young or the very old , more vulnerable than others ? 
‚ Is the available treatment or intervention more effective in one group than in others ? 
‚ What does the natural course of disease suggest , for example , as the incubation period ? 
D . Consider whether the result of investigation will likely lead to other interventions , and , if so , if
resources are adequate to manage them . 
Investigation often finds individuals who require further intervention such as case-finding or referral
and follow-up for further diagnosis and treatment . 
E . Weigh whether the costs related to the investigation will be offset by the benefits gained . 
Consideration of costs must include associated indirect costs and opportunity costs . Indirect costs
include : 
‚ costs of hiring temporary staff to cover for those involved in the investigation
‚ increased supervisory and administrative time related to implementation
‚ related training requirements
Opportunity costs include the other activities the resources would have supported had the investigation
not been implemented . Given how expensive investigation can be , ask yourself if this is a “ need to
know ” situation or a “ nice to know ” situation . 
F . Assess current staff competency to carry out the investigation . 
Additional training resources and / or requests for outside assistance may be needed if greater or different
competencies are required . 
3 . UTILIZES MULTIPLE DATA SOURCES THAT INCLUDE PERSON , PLACE , AND TIME
ELEMENTS . 
Best Evidence : Valanis ; Spradley and Allender
This is key to the investigation intervention . The purpose of investigation is to discover rapidly as much as
possible regarding who is at risk , where the event is occurring , and when it is occurring . Based on the data
15 Bringing together different disciplines adds multiple perspectives to the understanding of the situation
and possible responses . It may also add confusion . The three-level model of prevention cited above is commonly
understood by most public health professionals . However , other disciplines use those same terms with very
different meanings . 
16 When rapid response is required , such as in emergency situations , investigation is usually carried out
through protocols and procedures developed by public heath agencies and its partners and rehearsed on a regular
basis . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 37 Interventions
collected , investigation also includes making an educated guess regarding the “ why ” or the probable cause ( s ) of
the disease or event . 
4 . COLLECTS DATA THAT SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERVENTIONS AT
MULTIPLE LEVELS OF PREVENTION . 
Best Evidence : Spradley and Allender
Given that effective public health strategies are always designed with the three levels of prevention in mind , 
investigations should collect data that reflect those levels ( i . e .  , primary , secondary , and tertiary )  . Although
limited resources often force public health to deal with immediate issues at the expense of long-term prevention , 
the more a disease or health event is anticipated , the more likely effective countermeasures can be designed . 
The most effective strategies ( i . e .  , primary prevention ) prevent an event from occurring in the first place . The
classic examples of primary prevention are vaccinating against infectious diseases , chlorinating public water
supplies to prevent pathogen growth , and promoting optimum nutrition to prevent anemia in pregnant women . 
Not all health events are preventable . Natural disasters cannot be prevented , but public health can reduce the
severity of their impact by taking preventive measures . Building levees to control floods , for instance , or
designating tornado shelters for residents of trailer home parks lessen the impact . In these circumstances , 
public health usually calls the measures “ mitigation ” rather than “ prevention .  ” 15
5 . IS ABLE TO PERFORM THE ROLES WARRANTED BY THE SPECIFIC
CIRCUMSTANCES AND AGENCY RESOURCES . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Roles in investigation include that of leader , contributor , or user of information . At times the PHN may assume
multiple roles within the same investigation process . If the PHN is involved in an infectious disease outbreak
investigation , for instance , the PHN may well both participate in the collection of data from suspected cases 
( contributor role ) and , based on analysis of that data , determine the appropriate next steps ( user role )  . 
Generally , the more frequently an agency is called upon to participate in a given type of investigation , such as
food-borne or infectious disease outbreak , the more feasible it becomes for the agency to maintain its own staff
trained for these purposes . 16
However , PHNs should also keep in mind that implementing an investigation does not require a large and
complex system if the problem is not large and complex . For instance , in investigating why certain clients
consistently missed clinic appointments , a PHN discovered that most of them had addresses in the same
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 38 Interventions
neighborhood . With a little more investigation , she connected their missed appointments with the availability of
public transportation . This connection led to a different conclusion than “ willful noncompliance ” and also a
different resolution to the problem . 
The critical issue in the investigation intervention is to assure that data collected must be consistently and reliably
recorded in order for it to be used . Remember the old axiom from nursing documentation ,  “ What doesn ’ t get
recorded doesn ’ t count .  ” The same applies here . 
6 . SEEKS OUT AND UTILIZES INVESTIGATIVE DATA TO INFLUENCE POLICY
DEVELOPMENT . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise 

Data collected through investigation of diseases and other health events can serve to support policy
recommendations , since it is systematically collected from multiple valid sources using appropriate scientific and
epidemiological principles . In other words , investigation contributes to the science base on which policy ( that
is , legislation , regulation , ordinances , and guidelines that support healthful living ) should be based . PHNs use it
to influence policy development by informing policy-makerss about actual and potential threats to health and
sorting out what part of the popular perception of cause and effect is supported by science , how much is myth , 
and how much is truly unknown . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 39 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Disease and Other Health Event
Investigation
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice
and academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at
the end of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who
reviewed it . It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
none
Expert Opinion
Hinman , A .  ( 1998 )  . Evaluating interventions for prevention and control of infections diseases , part I . 
J . Public Health Management Practice , 4 ( 4 )  , 106-113 and Hinman , A .  ( 1998 )  . Evaluating
interventions for prevention and control of infections diseases , part II . J . Public Health Management
Practice , 4 ( 5 )  , 82-90 . 
In this two-part series , Hinman , who was with CDC at the time the articles were written , suggests criteria for
evaluating the effectiveness of prevention and control of infectious diseases . Although not titled “ investigation ,  ” 
and developed under the assumption of infectious disease , the components that address investigation are
relevant . He suggests that , initially , the following questions be asked ( adapted )  : 
1 . Is investigation needed ? Does the condition present such a significant problem that action is
warranted to counteract it ? The answer depends on the nature of the threat ( e . g .  , is it new to this
population or this geographic area ? Is it communicable ? Does it pose a real or potential threat to more
than one person ?  )  . 
2 . Who or what should be investigated ? The answer depends on the risk or threat presented , as well as
the ability to investigate thoroughly . For instance , the very young and the elderly are frequently more
vulnerable to infectious diseases , but resources may be insufficient to investigate both . On which group
should an investigation be focused ? For which is there the most effective therapy ? Which would
provide the “ best ” return on the resources invested in an investigation ? The answers must be weighed
separately in each circumstance . 
3 . Is investigating all who should be investigated realistic ? Can those at risk be identified early enough
to turn around the results if investigated ? Will the results of investigation necessarily result in remediation
of the threat or risk ? 
4 . Will the result of investigation likely lead to other interventions , and , if so , are resources adequate to
manage them ? 
5 . Will the costs related to investigation be offset by the benefits seen ? Note that the indirect costs of
investigation and opportunity costs must be considered in addition to the direct costs involved . 
6 . Does the nature of the investigation require knowledge and skill beyond what a given program or
agency has ? Will extra costs be incurred training staff or contracting for investigation ? 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 40 Interventions
7 . What has been the experience related to other similar investigations ? Did the benefits equal or
exceed the costs involved ? 
Expert Opinion = 47%
Pottinger , J .  , Herwaldt , L . A .  ,  & Perl , T . M .  ( 1997 , July )  . Basics of surveillance–An overview , 
Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology , 18 ( 7 )  , 513-526 . 
The first part of this article focuses on surveillance ; the rest looks at case-finding methods . Data sources
suggested as useful in locating infectious disease trends include total chart review ; lab reports ; review of client
summary data ( i . e .  ,  “ kardex ” review )  ; clinical rounds for direct observation ; and postdischarge data . When
assessing for system effectiveness , consider : Did the system detect events or disease ? Were practices changed
based on data collected ? Were the data disseminated ? 
Expert Opinion = 25%
Texts and Monographs
Valanis , B .  ( 1992 )  . Disease control and surveillance . Epidemiology in Nursing and Health Care .  ( 2nd
ed .  )  . Norwalk , CT : Appleton-Lane . 
Phase I : Preliminary Investigation : This is the time during which additional information is collected to broaden
the understanding of the health event or problem considered . It includes possible factors unrelated to the
problem itself , such as artifacts inherent in the data , or the reporting process , or introduction of a new or
improved diagnostic procedure . If these can be accounted for , then enter the next phase . 
Phase II : Active Follow-up : 1 ) Determine what additional information needs to be collected ; 2 ) review and
verify case definition and case status , making modifications of the definition as necessary ; 3 ) delineate an
appropriate companion group ; 4 ) seek out additional cases that may not have been reported before ; 5 ) collect , 
analyze , and interpret new data ; and 6 ) determine implications . 
Valanis also includes a list of control measures ( i . e .  ,  “ those activities which reduce or eliminate the epidemic or
the problem than has been identified ,  ” p . 326 )  : quarantine , immunization , preventive therapy ( e . g .  , gamma
globulin )  , eradication or reduction of host vector , medical treatment , early diagnosis , reduction or removal from
exposure , market ban or selective restriction of an agent ( e . g .  , thalidomide utilization )  , nutritional supplements 
( e . g .  , folic acid )  , product modification ( e . g .  , child-proof safety caps )  . 
Text = 62%
Spradley , B .  & Allender , J .  ( 1996 )  . Control of communicable diseases : Surveillance measures . 
Community Health Nursing : Concepts and Practice ( 4th ed .  )  .  ( pp . 507-509 , 520-529 )  . Lippincott . 
These authors treat investigation of disease and health events in two ways . In their general discussion of
assessing community health status through application of epidemiological methods , they suggest research
approaches ( i . e .  , descriptive , analytic , and / or experimental ) for investigating the causal mechanisms of health
and illness ( pp . 272-279 )  . However , in their later discussion of communicable disease control , they present
investigation as a secondary prevention method entailing data gathering regarding exposure , contact
determination and finding ( i . e .  , case-finding )  , and referral and follow-up for treatment . 
Text = 46%
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Outreach
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 41 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : OUTREACH
Definition
Outreach locates populations-of-interest or populations-at-risk and provides information about the
nature of the concern , what can be done about it , and how services can be obtained . 
Outreach activities may be directed at whole communities , targeted populations within those communities , 
and / or systems that impact the community ’ s health . It includes risk communication . Outreach success is
determined by the proportion of those considered at risk who receive the information and act on it . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All women aged 50 and over
Problem : Undetected Breast Cancer
Community Example : 
The PHNs provide information on the need for mammography and where to go for low-cost
mammography screening to older women at craft fairs , senior living facilities , and congregate
dining centers . Included in the packet of information the PHNs present to the women in their
audience is a postcard to give to their health care provider when they go in for their
mammogram . The PHNs collect these and are able to track the number of women who
responded to the outreach message . 
Systems Example : 
A local health department is participating in the federal breast and cervical cancer program that
provides low-cost mammography and cervical screening to women over 50 . The PHNs convince
pharmacists and grocers in a community to display information on mammography screening
prominently on the shelving where feminine hygiene products are sold . The display includes cards
explaining how and where women can access affordable mammography screening . The PHNs
also convince the owners of the local dress shop and department store to put up posters with
mammography information in the dressing rooms in the women ’ s clothing section . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 42 Interventions
Individual / Family [ Case-Finding ] example : 
The PHN responds to a referral from the local breast and cervical cancer clinic of a woman with
positive mammography results who has not responded to their calls . The PHN visits the home
and discovers that the woman has not returned to the clinic because of her fear and anxiety . The
PHN discusses the woman ’ s fears with her , counsels her about options , and eventually gets her to
call the clinic while she is there to set up an appointment for the next day . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
At the community practice level , outreach operates similarly to social marketing . Principles of social
marketing can be used to design and deliver an effective outreach message . A broadly focused social
marketing intervention to raise a community ’ s awareness about HIV / AIDS , for instance , can be paired with an
outreach intervention designed specifically for those at high-risk , such as IV-drug users or men engaging in sex
with men . More commonly , however , outreach is used in conjunction with health teaching to inform those at
risk about that risk and encourage them to seek attention . Outreach is also often implemented as a precursor to
screening , disease and other health event investigation , and case-finding . 
17 Demographic information comes mostly from the U . S . Census , which is collected every ten years . The most recent
census was collected in 2000 but reports will not be available immediately . Considerable information is available at the U . S . 
Census website ( www . census . gov )  . Additionally , state level data is available from each state ’ s demographer ’ s office . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 43 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Outreach
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Develop an outreach plan using information from an assessment of the community ’ s health . 
A . Identify and specify the issue to be addressed : 
• develop a list of what is known and what additional information is needed
• seek out the additional information
• invite participation from other groups , agencies , and providers in the community who share
concern about the issue . 
B . Describe the “ population-of-interest ,  ” also known as the target population . 
Identify relevant demographic information including : 
• number of persons
• age characteristics
• gender characteristics
• racial / ethnic characteristics
• residence / geographical location
• average household income
• educational level of head of household
• occupation of head of household
• economic indicators for the geographical area , such as unemployment rates , job sources , 
transportation to jobs , etc . 
C . Analyze how demographic17 and other information may be used to develop effective
outreach . 
Given the population , consider : 
• What persons or groups are seen as creditable sources of information ? Elders ? Parents ? 
Teachers ? Peers ? How might they be engaged ? 
• In what language and at what reading levels should written materials be developed ? 
• Where do people in the population gather ? Churches or other places of worship ? Clubs or
social organizations ? Work sites ? Schools ? Grocery stores ? Laundromats ? Neighborhood
corners ? 
This information is critical in developing effective outreach . 
D . Test the outreach plan to be sure it : 
• communicates the right message
• is communicated by the right person or group
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 44 Interventions
• reaches the right group or persons
• provides the right incentive for change . 
Ask other PHNs in your agency and co-workers from other disciplines who also work with the target
population to critique the outreach plan before implementation . If possible , recruit a small number of individuals
from the target population to critique the outreach plan , as well . This is especially important for any materials
developed , whether they are delivered orally or in writing . 
2 . Implement and monitor the outreach plan . 
The greater the amount of time and attention spent in plan development , the greater the likelihood
outreach will go smoothly . Once the plan is set , it is important to monitor outreach activities to make
sure the plan is followed . This includes supervising any paraprofessional workers who may be involved
in the outreach intervention . 
3 . Evaluate the results of the outreach implementation : 
• Did the target population hear the message ? 
Determine the proportion of the target population who were found and received the message . 
• Who acted on the message ? 
Determine the proportion of the target population who were found , received the message , 
and acted on it . 
• Who received the message but did not act on ? 
Determine the proportion of the target population who were found , received the message , but
did not act on it . 
• Who did not receive the message ? 
Determine the proportion of the target population who were not found and thus did not
receive the message . 
Identify what barriers prevented people from receiving and / or acting on the message .  
< Barriers external to the population the PHN is trying to reach ; for example , printed
information might be above their reading level or transportation might be unavailable .  
< Barriers internal to the population the PHN is trying to reach ; for example , the
recommended changes are not in keeping with cultural or ethnic understanding or individuals
see no benefit to changing . 
Identify what factors contributed to outreach success .  
< What factors facilitated success ?  
< What conditions or factors had to be present in order for facilitation to work ? 
4 . For people who encountered barriers , design supplemental outreach activities that eliminate
or overcome them . 
This may include activities that are sensitive to characteristics of the target population or concentrated in
areas where many people did not receive the message or did not act on the information . For those
persons deemed at highest risk , this could include case-finding . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 45 Interventions
Notes from Abby 
 “ Outreach ” as a term is ordinarily reserved for informing those at risk who are unknown to the agency .  “ In
reach ,  ” on the other hand , refers to methods used to inform or alert clients with whom there has been previous
or ongoing contact . Issuing client reminders for scheduling routine preventive health assessments is an example . 
A considerable literature has formed on the effectiveness of such methods in relationship to mammography
appointments . The most effective in-reach methods were found to be : 
• women received a letter signed by their personal physician announcing an appointment date and time in
the future
• women were asked to respond only if the appointment needed to be rescheduled
• the letter was followed up with a phone call reminder just prior to the scheduled appointment .  
[ See : Wagner , T . H .  ( 1998 )  . The effectiveness of mailed patient reminders on mammography screening : A meta-analysis . Am J
Prev Med , 14 ( 1 )  , 64-70 .  ] 
Using a method such as focus group interviews with members of the population-of-interest can provide useful
information about what outreach methods might work . For example , prior to launching a universally offered
home visiting program for newborns , focus group interviews reveal that the best ways to encourage women to
participate in the program were to : 
• be recommended by someone new moms trust , such as physicians , nurses , other moms
• introduce the program early , so it is not a surprise after delivery
• have program staff visit Lamaze and other childbirth education programs , WIC , early childhood
development classes , etc . 
• put advertisements in neighborhood papers
• send letters or postcards announcing the program to pregnant people
• make hospital visits to moms after delivery
• promote the program to adopting parents through adoption agencies
• offer an open invitation so women can call for a visit if they change their minds
• include photos of visitors on business cards and brochures .  
[ From : Minnesota Department of Health , Family Health Division .  ( 1998 , June )  . Promoting healthy beginnings : Findings from
focus groups with expecting moms and new parents .  ] 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 46 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Outreach
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When
PHNs consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices
come from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence
from the literature with their practice expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking
or particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . ACCURATELY INTERPRETS AVAILABLE COMMUNITY ASSESSMENT DATA TO
DETERMINE POPULATION HEALTH PROBLEMS , RISK , SERVICE NEEDS , AND
PROMOTERS AND BARRIERS TO SERVICE ACCESS . 
Best Evidence : Blozis , Moon , Cooper ; Lambert ; Gwyther and Jenkins ; May et . al . 
The process of clearly identifying the target population suggested by the data requires considerable knowledge
of : 
‚ the determinants of health , that is , social , biological , physical , genetic , and economic factors thought to
affect health
‚ current and historical health status indicators and their trends
‚ knowledge of community norms and cultural influences
‚ other influencing factors , that is , recent occurrences of natural disasters , such as tornadoes or flooding . 
Specific examples include : 
‚ Blozis , Moon , and Cooper found that enrollment in a work-site health promotion program increased
when it incorporated worker values determined through an employee survey . 
‚ Lambert improved utilization of health services for migrant farm worker families through :  
< delivering outreach services through an interdisciplinary team at their work or living sites 
< establishing messages that portrayed healthy goals realistic for the families 
< maintaining cultural sensitivity . 
They also found that aggressive referral and follow-up was related to improved service utilization . 

‚ Gwyther and Jenkins , also working with migrant farm worker families , observed many of the same
factors associated with outreach effectiveness , but also provided mobile vans and an information
tracking system . 
2 . SHAPES OUTREACH ACTIVITIES THAT ADDRESS THE UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS
OF THE TARGET POPULATION . 
Best Evidence : May et . al . 
Effectiveness depends on the extent to which outreach activities are acceptable and appropriate to the target
population . In other words ,  “ know your audience .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 47 Interventions
Key factors influencing outreach effectiveness include : 
‚ understanding and promoting personal preferences of those in the population-of-interest 
‚ attending to the importance of cultural sensitivity
‚ involving individuals indigenous to the community is important during outreach development . 
May and colleagues describe a particular strategy carried out in the late 1980s in Arizona to recruit urban highrisk women into early prenatal care . They did extensive survey and focus group work prior to developing the
outreach activities and found the results to be very useful in determining what types of outreach would or would
not work . For instance , they found these factors to be critical for recruitment : 
‚ receiving personal contacts from health workers fluent in the women ’ s first language ( in this case , 
Spanish ) 
‚ going door to door to recruit , rather than mailing information
‚ knowing someone already enrolled in the program . 
3 . UTILIZES A HOLISTIC , COMPREHENSIVE OUTREACH APPROACH . 
Best Evidence : Hurley and others ; Clover and Redman ; Lambert ; Gwyther and Jenkins
Almost all outreach strategies start with a media campaign to increase general awareness and then supplement
with more intensive methods to reach a specific target population . A summary of outreach elements found
consistently in successful strategies as presented in the literature reviewed include : 
‚ focusing on multiple levels of outreach simultaneously ; that is , individual / family , community , 
neighborhood , or environment
‚ using every opportunity to do case-finding in addition to outreach
‚ accommodating cultural and ethnic preferences
‚ utilizing both formal and informal support networks to spread the message
‚ designing flexible outreach plans that incorporate new information as it becomes available . 
4 . ADDRESSES POTENTIAL BARRIERS TO OUTREACH IN DEVELOPING AN OUTREACH
PLAN . 
Best Evidence : Blozis , Moon , Cooper ; Jones and Scannell ; Gwyther and Jenkins ; May et . al . 
A well-thought-out , planned approach to outreach is enriched when potential barriers are also considered during
plan development . A summary of barriers discussed in the literature includes : 
‚ geography
When the nature of the physical environment prohibits people gathering at , or traveling to , a common
place , such as in severe climates or isolated , sparsely populated areas , outreach becomes a greater
challenge . 
‚ time , natural daily rhythms , and schedules
If public services announcements on TV are used , broadcasting them at 3 a . m .  , for instance , is probably
not effective outreach , unless you are confident the target population will be watching at that hour . 
Similarly , accommodating shift-workers ’ schedules means personally delivered outreach methods
cannot all be done between 9 a . m . and 5 p . m . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 48 Interventions
‚ socioeconomic factors
Hurley and others found that in Australia a personal letter that included an appointment time increased
attendance at free , publicly funded mammography clinics , especially for women from higher
socioeconomic status . 
‚ preferences for service delivery
Outreach efforts are most effective when delivered by indigenous workers who speak the same
language . 
‚ ongoing patterns of behavior and lifestyles
‚ health beliefs in general , but those influenced by cultural and ethnic practices and
preferences , in particular . 
While the requirement to be sensitive to cultural and ethnic beliefs and practices is noted by all authors
reviewed , Lambert and Gwyther and Jenkins offer particular insights . Both report on observations made
working with migrant farm laborers : 
‚ Lambert cautions PHNs should be careful not to apply generalized observations made about one
cultural group to another . Lambert found that within migrant farm worker women , it was important to
understand both the implications of their Mexican culture regarding health beliefs , as well as the subculture of women workers . 
‚ Gwyther and Jenkins note Martaus ’ work in the late 1980s regarding the impact of cultural beliefs on
symptom interpretation , treatment actions , and provider-patient relationships :  
< explanation of symptoms involves three basic understandings : emotional origin , germ theory ( held
by the younger immigrants )  , and hot / cold imbalance 
< treatment actions are implemented by the women in the culture but must first be approved by the
male head of the household 
< expectation that the provider relieve symptoms quickly and effectively while approaching the
patient in a personal and warm manner . 
5 . USES OUTREACH METHODS WITH DEMONSTRATED EFFECTIVENESS . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
The PHN should consider the following elements , which are consistently found in effective outreach strategies : 
‚ include some type of personal involvement 
‚ implement multiple outreach strategies , for example , media , community campaigns , informal networks
‚ utilize trained volunteers drawn from the target population 
‚ incorporate principles of social marketing
‚ build on existing formal networks to which the target population is already connected , such as
organizations , associations , and clubs
‚ build on pre-existing informal networks ; for example , social groups , friends , extended family . 
In the opinion of the expert panel , nothing is quite as effective as word of mouth , that is , being endorsed
or approved by a person or group who is trusted . 
18 Tyson , B .  & Coulter , R .  ( 1999 , March )  . Marketing enlightened self-interest : A model of individual and
community oriented motivation . Social Marketing Quarterly , 5 ( 1 )  , 34-49 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 49 Interventions
6 . INVOLVES ALL KEY STAKEHOLDERS IN DEVELOPING OUTREACH PLANS . 
Best Evidence : Hurley and others
Stakeholders include physicians , community organizations , cultural groups , faith-based organizations , service
organizations , and others . The composition of the stakeholder group will vary according to the issue
addressed . 
There are many kinds of motivators for stakeholders . Some are interested in proposed program outcomes
because they see a personal benefit in the outcome . Opponents may be interested because they perceive a
personal threat . Both types of stakeholders are important to “ bring along ” in the outreach development
process . 
When planning outreach strategies , include those who consider themselves invested in the outcome of the effort . 
This especially pertains to representation from the target population you are attempting to reach . Clover , 
Redman , and others , found , for instance , that attendance at a free , publically funded mammography clinic was
significantly greater in communities where a community participation component was included . 
Note : This article was not reviewed by panelists , but the content contributes to the evidence .  
[ Tyson and Coulter18 provide insight into what motivates stakeholders . They start with what is known about
individual motivation : some people are motivated by the personal benefit they see from their efforts ; others do
so because they wish to avoid a threat and choose to act defensively . The authors then applied these basic
motivations for individual change to test the likelihood of individuals ’ involvement in community-level outreach
strategies . In summary , they concluded that linking threats or benefits to community health to what it could
mean to individuals ’ health promoted involvement . In other words , if an individual believed that his or her own
personal health could be affected by whatever happens to the health of the community as a whole , they were
more likely to participate in community-level efforts . Conversely , it would appear that promoting action based
on altruism or the betterment of the “ public good ” is not likely to prove motivating in and of itself .  ] 
7 . INTEGRATES THE OUTREACH INTERVENTION WITH RELATED ACTIVITIES
ADDRESSING THE SAME TARGET POPULATION . 
Best Evidence : Jones and Scanell
Jones and Scanell ’ s work with the homeless mentally ill can be reasonably generalized across other populations
of concern . Examples from their work include : 
‚ collaboration and coalition building among organizations focusing on the same target population
‚ physical co-location across systems
‚ building community ownership through involvement
‚ supporting efforts to stimulate resource development
‚ coordinating simultaneous outreach to individual / families and community providers . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 50 Interventions
Coordinated and comprehensive outreach delivery requires that someone or a group must monitor outreach
efforts in order to reduce overlap and maximize impact . This is especially important with hard-to-reach groups , 
where duplication of effort becomes very costly . 
Notes from Abby
Maija Selby-Harrington and colleagues published a series of studies they carried out in the mid-1980s to
increase utilization of early and periodic screening , diagnosis , and treatment ( EPSDT ) services by families with
children eligible for Medicaid in North Carolina . A variety of outreach methods were employed , including
mailed pamphlets , phone contacts , home visits , and combinations of these . All families received the same basic
information about EPSDT on intake to the Medicaid program ; a sampling of families who only received this
contact served as the comparison in the studies . Their findings included : 
• families without phones differed in health-related characteristics far beyond the fact that phones could
not be used to contact them regarding the EPSDT program ; the authors concluded that lack of phone
service served as a proxy indicator for those families who were the poorest of the poor ; they had more
and younger children , and the parents themselves were younger
• home visits were associated with somewhat greater use of EPSDT services by these families ; however , 
of those families without phones , 44 percent did not receive home visits
• compared outreach strategies ( i . e .  , mailed pamphlets , phone contacts , and home visits ) were all
associated with greater utilization than informing individuals about the service availability at the time of
intake ; however , the greater utilization was only true for those families with phones
• among families with phones , a home visit was the most effective , but a phone call was the most costeffective
• overall , none of the strategies produced the utilization rates desired . 
Selby-Harrington , M . et . al .  ( 1995 )  . Increasing medicaid child health screenings : The effectiveness of mailed pamphlets , phone
calls , and home visits . AJPH , 85 ( 10 )  , 1412-1417 . See also Selby-Harrington , M .  , Tesh , A .  , Donat , P .  ,  & Quade , D .  ( 1995 , Dec .  )  . 
Diversity in rural poor : Differences in households with and without telephones . Public Health Nursing , 12 ( 6 )  , 386-392 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 51 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Outreach
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice
and academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at
the end of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who
reviewed it . It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution . 
Review Articles
Gwyther , M .  ,  & Jenkins , M .  ( 1998 , March / April )  . Migrant farmworker children : Health status , 
barriers to care , and nursing innovations in health care delivery . J . Pediatric Health Care , 12 ( 2 )  , 60-
66 . 
The authors review the literature and determine major barriers to health care access for migrant children are
largely due to their mobility , minimal family incomes , and cultural barriers . They consider addressing the latter a
critical factor if health outcomes for migrant families are to improve . They suggest the following interventions as
important : use of trained lay community outreach workers ; provision of alternative delivery models , such as
mobile vans ; and development of information tracking systems . 
Review = 75%
Research Reports
Hurley , S .  , Huggins , R .  , et . al .  ( 1994 , Oct .  )  . Recruitment activities and sociodemographic factors that
predict factors at a mammographic screening program . AJPH , 84 ( 10 )  , 1655-1658 . 
Australian women eligible for free mammography who had not utilized the service after the general information
campaign were randomly sent one of two invitations to participate . One had a preset appointment ; the other
did not . Both groups were sent a follow-up letter without an appointment if they had not attended a clinic
within four weeks of the first letter . The strongest predictor of attendance proved to be the personal invitation
that included the appointment date . However , comparing costs , the letter without an appointment , plus a
follow-up letter , proved more cost-effective . In all , 38 percent of all women attending did so without any
outreach ; an additional 5 . 8 percent self-enrolled after the general information campaign ; the invitation with a
preset appointment , plus a follow-up letter , yielded 42 . 7 percent ; the invitation without a preset time , plus a
follow-up letter , yielded 29 . 5 percent . Other predictive factors included a higher socioeconomic level and living
closer to the clinic site . 
Experimental = 64%
Clover , K .  ,  & Redman , S .  , et . al .  ( 1996 )  . Two sequential trials of community participation to recruit
women for mammographic screening . Preventive Medicine , 25 , 126-143 . 
Eight smaller rural Australian towns were matched to compare outreach methods in the mid-1900s . Results
indicate that community participation or family physician involvement are effective strategies for recruiting
women and that both are superior to media promotion alone . 
Experimental = 58%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 52 Interventions
Tanner , E .  ,  & Feldman , R .  ( 1997 , Nov / Dec )  . Strategies for enhancing appointment keeping in lowincome chronically ill clients . Nursing Research , 46 ( 6 )  , 342-344 . 
The authors first present a meta-analysis of literature regarding compliance with appointment keeping , which
shows an average compliance rate of 58 percent . The rate consistently increases with the use of mailed
reminders and telephone prompts . However , mailed reminders must be sent with sufficient “ lead time ” to
accommodate clients ’ schedules . These findings hold across middle-income groups , but less-so among lowerincome groups . If clients ’ perceive they feel better after follow-through , they are more likely to keep further
appointments . Conversely , if clients experience no change in their well-being or are pessimistic that they can be
helped to improve , no change is noted in appointment keeping . The authors then report on a study to
determine the impact of social support ( i . e .  , engaging family and friends in promoting clients ’ appointment
keeping ) in improving compliance among low-income chronically ill clients . Findings show that providing social
support counseling at the exit of an appointment improves compliance with successive appointments . However , 
the addition of a post-card reminder and a phone call prompt only improved compliance among females ; for
men , the compliance rate fell with their addition . 
Experimental = 45%
Huggins , D .  ( 1998 , March / April )  . Parish nursing : A community-based outreach program of care . 
Orthopaedic Nursing , 27-30 . 
Huggins provides a detailed description of successful outreach ( called “ partnering ”  ) to Spanish-speaking
populations in Tucson , delivered by parish nurses under the auspices of the Carondelet Health Network , The
Catholic Diocese of Tucson , with assistance from the Tucson Hispanic Nurses Association and the Tucson
Chapter of the Catholic Nurses Association . Indicators of success included the client ’ s selection of a medical
provider ; knowledge of the provider ’ s name ; personal gifts to the provider ; joint spiritual practices or
devotions ; sharing of nontraditional health practices . The author concludes that success depended on “ a
supportive environment , giving permission to express one ’ s cultural practices of healing , respecting choice , and
culture .  .  .  .  ” 
Descriptive = 59%
Blozis , K .  , Moon , S .  ,  & Cooper , M .  ( 1988 , March / April )  . What blue collar employees want in health
promoting programs . Health Values , 12 ( 2 )  , 24-28 . 
The demographic characteristics and health promotion program preferences of blue collar employee
participants in worksite health promotion programs were determined via a survey . Worker participation in
worksite health promotion increased when their preferences were accommodated ( e . g .  , workers preferred
certain kinds of exercise over others , and women ’ s and men ’ s preferences differed )  . 
Descriptive = 18%
Expert Opinion
May , K .  , McLaughlin , F .  ,  & Penner , M .  ( 1991 , June )  . Preventing low birth weight : Marketing and
volunteer outreach . Public Health Nursing , 8 ( 2 )  , 97-104 . 
The authors describe a pregnancy outreach program in the late 1980s as a component of a strategy to reduce
low birth weights in Arizona . Although the major intervention was social marketing , outreach was also
provided through volunteer community workers which PHNs recruited , trained , and supervised . They
pretested proposed outreach activities with a sample of the population-of-interest and determined the following : 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 53 Interventions
activities should not be planned during prime viewing hours of daytime television ; door-to-door distribution of
written materials is necessary , as mailed items with any kind of organization ’ s or service ’ s return address are
tossed without being read , in most cases ; invitations to group events should offer the member of the populationof-interest the opportunity to bring along a friend for support ; outreach workers who provide considerable
referral / follow-up services , need frequent feedback from the PHN that this is viewed as a valuable service . 
These outreach workers also provide valuable insight to the PHNs regarding the influence of culture on the
motivation to use the prenatal service available . Due to the short timeframe of the overall project , the authors ’ 
conclusions have significant shortcomings ( which they acknowledge )  . 
Expert Opinion = 73%
Alexy , B .  ,  & Elnitsky , C .  ( 1996 , Dec .  )  . Community outreach : Rural mobile health unit . JONA , 26 ( 12 )  , 
38-42 . 
A hospital-sponsored project to provide primary health care services to isolated rural elderly via a mobile unit
staffed by advanced nurse practitioners is described . Key to its success was engagement of community
members in planning for the unit ; promotion through marketing designed to reach the target population ; outreach
to and linkage with other organizations providing services to the same target population ; development of a trust
relationship with potential clients ’ groups .  [ Note : Initially , the authors describe development of the mobile
service as an example of “ vertical integration with community outreach represent [ ing ] one strategy to capture a
larger market segment .  ” However , this theme is never further developed in the article .  ] 
Expert Opinion = 61%
Jones , A .  ,  & Scannell , T .  ( 1997 )  . Outreach intervention for the homeless mentally ill . British J . of
Nursing , 6 ( 21 )  , 1236 , 1238 , 1240-43 . 
A thorough literature search supported field observations of mental health nurses that , among the homeless , the
mentally ill homeless are particularly difficult to reach due to the need to “ recognize the diversity and complexity
of the needs of this client group and the value of working alongside other agencies in promoting [ care ]  .  ” 
Outreach programs successful in reaching this population may have lessons for other hard-to-reach populations , 
as well as outreach in general . Conclusions include the following outreach programs need to include individual
contacts with members of the target populations , services needed are easily accessible , peer support needs to
be available , and the community in which the outreach occurs itself needs to be supportive . 
Expert Opinion = 60 . 5%
Lambert , M .  ( 1995 , March / April )  . Migrant and seasonal farm worker women . JOGNN , 24 ( 3 )  , 265-
268 . 
Outreach to these women is considered critical due to their higher-than-expected accident rates , dental disease , 
mental health problems , malnutrition , diabetes , and hypertension , among other adverse health conditions . 
Successful outreach was found to relate to the use of a multidisciplinary team , visits to living and work sites , 
maintenance of cultural sensitivity , establishment of realistic health goals with families that consider their
circumstances , and aggressive assurance of referral and follow-up . 
Expert Opinion = 55%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 54 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Case Finding
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 55 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : CASE-FINDING
Definition
Case-Finding locates individuals and families with identified risk factors and connects them to
resources . 
Case-finding is a one-to-one intervention and , therefore , operates only at the individual / family level . As such , 
case-finding serves as the individual / family level of intervention for surveillance , disease and other health event
investigation , and outreach . Case-finding is frequently implemented to locate those most at risk . 
Examples
Example of Case-Finding Resulting from Surveillance : 
A school nurse reviews her weekly medications administration log and confirms her observation
that a 15-year-old girl has been coming in more often for acetaminophen . The school nurse is
concerned about the increasing frequency of the girl ’ s acetaminophen use , especially when she
considers her other observation that the girl is rapidly losing weight . The school nurse closely
monitors the girl ’ s visits to the sick room and continued weight loss . When the pattern continues
for another month , the school nurse arranges for an appointment with the girl and her parents . 
She consults with them on the possibility of an eating disorder and recommends an evaluation by
their primary care provider . 
Example of Case-Finding Resulting from Disease and Health Event Investigation : 
A PHN providing consultation to a local day care center routinely reviews the center ’ s
attendance records and notes that a three-year-old in the toddler program has been sent home
four times in the last two weeks because he ’ s failed the center ’ s “ no nit ” policy . The center
director explains she ’ s gone over the lice treatment protocol with the toddler ’ s father several
times . He claims the protocol has been followed carefully and is as frustrated as the director
with the situation . The PHN arranges for a home visit to identify potential barriers to lice
eradication . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 56 Interventions
Example of Case-Finding Resulting from Outreach : 
The PHN returns to a local turkey processing plant to do follow-up with workers having positive
Mantoux tests after exposure to a fellow worker with confirmed active tuberculosis . All the
workers except one keep their appointments with the PHN . A co-worker says he hasn ’ t seen
that person at work since the day the PHN confirmed his Mantoux as positive . The PHN checks
his work absence with the plant ’ s personnel manager , who has also been trying to contact him
without success . The personnel manager supplies the worker ’ s last known address ; no telephone
number is listed . Recognizing the address as a unit in a trailer court where many families newly
arrived from Mexico live , the PHN devotes the rest of the workday and many subsequent hours
to attempting to locate the person . The PHN is finally able to speak with a “ cousin ” in a
meeting arranged by the Catholic priest serving a parish frequented by many of those newly
arrived from Mexico . The PHN provides materials in Spanish for the “ cousin ” to give to the
worker , plus a voucher to see a physician . The PHN also uses the opportunity to help the 
 “ cousin ” understand his personal risk . 
Example of Case-Finding Resulting from Screening
The PHN performs a DDST-II screening as part of a battery of screening methods scheduled for
two-year-olds participating in the agency ’ s early and periodic screening program provided for
young children . Several delays are found . The PHN works with the toddler ’ s parent to identify
preferences for needed referral and follow-up with the family ’ s primary care clinic . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Case-finding is linked with outreach , screening , surveillance , and disease and other health event
investigation . Case-finding is the individual / family practice level of surveillance , diseases and other health
event investigation , and outreach . It often leads to referral and follow-up . Case finding is also closely linked
with screening of individuals and families . In fact , some use the terms interchangeably . 
At times the PHN is presented opportunities for case-finding without seeking them out . A PHN–always
vigilant , always watching for actual or potential threats to health–may come across events or observations
expectedly . These are cues for at least further assessment and , perhaps , identification of new cases .  [ See
Disease and Other Health Event Investigation .  ] 
19In many instances of case-finding related to contagious diseases , specific protocols have been
developed . These are not included in this document ; rather , effective general case-finding activities are described . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 57 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Case-Finding19
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Identify those individuals and families at particular risk through information from 
surveillance , disease and health event investigation , and / or outreach . 
Risk severity is intensified by factors that make individuals and families unaware , unable , or unwilling to
respond . Risk increases when individuals and families are : 
• Unaware of risk 
< lacking information or understanding of the risk 
< isolated from the media
• Unable to respond 
< unable to receive or understand the message , due to causes such as illiteracy , hearing and
vision impairments , or cognitive impairment 
< being non-English speaking or having other language barriers 
< having contrasting cultural beliefs 
< lacking resources , such as financial , transportation , child care , or social skills 

• Unwilling to respond , that is , fearing that negative consequences will exceed any benefits 
< refusing , as an illegal alien , medical services for fear of deportation if discovered 
< being a single mom whose children need immunizations but whose insurance does not cover 
 “ preventive services ” and being unable to afford them out-of-pocket
2 . Connect with formal and informal networks to find those identified as at-risk . 
Formal networks include those professionals and agencies with whom you communicate regularly and
maintain a relationship , for example , hospital and outpatient discharge planners , follow-along program
coordinators for children with special needs , social workers , epidemiologists , etc . 
Informal networks are individuals and organizations with whom the individual / family communicate
regularly and maintain a relationship . Successful case-finding often depends on the PHN developing a
trust relationship with such members of the individual ’ s or families ’ network . 
3 . Initiate activities to provide information about the nature of the risk , what can be done about it , 
and how services can be obtained . 
The PHN should base the approach to the individual or family on their rationale for not seeking services
on their own . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 58 Interventions
• If the individual or family is unaware of the risk or does not understand its severity or full potential
for harm , the PHN should provide health teaching to reduce the knowledge deficit and further
engage them using a teaching and counseling strategy . 
• If the individual or family is unable to respond , the PHN should work with them to resolve the
barriers they face . This could range from providing counseling , consultation , and / or advocacy
to referral and follow-up for transportation , financial assistance , arrangement for interpreters , 
child-care provision , etc . 
• If the individual or family is unwilling to respond , the PHN should first establish a trust relationship
with them and then identify the source , such as fear or anxiety , of the unwillingness . Once
established , the PHN should provide health teaching , counseling , consultation , advocacy , or
referral and follow-up as needed . 
4 . If the level of risk suggests endangerment to the individual , family , or community , the PHN
should provide direct access to necessary services . 
Examples of endangerment demanding immediate PHN response include : 
• A man whom the PHN has followed for management of his psychotropic medications regimen
fails to show up for his every-other-week office visit . In attempting to contact him , the PHN
discovers that his phone has been disconnected . The PHN visits his apartment , talks with the
landlord , checks with his family to try to locate him , and assures his well-being . 
• A newborn fails to make a reasonable weight gain over a series of visits . The PHN determines
the mom is ambivalent and not bonding well with the infant . The PHN arrive for your third in a
series of planned home visits and hears the baby crying inside the apartment , but no one answers
the door . After checking with neighbors ( who do not know of the mom ’ s whereabouts ) the PHN
finds the building manager , convinces him to open the door , and then contacts child protection . 
• A member of the caregivers ’ support group the PHN is staffing arrives wearing dark glasses and
a scarf covering her head and neck . She excuses her appearance , saying she had been cleaning
her mother ’ s house and has gotten dust in her hair and eyes . She seems unable to relax during
the group , however , and lingers after the others leave . She divulges she is afraid to go home , 
because her boyfriend has started to beat her . He is accusing her of having an affair because she
is gone so much of the time and refuses to believe that she is really caring for her ailing mother . 
The PHN helps her develop a plan to protect herself , considering all relevant state laws and
regulations . 
5 . Fulfill all reporting requirements mandated by state laws and regulations , such as those
regarding reportable contagious diseases or indicators of child maltreatment . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 59 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Case-Finding
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practice expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or particular
order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . UTILIZES DATA FROM THE INTERVENTIONS THAT PRECEDE CASE-FINDING : 
SURVEILLANCE , DISEASE AND HEALTH EVENT INVESTIGATION , AND / OR OUTREACH . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Case-finding most often follows implementation of other interventions . Surveillance and disease and health event
investigation and outreach identify individuals and families who have , for whatever reason ( unawareness of risk , 
inability or unwillingness to act )  , not responded to the interventions . These individuals and families warrant the
more intensive activities associated with case-finding . 
2 . RESORTS TO MORE INTENSIVE AND LESS CONVENTIONAL MEANS , DEPENDING ON
THE RESOURCES AVAILABLE AND THE URGENCY ASSOCIATED WITH LOCATING THE
PERSON OR PERSONS OF CONCERN ; THAT IS , THE “ CASE .  ” 
Best Evidence : Bechtel and Shriver ; Johnson , Williams , Chatham
Bechtel and Shriver write specifically on methods to find community-dwelling elders whose functional levels may
be putting them at risk for injury or illness . Johnson et al .  ’ s study targeted heroin addicts at risk of HIV
exposures . While the differences between these sub-groups may seem great , the similarities in methods used to
locate them are striking . Both offer many of the same recommendations : 
‚ The client ’ s situation must be addressed in its entirety . The PHN should address the underlying cause of the
circumstance or risk , not just the symptom itself
‚ The PHN should address cultural and ethnic values in the context of family and environment
‚ The PHN should throughly discuss each of the reasons for the concern with the individual or family . 
Based on their review of the literature and collective practice experience , the expert panel developed the
following list of case-finding strategies with demonstrated effectiveness : 
‚ door-to-door canvassing of a neighborhood
‚ enlisting the help of service workers and others likely to encounter the individual or family such as paper
boys , utility workers , bank tellers , hairdressers , etc . 
‚ dropping in on places , such as laundromats , shopping malls , video stores , bars , etc .  , you might not ordinarily
go during the work day , but the individual or family might
‚ training persons from the target population to do case-finding within their community 
‚ providing private investigator skills training , which involves , among other activities 
< convincing those close to , or who keep in touch with , the individual how important it is for that
individual to respond or take action 
< presenting , in ways that are compatible to their culture or ways of understanding , the benefits to the
individual of being located . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 60 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Outreach as Case-Finding .  .  . 
In the mid-1980s Brooks-Gunn et al . evaluated a process of case-finding to enroll high-risk women in prenatal
care in Central Harlem . Four indigenous health care workers were hired , trained , and given freedom in
designing case-finding methods . Their best success came in enrolling women at welfare offices and other clinic
settings , and simply approaching pregnant women on the streets–including well-known drug corners . They
were least successful in canvassing apartment buildings and projects , because of the general mistrust of anyone
knocking on a door in the neighborhood . They found their most successful “ hook ” was convincing the mother
that prenatal care was essential for the health of the baby . Overall , the evaluators found the average cost per
enrollee was $850 . Measured against NICU costs at the time , the project needed to prevent three low-birth
outcomes in order to “ break even .  ” Based on the findings , the authors concluded that “ current marketing
methods [ should be used ] to find them and then follow-up with ‘ high touch ’ personal contact to enroll them .  ”  
[ Brooks-Gunn , J .  , et al .  ( 1989 , February )  . Outreach as case finding : The process of locating low-income pregnant women . 
Medical Care , 27 ( 2 )  , 95-102 .  ] 
Disease or Risk-specific Case-Finding
Excellent protocols for specific case-finding strategies are available from various organizations . For instance , 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ’ s national Center for HIV , STD , and TB Prevention maintains
a website on major TB guidelines : 

Or see ANA ’ s Nursing links website and select “ specific health conditions ” to access specialty organizations
and their guidelines : 
CDC ’ s National Council for Environmental Health ’ s Lead Poisoning Prevention Program 1997 publication
includes case-finding information . See : 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 61 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Case-Finding
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice
and academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at
the end of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who
reviewed it . It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Gwyther , M .  ,  & Jenkins , M .  ( 1998 , March / April )  . Migrant farmworker children : Health status , 
barriers to care , and nursing innovations in health care delivery . J . Pediatric Health Care , 12 ( 2 )  , 60-
66 . 
The authors reviewed the literature and determined that major barriers to health care access for migrant children
were largely due to their mobility , minimal family incomes , and cultural barriers . Keeping track of these families
and assuring that needed resources for health follow them is difficult and often results in repetitions of casefinding . The latter is considered a critical factor to address if health outcomes for migrant families are to
improve . The authors suggest the following strategies as important : use of trained lay community outreach
workers ; provision of alternative delivery models such as mobile vans ; and development of information tracking
systems . 
Review = 75%
Research Reports
Johnson , Williams ,  & Chatham .  ( 1995 , June )  . Notes from the field : The Houston advance DATAR
follow-up project : Private investigator techniques for public health . Am . J . Public Health , 85 ( 6 )  , 868-
869 . 
This study involved evaluating and improving psychosocial adjustment and reducing HIV-risky behaviors of
heroin addicts through counseling , education , and methadone therapy . Follow-up by workers to measure
change was complicated by the participants ’ transient nature . Results indicated that follow-up success ( i . e .  , 
locating participants or case-finding ) was increased when the following occurred : 1 ) Workers operated in
communities where they blended in ( they found participants more quickly and more efficiently )  ; 2 ) Workers
employed techniques used by private investigators to locate missing persons , in particular the “ back tracing to
the anchor ” technique .  ”  
[ Note : This article was originally read and considered by expert panelists focusing on follow-up , not casefinding . Follow-up can merge with the case-finding intervention at a high-level of intensity .  ] 
Experimental = 43%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 62 Interventions
Expert Opinion
Bechtel , G .  ,  & Shriver , C .  ( 1997 , Oct )  . Guidelines for developing instruments to enhance case-finding
among older adults . J . Gerontological Nursing , 20-23 . 
Case-finding is described as the application of instruments to detect variables such as high-risk behaviors , 
socioeconomic factors and / or environmental circumstances , which have the potential to diminish health
functioning . The intent is to apply the instruments among asymptomatic , but potentially at-risk , populations ( in
this case , the elderly ) to detect actual or potential deviations from optimal functioning and correct them early , 
thereby avoiding more intense–and costly–services . The authors view case-finding as “ more deliberate and
intense ” than screening and applied to populations with known risk indicators ( as opposed to the generally
well )  . 
Guidelines for developing case-finding instruments include : 
‚Case-finding tools must never be used as the sole diagnostic criteria or the standard 
‚The client ’ s situation must be addressed in its entirety–the underling cause of the circumstance or riskfactor , not the symptom itself–should always be addressed
‚Cultural and ethnic values must be addressed in the context of family and environment 
‚Findings must always be discussed with the client
‚Each item within the instrument must be addressed . 
Expert Opinion = 62 . 5%
Texts and Monographs
Note : Most of the community health nursing texts reviewed , describe case-finding only in reference to
communicable disease control measures .  [ See , for instance , Spradley and Allender ( 4th edition )  , p . 529-530 ; 
Smith and Maurer , p . 507-508 ; Swanson and Nies ( 2nd edition )  , p . 691 .  ] Helvie speaks of case-finding more
broadly , in the sense of identifying those in need of services , such as case management ( p . 12 )  . Stanhope and
Lancaster ( 5th edition ) define case-finding as “ careful , systematic observations of people to identify present or
potential problems ”  ( p . 624 )  . They also note that “ the role of casefinder is historically a basic part of public
health nursing .  .  .  . It is important to bear in mind that , although the nurses ’ efforts are for a particular client , the
focus on casefinding is on monitoring the health status of entire groups or communities ”  ( p . 629 )  . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Screening
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 63 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : SCREENING
Definition
Screening identifies individuals with unrecognized health risk factors or asymptomatic disease
conditions in populations . 
Three types of screening are described in the literature : 
• mass : a process to screen the general population for a single risk–such as cholesterol screening in a
shopping mall–or for multiple health risks–such as health fairs at work sites or health appraisal
surveys at county fairs ( community level ) 
• targeted : a process to promote screening to a discrete sub-group within the population–such as
those at risk for HIV infection ( individual / family level ) 
• periodic : a process to screen a discrete , but well , sub-group of the population on a regular basis , 
over time , for predictable risks or problems ; examples include breast and cervical cancer screening
among age-appropriate women , well-child screening , and the follow-along associated with early
childhood development programs ( individual / family level ) 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All sexually active persons 
Problem : Sexually transmitted disease
Community Example : 
Some PHNs operate an STD / HIV testing site near a downtown metropolitan area . The clinic
targets populations known to be at disproportionate risk for STDs ( i . e .  , adolescents and young
adults , women , and men who have sex with men )  . The PHNs screen for gonorrhea , syphilis , 
chlamydia , and other STDs . They provide health teaching and counseling to all clients during the
assessment rather than waiting for results because many clients do not return or do not choose to
give their real names . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 64 Interventions
Systems Example : 
A public health agency receives both federal and state family planning monies , which are
contracted out to local clinics for the provision of family planning services to low-income women . 
The PHNs in the agency negotiate a requirement in the contract that clinics must routinely screen
all family planning clients for STDs .  

Individual / Family Example : 
The PHN nurse practitioner performs a physical examination on a young woman at a student
health clinic and , with her consent , includes tests for gonorrhea and chlamydia . The PHN counsels
the woman regarding her risk and STD prevention . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
The screening intervention is frequently implemented in conjunction with other interventions ; for example , 
• implementation of social marketing and outreach prior to screening are imperative when mass screening
is planned
• opportunities for health teaching and counseling almost always present themselves , either implemented
simultaneously with screening or as a feature of the interview conducted immediately afterward
• screening often transitions into referral and follow-up for those requiring further assessment of risk or
symptoms . 
20This process is adapted from Wilson J . M . G .  & Junger G .  ( 1968 )  . Screening for disease , In J . M . G . Wilson 
( Ed .  )  , Principles and practice of screening for disease ( pp . 26-29 )  . Public Health Papers ( Geneva : WHO )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 65 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Screening20
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Determine if the health risk or disease is an important threat to the population ’ s health . 
The incidence ( that is , the number of new cases observed over a set period of time ) and the prevalence 
( that is , the number of cases , old and new , that exist at any one point in time ) serve as good measures of the
extent to which the risk or problem may be considered severe . Usually , the greater the incidence and
prevalence , the more intense the demand for screening . 
Mass screening should always result in some benefit to overall population health , as well as to the
individuals screened . For instance , most states require newborn screening for a variety of congenital
problems such as phenylketonuria , hearing impairment , galactosemia , and other conditions . Not only is there
an obvious benefit to the newborns in terms of preventing serious medical and developmental problems , but
society benefits in terms of a healthier overall population . 
2 . Consider the extent to which the population believes the health risk or disease an important health
problem . 
At times the population ’ s level of concern or anxiety is elevated to the point where screening is demanded for
a given risk / disease despite a lack of evidence . Cancer frequently falls into this category . The PHN must
screen if the public or political concern is significant and not screening would be perceived as irresponsible . 
Even though the science may be weak , the effect of doing nothing may be worse . On the other hand , the
data may suggest a very real risk or threat , but the population may be uninterested or difficult to motivate . 
Motivating an apparently well population to participate in hypertension screening , for instance , can be
challenging . 
3 . Determine if adequate information exists about the outcomes expected from screening . 
Screening is early detection of risk or disease in its preclinical state , that is , before symptoms occur . 
• If a risk or disease cannot be detected sufficiently early so that its natural clinical course can be stopped
or altered , then screening may not be appropriate . 
• If a screening program only identifies risk or disease after it becomes symptomatic , then the gains of
early intervention will be reduced . 
4 . Determine if the risk or disease has a recognizable latent or early symptomatic state which 
makes early identification feasible . 
To be most effective , screening is used with conditions that have a natural asymptomatic ( preclinical or
prodromal ) state . There must be a long enough period of time before symptoms to intervene . While early
treatment of conditions that are already symptomatic may be beneficial to a given individual , the overall
population effect is greatly reduced . 
21See Mausner , J .  & Kramer , S .  ( 1985 )  . Epidemiology : An introductory text ( 2nd Ed .  )  ( pp . 217-229 )  . 
Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 66 Interventions
5 . Decide if the risk ’ s or disease ’ s natural course of history is understood sufficiently to allow early
intervention . 
The PHN should make sure that his / her knowledge about the problem is up-to-date and complete . An
understanding of the problem ’ s “ natural course of history ” is especially important . This is the course that the
condition would predictably take if nothing were done to intercede . For example , without treatment , 
progressive pulmonary tuberculosis kills 50 percent of those infected within 5 years ; dental caries continue to
decay ; without correction , children with amblyopia eventually lose vision in the affected eye . 
At times , urgency for public health action to prevent negative impacts on health status means making
decisions before exact causes are known , so PHNs often rely on epidemiological evidence that supports
strong associations between risk factors , rather than waiting for research findings . 
6 . Consider whether an acceptable treatment for the risk or disease exists . 
Screening is unethical when it creates a situation for an individual where he / she knows that they have a
disease or condition but : 
• there is no known treatment , or 
• there is no known benefit to self or others from knowing , or
• the “ cure ” is perceived as worse than the disease itself , or
• acceptable treatment exists , but is too expensive or too far away to access . 
7 . Determine whether a suitable test exists .  
 “ Suitable ” means screening tests should meet the following criteria 21 : 
• valid
That is , a test has sufficient sensitivity to identify correctly all screened individuals who actually have
the risk or condition . In other words , the number falsely identified as “ positive ”  ( having the risk or
condition when they actually do not ) is low . A test must also have sufficient specificity . That is , the
ability of a test to identify correctly those who do not have the risk or condition . Acceptable specificity
means a test can accurately identify those who truly do not have the risk or condition . Tests should be
able to differentiate between true positives and true negatives , while minimizing the number of false
positives and false negatives . Test sensitivity and specificity are important because screening outcomes
producing false security ( people think they do not have a risk or disease when , indeed , risk or disease is
present but undetected ) or needless worry ( those referred for diagnosis when they are actually risk or
disease free ) can do more harm than good . 
• reliable
That is , the test gives consistent results when performed more than once on the same individual under
the same conditions . 
• easy and quick to administer
• minimally intrusive 
That is , little disrobing or divulging of private information in a public situation is required . 
• yield
The amount of previously unknown risk or disease identified as a result of screening is the yield . 
22 In addition to the screening test being acceptable to the population , the PHN needs to determine that it is acceptable
to his / her board of nursing . If the test exceeds the definition for a state ’ s independent nursing practice and requires
administration as a delegated medical function , then the required protocols , standing orders , etc .  , will need to be developed . 
Screening tests vary across time and are dependent on allowable functions under each state ’ s nurse practice act . For example , as
recently as the mid-1960s , nurses ’ use of sphygmomanometers was considered outside many states ’ scope of nursing practice . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 67 Interventions
Advancing technology provides increasing opportunities for screening tests that meet the criterion of detecting
the presence or absence of risks or diseases , but fail to meet the criteria for quick , unintrusive , low-cost tests . 
Of more importance , testing for such conditions as Huntington ’ s Chorea or Trisomy X have significant
importance for individuals and families but minimal impact on the overall population health . 
8 . Determine if the screening test is acceptable to the population of interest . 22
If the screening test is too costly , or requires too much time , creates too much physical or mental discomfort , 
or does not fit with a given culture ’ s beliefs about health and disease , it is less likely to be utilized . Screening
tests that are unacceptable to the population will reduce the effectiveness of a screening effort . 
9 . Arrange for further assessment / diagnosis and treatment for those with positive findings . 
Positive results indicate the need for further assessment of the individual / family situation , which then leads to
either diagnosis and treatment or a “ clean bill of health .  ” It is unethical to carry out a screening program
identifying people with positive findings but have no available treatment resources . 
10 . Establish agreed-upon policies regarding whom to treat . 
If resources are inadequate to provide care for all who have positive findings , PHNs must establish policies on
how treatment resources will be prioritized . 
11 . Determine whether adequate funds or resources exist to support the entire process . 
Costs of providing screening programs should include all costs ranging from outreach to follow-up and
treatment . Total costs per screen include the costs associated with referral , diagnosis , treatment , and followup . The total cost must be used in determining the benefit ratio of a given screening program . Costs borne
by an insurer , employer , or “ other ” beyond the local public health agency , are still costs . 
The costs for potential case-finding should also be included in the estimate . 
• A certain proportion of those screened will require referral for further assessment and diagnostic workup . 
• A proportion of those referred will also require follow-up of some intensity to assure the referral is
acted upon . 
• Not every person is able to navigate the referral process alone , and some may require additional
assistance . 
• Others may see follow-up as too intrusive and resist follow-up recommendations . 
• In some instances , one case may escalate into numerous other possible cases , creating a significant time
and resource demand . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 68 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Screening is occasionally confused with monitoring . It is important to understand them as separate
activities since their purpose and intent differ . 
The difference is not what the test is or what condition it is testing for ; the same test may be used for both
screening and monitoring . The determining factor is how the test is applied to the population . For
example , blood pressure checks may be screening or monitoring . 
Screening : 
Blood pressure checks at a community health fair where : 
• apparently well individuals with no previous history of hypertension are actively
sought
• positive results automatically lead to health teaching , counseling , referral and followup 
• preparatory work in the community assures participation of high-risk groups ( such as
25 to 50-year-old African-American males )  , and
• follow-up resources for diagnosis and treatment are provided . 
Monitoring : 
Community citizens stop by the local PHN agency anytime and have their blood pressure
checked . Readings outside normal limits automatically lead to health teaching , counseling , 
referral and follow-up ; readings within normal levels lead to reinforcement of successful selfcare methods exhibited . 
Clinics to detect changes in status of those with known risk fail the screening criterion for “ seeking
undetected or asymptomatic conditions .  ” They do not result in overall population health benefits . Taking
blood pressures at senior centers or worksites may only be considered screening if you are targeting
individuals who do not know they have hypertension . However , if you are taking blood pressures for
individuals with known hypertension , this constitutes monitoring , not screening . Monitoring has considerable
benefit to the individual but minimal benefit in terms of the health status of the overall population . 
Screening 
• purpose is to identify those with
risk
• fact finding
• affects many 
• focuses on apparently well
populations
Monitoring 
• purpose is to track the progress
once a risk has been identified 
• after the fact
• affects only a few 
• focuses on persons with known
risks 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 69 Interventions
Notes from Abby 
 “ Screenings ” commonly conducted by PHNs : 
• tuberculosis screening in a correctional facility
• HIV screening at an AIDS / STD testing site
• anemia screening of pregnant women and infants in WIC
• blood lead level checks in at-risk children during well-child examinations
• hypertension screening at work sites
• growth and development screening with Headstart children
• pregnancy testing at family planning clinics
• hearing and vision screening with school-aged children
• screening for violence risk with women on MCH caseload * 
• DDST II ( Denver Developmental Screening Test-II ) screening of children with suspected
developmental delays
• home hazard screening of elder homes with the “ Home Safety Checklist for Older Adults ”  *  * 
• blood glucose screening at senior health clinics 
* An example is the Abuse Assessment Screen , a five-item screen developed by the Nursing Research Consortium on
Violence and Abuse . One of its questions is “ Within the last year have you been hit , slapped , kicked , or otherwise physically
hurt by someone ? If yes , who and how many times ?  ” For more information see Soeken , Parker , McFarlan , Lominah .  ( 1998 )  . 
The abuse assessment screen : A clinical instrument to measure frequency , severity , and perpetration of abuse against
women . In J . Campbell ( Ed .  )  , Beyond diagnosis : Changing the health care response to battered women and their children . 
Newbury Park , CA : Sage .  
*  * For further information , contact the Minnesota Department of Health / Injury and Violence Unit at 651-281-9857 . 
Other disciplines and community partners may not be aware of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention ’ s excellent resource on prevention guidelines available at

In addition , the US Prevention Task Force ’ s Guide to Clinical Preventive Services , 2
nd Ed .  ( 1996 ) is
available from Williams and Wilkins Publishing or your local library . 
The February 2000 issue of the AAOHN Journal ( Vol . 48 , No . 2 ) includes a series of articles describing
surveillance and screening interventions as “ vital roles ” for the PHN working in occupational and environmental
health . See Pap , E .  ,  & Miller , A . Screening and surveillance : OSHA ’ s medical surveillance provisions , 59-72 ; 
Stone , D . Health surveillance for health care workers : A vital role for the occupational and environmental health
nurse , 73-79 ; Rogers , B .  & Livsey , K . Occupational health , surveillance , screening , and prevention in
occupational health nursing practice , 92-99 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 70 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Screening
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practice expertise to develop them . These best practices are not presented in any
ranking or particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . FIRST CONSIDERS WHETHER SCREENING IS THE APPROPRIATE INTERVENTION
GIVEN THE CIRCUMSTANCES
Best Evidence : Braveman and Tarimo ; Morrison ; Shickle and Chadwick
The screening intervention , whether mass or targeted , can be expensive because the cost of follow-up diagnostic , 
and treatment services must be included . Braveman and Tarimo point out that screening efforts can actually divert
attention from primary prevention of pressing threats to health . 
Prior to planning and implementing a mass screening , the PHN should first determine if the number of persons
expected to be found with previously undetected risk or disease will be large enough to warrant the cost of
screening . The potential gains must be carefully weighed against the potential negative effects . Morrison notes that
the satisfaction of those screened must be considered : 
True Positives 
‚ Those with true positives whose deaths are postponed by early treatment have the most to gain . 
However , those true positives whose deaths cannot be postponed may not feel anything has been
gained . 
True Negatives
‚ True negatives are likely to feel that knowing they are risk- or disease-free was worth any pain or
discomfort associated with the screening process . 
False Positives 
‚ False positives are likely to feel dissatisfaction when the results from their referral for diagnostic followup are negative . 
False Negatives 
‚ Perhaps those with the most reason for dissatisfaction are those with false negatives who risk believing
they are risk- or disease-free when they are not . Such false security can lead to the possibility of
ignoring symptoms when they do appear and delaying further assessment and diagnosis . 
Besides assuring acceptable levels of positive gains versus negative losses , the value of screening is dependent on
the extent to which early diagnosis and treatment may impact the health status of the population . To be of value , 
screening must go beyond the direct benefit to those individuals with positive results and benefit the population as a
whole . Adherence to the basic steps of screening discussed earlier will assist in determining the value of a
proposed screening activity . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 71 Interventions
2 . DESIGNS THE INTERVENTION WITH INPUT FROM THOSE TO BE SCREENED
Best Evidence : Morrison ; Wilson and Junger
PHNs must always determine the population ’ s perspective on the need for , value of , and urgency for any screening
activity . 
‚ Wilson and Junger ’ s “ first principle ” of screening says that the screening condition should be an important
health problem from the perspective of both individuals and the community in which they live . 
‚ Morrison suggests that “ the success of a screening program .  .  . depends on interrelations between the disease
experience of the target population , the characteristics of the screening procedures , and the effectiveness of
the methods of treating disease early ”  ( p . 6 )  . 
The screening ’ s support or endorsement by leaders of the target population is key in communicating its importance . 
In addition , input from the population to be screened can significantly improve the effectiveness of the outreach and
follow-up associated with screening . 
3 . INCLUDES HEALTH TEACHING AND COUNSELING IN ALL SCREENING , 
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER RESULTS ARE POSITIVE OR NEGATIVE
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
People participate in screening because they have some sense that they are at risk for a possible condition or
disease . Certainly , those with positive results require counseling on what the results mean and what they should do
next . Depending on the individual ’ s or family ’ s capacity to carry out the recommended follow-up , the PHN should
make appropriate referrals . However , it is equally important that the PHN offer health teaching and counseling
to those with negative results . The same sense of risk that motivated the client to be screened may also increase
receptivity to preventive health teaching and counseling . The point at which a person has been screened and
declared negative is often a key “ teachable moment ” not to be missed . 
4 . THOROUGHLY CONSIDERS ALL RELEVANT LEGAL , SOCIAL , CULTURAL , AND
LANGUAGE ISSUES
Best Evidence : Busen and Beech ; Shickle and Chadwick ; Kurland and Robbins ; Miller ; Wilson with Junger
PHNs should thoroughly anticipate and plan the mechanics of screening , providing for quick , inexpensive , and
effective screening tools , adequate facilities , appropriate interpreters , and well-trained staff . However , it is just as
important to tailor those mechanics to accommodate local customs , attitudes , and values . A good fit greatly
increases the potential for actual participation . 
Busen and Beech , for instance , recruited homeless youth off Houston streets and paid them to participate in a
screening to identify their health risks . This data proved very useful in later negotiating increased primary care
services for them . However , the study also documented that to be effective in providing this primary care , 
practitioners needed to “ understand not only the clients ’ living situation but also their language and their personal
perspective on how they live . No matter what these youth say ,  [ practitioners ] must not lose their [ composure ]  , 
must not appear shocked nor sit in judgment ”  ( p . 323 )  . 
23 Kurland , J .  & Robbins , A .  ( 1998 , July / August )  . A public health standard for screening managed care
populations . Public Health Reports , 113 , 352 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 72 Interventions
The legal issues in screening are significant beyond those noted in the basic steps , so PHNs must be aware of
related information , such as state laws on : 
‚ data confidentiality
‚ the types of information that can be shared without a client ’ s consent
‚ those with whom information can be shared without a client ’ s consent
‚ the age at which a minor may legally arrange for medical treatment without parental presence or permission
‚ the circumstances under which registered professional nurses are mandated to report their observations . 
5 . DESIGNS THE SCREENING INTERVENTION COLLABORATIVELY WITH OTHERS
THAT SHARE CONCERN FOR THE SAME HEALTH RISK OR DISEASE
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
No single community agency ordinarily has sufficient resources or expertise to implement all phases of screening on
its own , nor is it likely any one agency has access to an entire targeted population . Planning the role that each
organization will play is important for both screening efficiently and arranging follow-up . 
6 . EXTENDS EXPERTISE TO OTHER HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS / PAYERS REGARDING
THEIR SCREENING ACTIVITIES
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
For target populations that are “ shared ” by health care providers , it is important that PHNs assure all providers
offer appropriate screening . In a recent editorial in Public Health Reports , for instance , Kurland and Robbins
note ,  “ Public health agencies have always made realistic allowances for screening programs that had to depend on
outreach and public education to bring citizens in .  .  .  . Managed care , with enrolled members , should not be granted
such a handicap .  .  .  .  [ It ] seems reasonable that managed care plans should be expected to reach 100% of their
enrolled members .  ” 23 What expertise the PHN extends to these screening partners or how it is extended will
obviously vary , depending on the specific circumstances . However , if portions of the target population do not have
access to needed screening services , it is clearly within the PHN ’ s core assurance function to make it happen . 
The activity just described , where PHNs reach out to others in the community outside of their own clientele , is an
example of population-based public health practice . However , PHNs must also remember to “ in-reach ,  ” or make
sure that those who are public health clients also benefit from screening . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 73 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Screening
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and academic
experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end of each
annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . It
reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
none
Expert Opinion
Busen , N .  & Beech , B .  ( 1997 , Sept / Oct )  . A collaborative model for community-based health care
screening of homeless adolescents . J . Professional Nursing 13 ( 5 )  , 316-324 . 
The nature of homeless youth ’ s life-style puts them at extremely high-risk for life-threatening and debilitating
diseases , such as HIV and HepB . The authors report on a project to investigate the social and health services
needs of homeless youth in Houston , Texas , in preparation for initiating a comprehensive health care service aimed
at prevention and early intervention . A “ screening questionnaire ” was administered to 150 homeless youth recruited
off the streets to participate anonymously in a health interview , history , and physical assessment that included a TB
skin test ; blood tests for HIV , HepB , and syphilis ; and urine analysis to screen for drug use and alcohol . 
Participants received $30 , plus an extra $5 if they returned to have their TB test read . Those with positive findings
were referred on . The results of the “ screening ” –significant history of STD ’ s , prostitution , sexual and physical
abuse , with laboratory findings demonstrating substance use / abuse and seroprevalence of HepB , HepC , and / or
HIV in 12-15% of those tested–served as the basis for structuring the clinical services available and appropriately
training the workforce .  [ Note : The use of “ screening ” in this article is not its conventional use , although the tests
used may have been those also used in traditional screening activities . The purpose of the project was more in the
framework of needs assessment and program planning .  ] 
Expert Opinion = 61%
Braveman , P .  & Tarimo , E . Health screening , development , and equity . J . Public Health Policy 17 ( 1 )  , 
14-27 . 
This article summarizes concepts presented in the authors ’ book , Screening in Primary Health Care ( Geneva : 
WHO ) 1994 . After applying Wilson and Junger ’ s criteria for screening to various examples ( mostly in developing
countries )  , they conclude ,  “ Screening can divert attention from primary prevention of a society ’ s most important
threats to health , especially when primary prevention faces political challenges and screening costs are viewed in
isolation from the overall strategy required to make it useful .  .  .  . In any country , but perhaps especially in developing
countries , screening may waste scarce resources , it could also lead to widening inequities ”  ( p . 27 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 51%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 74 Interventions
Shickle , D .  & Chadwick , R .  ( 1994 )  . The ethics of screening : Is ‘ screeningitis ’ an incurable disease ? J . 
Medical Ethics 20 , 12-18 . 
The authors thoroughly review the ethical conflicts associated with screening stemming from the reality that falsepositives may cause needless anxiety and false-negatives may result in false security . In the end they conclude that 
 “ the harm consequent from a screening test for any individual will usually be trivial , in comparison with the potential
harm from not offering screening and saving a life by providing effective treatment ”  ( p . 16 )  . Or , as they quote
Singer ,  “ If we can prevent something bad without sacrificing anything of comparable moral significance , we ought to
do it .  ” 
Expert Opinion = 46%
Kurland , J .  & Robbins , A .  ( 1998 , July / Aug )  . A public health standard for screening managed care
populations . Public Health Reports 113 , 351-352 . 
The authors , representing the perspective of official public health , applaud MCOs for utilizing chronic disease
screening with their enrolled populations . However , they also suggest that MCOs must be held to the same high
standard for screening as applied to public health agencies in “ order to get the full benefit of an increasingly
organized medical care system ”  ( p . 352 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 29%
Khoury , M . for the Genetics Working Group .  ( 1996 , Dec )  . From genes to public health : The applications
of genetic technology in disease prevention . Am J Public Health 86 ( 12 )  , 1717-1722 . 
The author discusses the potential of genetic testing in fulfilling the core public health functions of assessment , policy
development , and assurance . While acknowledging that most current genetic tests are not yet suitable for use in
screening for preventable conditions , Khoury concludes that , when they are , it is “ essential that public health
agencies evaluate the effectiveness of genetic testing programs and ensure the quality of genetic testing in the US
population ”  ( p . 1720 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 26%
Mitchell , H .  ( 1995 )  . Cancer screening : Protecting the public ’ s health . Diagnostic Cytopathology , 12 ( 3 )  , 
199-200 . 
In this editorial the author , a physician , offers three reasons why the inevitable false findings associated with
screening techniques should not be held to the same standards as results from testing in clinical care : 1 ) Screening
programs are public health programs , not clinical interventions . They are designed to “ reduce the community
burden of cancer by detecting some of the individuals who have asymptomatic disease .  ” 2 ) Screening programs
are “ deliberately designed to lack the luxury of multiple information sources .  .  .  . Screening programs use a single
inexpensive test so as to be logistically achievable and financially affordable across a whole community .  ” 3 )  
 “ Screening programs involve a predication for the future which adds to the uncertainty of any report that is made .  ” 
For these reasons , Mitchell argues that screening as a public health activity should be afforded indemnity from
prosecution since it “ makes no promises .  ” 
Expert Opinion = 23%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 75 Interventions
Texts and Monographs
Smith , C .  & Maurer , F .  ( 1995 )  . Screening and referral . Community health nursing : Theory and practice 
( pp . 430-433 )  . Philadelphia : B . Saunders . 
The authors delineate several key factors regarding screening . They are : 
1 . The first goal of screening is to differentiate correctly between persons who have an illness , developmental
delay , or other health alteration and those who do not . 
2 . The second goal of screening is to refer those with alterations for diagnosis and initiation of appropriate
interventions at a stage earlier than the onset symptoms or obvious problems . 
2 . Screening is intended to detect previously unrecognized problems and , therefore , is conducted with apparently
healthy populations . 
3 . Screening is not in itself diagnostic ; it only identifies findings that do not match the expected results . Because
screening tests and procedures must be applied rapidly and inexpensively , they are not always 100 percent
accurate . Those found with abnormal findings must be referred for follow-up assessment and testing . 
4 . The term “ mass screening ” denotes the application of screening tests to large populations , either in general or
selectively ( i . e .  , those at risk because of general factors such as age , area of residence , or nature of occupation )  . 
5 . Multiphasic-screening denotes the application of multiple screening tests on the same occasion , such as at health
fairs . The advantage of access to , and convenience for , large numbers of persons must be balanced against the
disadvantage of increased occurrence of false-positive test results inherent in the large numbers of tests done . 
6 . Case-finding is screening that occurs with individuals on a 1 : 1 basis . 
Text = 69%
Valanis , B .  ( 1992 )  . Screening . Epidemiology in nursing and health care ( 2nd ed .  , pp . 331-353 )  . Norwalk , 
CT : Appleton-Lang . 
Valanis defines screening as :  “ the presumptive identification of unrecognized disease or defect by the application of
tests , examinations , or other procedures that can be applied rapidly and inexpensively to populations ; its purpose is
to distinguish among apparently well persons , those who probably have a disease from those who probably do not ; 
it is not intended to be diagnostic ”  ( p . 331 )  . Types of screening include case finding ( application of screening tests
to an individual within a provider ’ s own caseload )  ; multiphasic screening ( use of a variety of screening tests on the
same occasion )  ; and mass screening ( unselective application to entire populations )  . Valanis offers the following
criteria for acceptable screening programs : 
a . The test or procedure used has high sensitivity and specificity
b . The test or procedure meets acceptable standards of simplicity , cost , safety , and patient acceptability . 
c . The disease that is the focus of screening should be sufficiently serious in terms of incidence , mortality , 
disability , discomfort , and financial cost . 
d . The evidence suggests that the test procedures detect the disease at a significantly earlier stage in its
natural history than if it presented with symptoms . 
e . A generally accepted treatment that is easier or more effective than treatment administered at the time of
symptom presentation is available . 
f . The available treatment is acceptable to patients , as established by studies on compliance with treatment . 
g . The prevalence of the target disease is high in the population to be screened . 
h . Follow-up diagnostic and treatment service must be available and accompanied by an adequate
notification and referral service for those positive on screening ( p . 342 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 76 Interventions
The author concludes that “ clearly , screening procedures are best used in conjunction with a longitudinal program of
periodic health assessment rather than sporadic , one-shot screening programs ”  ( p . 352 )  . 
Textbook = 46 . 5%
Miller , A .  ( 1996 )  . The public health basis of cancer screening : Principles and ethical aspects . In Cancer
Treatment and Research : Vol . 86 ( pp . 1-7 )  . 
Although the author supports screening as “ an important component of cancer control ”  ( p . 6 )  , he describes its
shortcomings , estimating that screening would only contribute about 3 percent of the reduction in cancer mortality
anticipated by the year 2000 . The stated shortcomings include : 
1 . Necessary components for organized screening programs are difficult to achieve [ Note : Miller references his
own list from a 1995 editorial ]  : 
a . Identifying the at-risk individuals within the target population
b . Implementing methods to guarantee high coverage and attendance , such as a personal letter of invitation
c . Assuring adequate field facilities to handle related lab and clinical procedures
d . Providing an organized quality-control program for procedures and interpretation of results
e . Assuring adequate facilities for diagnosis and appropriate treatment for those found with positive findings 
f . Providing a carefully designed and agreed-upon referral and follow-up system
g . Providing on-going monitoring of screening program performance and evaluation
2 . Failing to attend to ethical issues inherent in screening : 
a . Screening programs should not be offered if their effectiveness in distinguishing between false and true
findings has not been demonstrated ; the overall health benefit to the community must be guaranteed while
reducing the potential for harm to any individual
b . Assuring informed consent from those being screened
c . Assuring that the quality control of the screening methodology is maintained
d . Reducing unnecessary anxiety
e . Ensuring that appropriate follow-up resources are available to those with positive findings
f . Ensuring that resources used to provide screening is not being diverted from higher-order utilization
3 . Failing to anticipate the policy implications of screening findings . 
Textbook = 44%
Morrison , A .  ( 1985 )  . Screening in chronic disease . NY : Oxford Press . 
Chapter One : Introduction ( pp . 3-20 ) 
Screening is defined as “ the examination of asymptomatic people in order to classify them as likely , or unlikely , to
have the disease that is the object of the screening . People who are likely to have the disease are investigate further
to arrive at a final diagnosis .  .  .  . The goal is to reduce morbidity or mortality from the disuse among people screened
by early treatment of the cases discovered ”  ( p . 3 )  . Morrison suggests that “ the success of a screening
program .  .  . depends on interrelations between the disease experience of the target population , the characteristics of
the screening procedures , and the effectiveness of the methods of treating disease early ”  ( p . 6 )  . 
Other key points include : 
a . A disease must have a preclinical phase during which it is undiagnosed , but detectable , so that early
treatment can have some advantage over later treatment . There is no point in screening for a disease that
cannot be detected before symptoms emerge . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 77 Interventions
b . If early treatment is ineffective in significantly reducing the impact of a disease , there is no point in early
detection . 
c . Screening for diseases with rare prevalence is not an effective use of resources . 
d . It is only feasible to detect and treat cases early for diseases in which the preclinical phase is long . If the
preclinical phase is short , virtually continuous rescreening would be necessary . 
e . Tests / procedures used must be valid and reliable . 
f . Lead time is the interval from the point of detection , via screening , to the time at which diagnosis would
have been made without the screening . This reflects the pressure to diagnose created by screening ; it is the
amount of time by which treatment is “ early .  ” For screening programs to be effective in reducing morbidity
or mortality in a population , there must be enough lead time in a sufficient number of cases . 
Chapter Seven : The Feasibility of Screening Programs ( pp . 138-156 ) 
In general , the “ gain ” from resources devoted to screening programs can be enhanced if : 
1 ) The number of cases detected ( i . e .  , true positives ) is increased by
a . lowering the measure which divides “ positive ” from “ negative ” findings
b . increasing the frequency of screening
c . using two or more different tests and considering a positive result on anyone as an indication of
need for further assessment
d . employing a test or procedure with improved sensitivity ( i . e .  , ability to determine positive
findings )  , and / or
2 ) The number of false positives is reduced by
a . adjusting the screening frequency in diseases with a long preclinical phase
b . employing a test or procedure with improved sensitivity , and / or
3 ) Screening is limited to groups with known risk factors for the condition of concern , and / or
4 ) The satisfaction of persons screened remains high–i . e .  , they think they have been well served or have
gained . Possible gains and costs must be considered in each case : 
a . true positives whose deaths are postponed by early treatment obviously benefit from screening
b . true positives whose deaths cannot be postponed may not feel anything has been gained . 
c . true negatives may feel knowing they are disease-free is worth any pain or discomfort associated
with the screening event itself
d . false positives end up undergoing diagnostic evaluations with their related costs , discomforts , 
and possible risks as a result of test error . 
e . false negatives end up believing they are disease free when indeed they are not , leading to the
possibility of ignoring symptoms when they do appear and delaying further assessment and
diagnosis . 
In the end , before proceeding with any program of screening , the gains versus the costs must first be carefully
weighed . 
Text = 38%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 78 Interventions
Wilson , J . M . G .  , with Junger , G .  ( 1968 )  . Principles and practice of screening for disease ( pp . 9-39 )  . 
Geneva : WHO . 
Considered a “ seminal article ” on screening practice , this article has withstood the test of time and is frequently used
as a lateral reference in journal articles . It suggests the following definitions : 
1 . Mass screening : large-scale screening of whole population groups ; no prior selection of groups . 
2 . Selective screening : screening of selected high-risk groups ; one form of population screening
3 . Multiple ( multiphasic ) screening : application of several screening tests at one point in time per person
4 . Surveillance : a long-term process where screening examinations are related at intervals of time for data
comparison
5 . Case-finding : application of tests or procedures for the purpose of detecting disease in individuals and
getting them into treatment
Sets out criteria for screening tests or procedures , building on the earlier publication by the Commission on Chronic
Illness ’  “ Prevention of Chronic Illness ”  : 
a . The test or procedure used must be valid , meaning it accurately separates those who have the condition
sought from those who do not , and is reliable , meaning it consistently produces the same results
b . The test or procedure must also be
•simple to carry out , 
•able to be done rapidly in field ( vs . clinical ) conditions , 
•acceptable and cause minimal pain or discomfort , 
•inexpensive
c . The yield ( i . e .  , the number of previously unrecognized diseases diagnosed as a result of screening ) is
acceptable , given the cost of implementation ; the yield is often a factor of disease prevalence and the
efficiency of the screening test itself
Sets out principles of screening : 
a . The condition sought should be an important health problem from the perspective of both individuals and
the community
b . There should be an accepted treatment for patients with recognized disease
c . Facilities for diagnosis and treatment should be available
d . There should be a recognizable latent or early symptomatic stage ( necessary to achieve early
intervention ) 
e . There should be a suitable test or examination
f . The test should be acceptable to the population
g . The natural history of the condition , including development from latent to declared disease , should be
adequately understood
h . There should be an agreed-upon policy on whom to treat as patients
i . The cost of case-finding ( including diagnosis and treatment of patients diagnosed ) should be economically
balanced in relation to possible expenditure on medical care as a whole
j . Case-finding should be a continuing process and not a “ once and for all ” project ( pp . 26-38 )  . 
Monograph = 37 . 5
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Referral & 
Follow-Up
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 79 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : REFERRAL AND FOLLOW-UP
Definition
Referral and follow-up assists individuals , families , groups , organizations , and communities to utilize
necessary resources to prevent or resolve problems or concerns . 
Referral may include developing resources that are needed , but unavailable to the population . The key to
successful referral is follow-up ; making a referral without evaluating its results is both ineffective and inefficient . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : Older adults
Problem : Diminished capacity to manage activities of daily living safely
Community Example : 
A community ’ s PHNs serve on a committee with social services and the Area Board on Aging to
develop a Senior Hotline , which provides information on resources and services for older adults . 
Despite the large number of elders in the community , very few utilize the hotline . The committee is
not really surprised about the lack of hotline use , given the elder generation ’ s tendency to believe
that “ self care ” means “ without help .  ” The committee decides to try to change this community
attitude among elders and adults with elderly parents . They design a social marketing intervention
that emphasizes the benefits of “ help in your home ” versus “ help in the home ”  ( meaning nursing
home placement )  . Brochures and refrigerator magnets with the hotline number are distributed at
the check-out counters of local grocery stores and pharmacies , and the campaign is announced in
the local newspaper .  
[ Note : Developing the Senior Hotline was a systems-focused intervention . Systems- and community-focused interventions are
often implemented simultaneously or sequentially .  ] 
Systems Example : 
A community assessment reveals that there is a great need for adult day activity centers , especially
for working families caring for an older adult . Families are frustrated because they want to keep
their loved ones at home , but there are no services available for elders while the adult children are
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 80 Interventions
at work . The PHNs work with organizations in the community to develop incentives to provide
adult activity centers . Transportation for elders is quickly identified as a barrier , so the PHNs and
the group trying to develop the adult day activity centers present this need to various community
service organizations . The local Lions Club responds with an offer to make “ transportation ” a
project and eventually pledges to purchase a handicapped-accessible van . The group then
approaches the social services department to discuss the possibility of their hiring a van driver . A
small center opens , but it is not enough to meet the need . The PHNs continue their efforts to
develop more adult day activity center resources in the community . 
Individual / Family Example : 
A PHN staffs a support group for caregivers of persons with dementia . He closely monitors the
group discussion to identify emerging needs that could be met by referral to services . He listens
carefully to their stories to identify barriers and gaps in services in the community . He also 
vigilantly monitors the status of the caregivers in the group to identify the point when they need to
seek additional assistance or make other arrangements . When he identifies that this is happening , 
the PHN meets with the caregiver and starts the referral process by identifying needs and available
resources with the caregiver and client , if possible . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Referral and follow-up most often follows the implementation of another intervention , such as health teaching , 
counseling , delegated functions , consultation , screening , and case-finding ( as related to surveillance , 
investigation of disease and other health events , or outreach )  . It is also an important component of case
management . On occasion , it is implemented in conjunction with advocacy . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 81 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Referral and follow-up .  .  . 
• Implementing the referral and follow-up intervention is a hallmark of public health nursing . In fact , it has
been said that PHNs are “ walking ‘ First-Calls for Help ,  ’  ” reflecting PHNs ’ extensive knowledge of
resources and established linkages within a community . The PHNs are often the persons to whom
community members turn when they want to know where to go for help . 
• The “ intake ” function in a public health nursing agency is carried out in a variety of ways . Sometimes a
single PHN manages that function full- or part-time , or it is “ rotated ” among all PHNs . Sometimes the task
is delegated to support staff who carry it out under the direction of a PHN . Either way , the task is to
review requests or referrals made to an agency and determine a preferred course of action . At times this
means referring a request internally . Other times it may mean re-referring it on to more appropriate
vendors . Regardless , it is important to distinguish an “ information and referral ” function [ I & R ] from referral
and follow-up . An I & R simply provides information on available resources ; the family or other inquirer
takes it from there . Follow-up , on the other hand , occurs when the PHN either accepts or makes a
specific referral on behalf of an individual or family . 
• Less recognized “ hallmarks ” of public health nursing are the efforts PHNs have invested in developing and
sustaining referral systems within a community , such as those with clinics , hospitals , social service agencies , 
food shelves , battered women shelters , schools , etc . 
• PHNs are both the “ senders ” of referrals ( that is , the initiators of referrals on behalf of clients ) and 
 “ receivers ”  ( that is , the recipients of referrals from others )  . 
24 Adapted from Clemen-Stone , Eigsti , McGuire .  ( 1996 , Sept / Oct )  . Nursing outlook , 44 ( 5 )  , 218-22 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 82 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Referral and Follow-Up
Individual / Family Practice Level24
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Establish an effective working relationship with the client . 

Because referral often follows the implementation of preceding interventions , in most instances a relationship
is already established . Regardless , the PHN needs to be open and honest with clients , communicating
genuine concern for their well-being . In order to promote self-care , it is important for the client to carry out
as much of the actual referral process as they are capable of doing . 
2 . Clarify the need for the referral with the client . 
To be effective , the referral must be appropriate to the client ’ s needs and objectives . This means the PHN
must be familiar with , and have an established working relationship with , an array of referral resources
within the community . 
3 . Assist the client in establishing realistic outcomes for the referral . 
Often , the client will have a clear idea of what they want , but little idea of how to accomplish it . The
opposite may also happen : the client may have a clear preference for the use of a specific resource but be
unable to provide a reason why . 
4 . Explore the availability of resources with the client . 
Depending on the client ’ s capacity to work independently , the PHN assists the client in generating a list of
possible referral resources . The PHN and client should explore informal resources ( such as family
members or friends )  , and resources and services available through neighborhood groups and the faith
community should also be explored . 
5 . Encourage the client to select the resources they prefer and to initiate the contact whenever
reasonable . 
The PHN provides guidance as needed . Depending on the client ’ s capacity , this may range from : 
• dialing the phone and making the contact while the client watches how it is done
• standing behind the client coaching them through the interaction 
• helping the client prepare a set of questions to ask 
• assisting them in completing any required paperwork
• leaving a list of resources and phone numbers 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 83 Interventions
If the client is hesitant or resistant to referral , the PHN explores his / her rationale . In the end , however , the
client ’ s choice must be respected . 
The exception to this rule is a situation , such as instances of child maltreatment or suspected abuse of
vulnerable adults , in which the PHN is legally compelled to report . In such cases of involuntary “ referral ,  ” it
is important for the PHN to retain a supportive relationship with the client to the extent possible . 
6 . Facilitate the referral process when necessary . 
In addition to the preparatory work described above , the PHN should anticipate and reduce barriers to a
successful referral ( for example , the need for interpreters and transportation , as well as financial
requirements )  . The PHN may also need to communicate with the referral resource to prepare for the client . 
7 . Follow up after the referral has been made to determine with the client the extent to which the
referral was successful . 
In collaboration with the client , the PHN : 
• assesses whether the desired outcomes were achieved
• identifies any unmet outcomes and barriers 
• modifies the plan , including consideration of different referral resources
8 . Recognize that all steps in this process must be completed to assure success . 
Notes from Abby
A PHN may have to perform the role of conflict manager in the referral process . Whether working with individuals , 
families , systems , or communities , differences may arise between what the “ client ” wants versus what your
professional judgement suggests is needed to meet the desired outcomes safely and effectively . 
The PHN can anticipate that individuals and families will want to maximize whatever benefits they believe they are
entitled , while a community or system will want to maximize its market share . The PHN ’ s role in this debate is to : 
• serve as the steward of any public funding resources involved , and 
• provide assurance that no one group potentially needing the resource will encounter access barriers greater
than any other group . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 84 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Referral and Follow-Up
Systems and Community Practice Levels 
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Utilize linkages with other providers , organizations , institutions , networks , etc .  , to monitor the
community ’ s capacity to provide the resources and services needed by populations at risk . 
The PHN may use social marketing , provider education , collaboration , and / or coalition building to
create a compelling reason why other community partners would want to become involved in developing
resources . For instance , if the PHN deems it important for the faith community ( that is , churches , 
synagogues , mosques , etc .  ) to be engaged , they may first have to be convinced how their members would
benefit . Likewise , if community businesses are seen as important in developing referral resources , they will
need to see how it would benefit their customers and their “ bottom line .  ” 
2 . Produce strategies for services and resources development . 
It is important the PHN share his / her extensive knowledge of the special needs and unique characteristics of
target populations with those in the community who are considering developing resources or services . This
may mean working with local businesses , community service organizations ( such as the Lions , Rotary , or
Business and Professional Women )  , other health care providers , housing agencies , nonprofit agencies , etc . 
The more compelling the information , the greater the potential for resource development . For the PHN , 
this may mean researching how other communities have addressed similar needs , determining what grants
are available , knowing what their own agency ’ s contribution can be , and generating the initial list of strategy
ideas . 
3 . Participate in implementing those strategies selected which fall within the public health agency ’ s
mission and goals . 
Depending on the gaps in services and resources the community assessment identifies , the public health
agency may or may not decide to alter the services and resources offered . The health board for the agency
makes those determinations based on the extent to which the needs fit with the agency ’ s mission and overall
plan . The PHNs ’ extensive knowledge of the target populations is critical to building the case for changing
agency services . 
4 . Participate in evaluating the strategies ’ effectiveness in developing needed services and
resources . 
With all the referrals that PHNs make and receive , they are in a good position to observe the functioning of
referral systems , their strengths and weaknesses . Developing objective ways to gather this data contributes
to the evaluation process . For instance , information on the average number of contacts required to
complete a referral , a listing of barriers encountered , and observations on what worked well are all critical
feedback . 
25 This best practice is based on a 1962 article by Ilse Wolff published in Nursing Outlook . Titled “ Referral : 
A Process and a Skill ,  ” it is considered the seminal article on referral and follow-up in public health nursing . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 85 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Referral and Follow-Up
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practice expertise to develop them . These best practices are not presented in any
ranking or particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . DEVELOPS REFERRALS WHICH ARE TIMELY , MERITED , PRACTICAL , TAILORED TO
THE CLIENT , CLIENT CONTROLLED , AND COORDINATED . 
Best Evidence : Wolff 25
Timely : 
It is never too soon to initiate discussion with the referral network . This does not mean that the PHN supplies
specific client data . Rather , the PHN prepares the referral network for the possibility of a referral . This allows the
PHN to determine resource availability . Timely processing of a referral is facilitated when the PHN achieves and
maintains relationships with others in the referral network . 
Timeliness involves knowing when the client and / or family is best approached about referral . In general , the best
time is when the client can focus beyond the immediate crisis or circumstance . 
Merited : 
Before initiating a referral , the PHN and client together determine if additional resources are really necessary . 
Sometimes the client and family want to use community resources because they think they have a “ right ” to use
them , even though the PHN ’ s assessment does not support it . Appropriate and judicious use of resources is almost
always the result of negotiation between the PHN and client . 
Practical : 
The PHN should thoroughly assess : 
‚ the client ’ s perception of need
‚ preferences for meeting those needs
‚ accessibility and availability of personal and family resources
‚ current knowledge and past utilization of community resources . 
The PHN uses this information to develop a referral the client and family believe can work for them . It also supports
the concept of client control and provides the information critical to developing reasonable , attainable outcomes . 
Tailored to fit : 
What seems “ right ” for one person cannot be assumed to be right for the next . The greater the extent each person ’ s
unique individuality , preferences , and needs can be accommodated , the more likely the referral will be successful . 
26 Minnesota Dept . of Health / Section of Public Health Nursing .  ( 1999 , June )  . The Cornerstones of Public
Health Nursing . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 86 Interventions
Client controlled : 
The client ’ s right to accept or not accept a referral is a basic assumption for this intervention . Acting on this
requires the PHN set aside assumptions about what is best for a client . 
Coordinated with other interventions : 
The referral process is most efficient when it is carried out in conjunction with other interventions . 
Frequently health teaching and counseling are utilized to change the client ’ s and family ’ s knowledge and attitude
about reasonable outcomes of the referral . 
2 . ESTABLISHES A RELATIONSHIP BASED ON TRUST , RESPECT , CARING , AND LISTENING . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Effectiveness in referral and follow-up depends heavily on the PHN ’ s capacity to develop and maintain
relationships , an underlying cornerstone of all public health nursing practice . 26
3 . THE CLIENT IS AN ACTIVE PARTICIPANT IN THE PROCESS AND THE PHN INVOLVES
FAMILY MEMBERS AS APPROPRIATE . 
Best Evidence : McGuire , Eigsti Gerber , Clemen-Stone ; Wolff ; Will ; Stanhope and Lancaster , 1984 
Engaging the client and family in the referral process to the extent they are able reflects the PHN ’ s respect for the
client . While the PHN has a professional duty to present a plan of action , the plan should be open to negotiation at
all points . The greater the extent to which the client and family agree to each phase of the referral , the greater the
potential for successful implementation . 
Ilse Wolff ’ s observation–although written in the style of the 1960 ’ s–is clear :  “ No referral should ever be made in a
routine way ; this is especially important when the reason for it is to bring about a change in behavior , relationship , or
attitude . It is well known that no referral of this type will work unless it is based on the individual ’ s own wish and
desire for it ”  ( p . 255 )  . 
4 . ALLOWS FOR CLIENT DEPENDENCY IN THE CLIENT-PHN RELATIONSHIP UNTIL THE
CLIENT ’ S SELF-CARE CAPACITY SUFFICIENTLY DEVELOPS . 
Best Evidence : McGuire , Eigsti Gerber , Clemen-Stone
The PHN ’ s ability to “ meet the client where they ’ re at ” is an enduring hallmark of public health nursing practice . 
Promoting a client ’ s self-care capacity sometimes requires the PHN to allow a period of client dependency . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 87 Interventions
McGuire and others state it most clearly . They acknowledge that PHNs may need to take on relatively more
responsibility for the referral process in situations where the client and family lack the knowledge and skill necessary
for the task . This period of “ doing for ” the client can serve as an opportunity for teaching and modeling what is
required under the circumstances . At other times the client and / or family may possess the necessary knowledge
and skill but are unable to act because they are overwhelmed by the complexity or emotionally depleted by the
nature of their circumstances . 
5 . RESPECTS THE CLIENT ’ S RIGHT TO REFUSE A REFERRAL . 
Best Evidence : McGuire , Eigsti Gerber , Clemen-Stone ; Wolff ; Will ; Stanhope and Lancaster , 1984 
Respecting choice reflects the nature of the PHN-client relationship . This “ right to refuse ” also applies to those
circumstances in which the PHN believes the choices the client makes may not be in their best interest .  

The exception is those circumstances where referral is legally mandated of the PHN , although this constitutes
reporting and not referral . Often , however , a “ gray area ” exists between what is “ not in the client ’ s best interest ” 
and the point at which the client ’ s choice exceeds legal limits . Follow-up ( or follow-along ) by the PHN is critical in
these situations . The consequences of their choices may make some clients more open to the referral process . The
reality for a frail but determined elder living alone in his home may be much different than anticipated . 
In addition , this “ gray area ” is often defined by unwritten but well-understood “ community standards .  ” For
example : 
‚ How much “ self-neglect ” is tolerable for an elderly man whose standards of personal hygiene offend
others ? 
‚ How many pets are too many pets for an eccentric woman living alone in the community ? 
‚ When exactly does a person become incompetent to manage their own affairs ? 
‚ What are acceptable and culturally sensitive methods of child discipline ? 
In these circumstances , the PHN must resolve the ethical dilemma presented by the need to respect clients ’ rights of
self-determination versus society ’ s need to protect the vulnerable . Consulting agency policy and / or discussing the
dilemma with a supervisor is appropriate action in these situations . 
This does not mean that the PHN ignores client choices that exceed legal limits for jeopardizing their own health and
welfare ( such as states ’ laws regarding self-neglect by adults ) or that of others ( such as states ’ laws regarding child
maltreatment or domestic abuse )  . In many states the PHN is a mandated reporter of those circumstances and has a
legal as well as a professional duty to report to the proper authorities . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 88 Interventions
6 . DEVELOPS COMPREHENSIVE , SEAMLESS , CLIENT-SENSITIVE RESOURCES THAT
ROUTINELY MONITOR THEIR OWN SYSTEMS FOR BARRIERS . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Examples of barriers could include : 
‚ inaccessibility and unavailability of resources
‚ systems ’ inefficiencies or design flaws
‚ a community ’ s belief that “ self-care ” means “ without help .  ” 
The need for effective referral systems is identified through community assessment . Once identified , the PHN
works with systems within the community , either adapting current referral systems or creating new referral
resources . Assuring that there are appropriate resources in the community is just as critical as making referrals . 
7 . USES MULTIPLE METHODS OF FOLLOW-UP TO REINFORCE THE REFERRAL PROCESS . 
Best Evidence : Manfredi , Lacey , et al . 
Although referral and follow-up are presented as one intervention , effectiveness research often focuses on them
separately . Conventional follow-up methods are : 
‚ personal contacts such as home visits
‚ telephone calls
‚ written motivators / reminders . 
Manfredi , Lacey , and others tested the effectiveness of four methods of follow-up for patients served at Chicago
Department of Health in the mid-1980s . These individuals were referred for further diagnosis or treatment of
suspected cancer . 
Participants received the following additional follow-up services : 
‚ an interview with a nurse using a structured mini-questionnaire designed to facilitate questions about
follow-up expectation
‚ a form , which participants were requested to return in a pre-stamped , pre-addressed envelope after
follow-up was completed
‚ a reminder note mailed to participants who did not return the form
‚ a telephone reminder to non-respondents three weeks after sending the reminder note . 
They found two factors strongly associated with improved follow-through : 
‚ when participants were able to get return appointments for the needed diagnostic work-up or
treatment within two weeks of the initial appointment , and 
‚ when participants received the extra attention of the nurse-interviewer . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 89 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Follow-up activities are critical to referral success . When working with individuals and families , this means the
PHN should assure that barriers are resolved or reduced . 
Yawn , Kurland , and others investigated why school children who failed school-based vision screening did not
receive the recommended follow-up care . Through focus group interviews with parents , school personnel , and
health care providers , the following issues were identified : 
‚ School Related 
= concern that the screening results were not valid since the volunteers doing the screening had only
minimal training 
= confusion about the school ’ s intent to screen , expectations of parents , and resources available for
follow-up . 
‚ Community Related 
= expense of eye-care services and glasses 
= available appointment times with eye-care specialists were inconvenient and required a long wait 
= affordable lenses were not “ cool ”  ; children refused to wear them 
= care was not seen as a priority by enough parents 
= lack of general awareness of the significance of vision problems by the community as a whole . 
A community-school task force developed a 22-point plan to address the issues , including such things as : 
‚ facilitating an agreement among eye-care providers to schedule evening and weekend appointments
‚ starting a regular health column in the school newsletter where parents could anticipate getting information
‚ communicating the need for follow-up to parents at parent-teacher conferences
‚ investigating concern about screener training and the validity of results
‚ increasing awareness within the community regarding the seriousness of vision problems in children . 
Yawn , B .  , Kurland , M .  , Butterfield , L .  ,  & Johnson , B .  ( 1998 , Oct )  . Barriers to seeking care following school vision screening in
Rochester , MN . J . of School Health , 68 ( 8 )  , 319-324 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 90 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Referral and Follow-Up
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and
academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end
of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed
it . It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
Mitchell , A .  , Van Berkel , C .  , Adam , V .  , Ciliska , D .  , et al .  ( 1993 , July-Aug )  . Comparison of liaison and staff
nurses in discharge referrals of postpartum patients for public health nursing follow-up . Nursing Research , 
42 ( 4 )  , 245-249 . 
This study compares hospital staff nurses to public health liaison nurses in terms of the accuracy and cost of postpartum
referrals for public health nursing follow-up in the community . After completing the postpartum contacts , the PHNs
receiving community referrals judged whether the referral was appropriate ; they were blinded as to whether the referral
was generated by a hospital staff nurse or the PH liaison nurse . Results show that the hospital nurses correctly identified
a higher proportion of referrals requiring PHN follow-up than the liaison nurses ; however , they also referred more
clients who did not require follow-up . Cost analysis determined that it was less expensive to have the hospital staff
nurses generate all referrals . As a result , the allocation of time for the PH liaison nurses was reduced and converted to
that of a consultant role to the hospital staff . 
Experimental = 80%
Manfredi , C .  , Lacey , L .  ,  & Warnecke , R .  ( 1990 , Jan .  )  . Results of an intervention to improve compliance with
referrals for evaluation of suspected malignancies at neighborhood public health centers . Am J Public
Health , 80 ( 1 )  , 85-87 . 
This study evaluated procedures to improve compliance with referrals of patients at risk for oral cancer . Intervention
consisted of a standardized communication from the exit nurse , a patient form to be returned after compliance , and one
written and one telephone reminder , as needed . 
Compliance was 68 . 2 percent in a control group and 89 percent among patients who received the experimental
intervention , a statistically significant increase . 
Experimental = 70%
Johnson , J .  , Williams , M .  ,  & Chatham , L .  ( 1995 , June )  . Notes from the field : The Houston advance DATAR
follow-up project : Private investigator techniques for public health . Am J Public Health , 85 ( 6 )  , 868-869 . 
This study involved evaluating and improving psychosocial adjustment and reducing HIV risky behaviors of heroin addicts
through counseling , education , and methadone therapy . Follow-up by workers to measure change was complicated by
participants ’ transient nature . Results indicated that follow-up success ( i . e .  , locating participants ) was increased when
the following occurred : 1 ) Workers operated in communities where they blended in ; 2 ) Workers who employed techniques
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 91 Interventions
used by private investigators to locate missing persons , in particular the “ back tracing to the anchor ” technique .  ”  
[ Reference : Thoms RD How to Find Anyone Anywhere : New Expanded and Revised Third Ed .  ( Austin , TX : Thomas
Investigative Publications ) 1992 ] 
Experimental = 43%
Expert Opinion
McGuire , S .  , Eigsti Gerber , D .  ,  & Clemen-Stone , S .  ( 1996 , Sept-Oct )  . Meeting the diverse needs of clients
in the community : Effective use of the referral process . Nursing Outlook , 44 ( 5 )  , 218-222 . 
Nurses face a significant challenge in meeting the diverse needs of clients who are moving quickly from one care setting
to another . To address this challenge , organizations need to develop a well-established referral system to assist in the
process of linking clients to community resources , and practitioners need to understand of the basic principles and
clinical and theoretical aspects of the referral process . The article largely builds on the authors ’ textbook and includes
much of the same material . 
Expert Opinion = 64%
Wolfe , I .  ( 1962 , April )  . Referral—A process and a skill . Nursing Outlook , 10 ( 4 )  , 253-256 . 
In what many considered a seminal article , Wolff establishes a set of referral and follow-up principles which have stood
the test of time , despite the vast changes in health care delivery . These include : 
1 ) A client ’ s successful follow-through with a referral depends largely on his / her motivation which , in turn , depends
largely on the extent to which what ’ s asked of the client meshes with their personal perception of importance . The
PHN ’ s spending sufficient time getting to know the client ahead of the referral allows him / her to present it to the client
in a way which fits those issues or concerns which do motivate the client . Wolff refers to this as “ the long patience ” and
promotes it as saving time and resources in the long run . In other words , it ’ s better to do it effectively the first time , 
rather than have to go back and redo referrals . 
2 ) Consider these factors before approaching the client about a referral : 
•Does the referral have merit , that is , is the referral really necessary in order to meet the client ’ s established
goals ? 
•Is it practical , that is , is it reasonable to expect that a given client can follow through given their current
resources ? 
•Does it fit the client ’ s individuality , that is , to what extent are the referral resources able to accommodate the
client ’ s unique characteristics ? 
•Is the client ’ s right to refuse a referral respected ? 
3 ) No referral or follow-up procedure should ever be used as a “ one size fits all ” process . Each referral and follow-up
must be tailored to the unique characteristics and needs of each client . The PHN must be cautious in his / her counseling
not to continue to press for the way he / she thinks things should go as this only alienates the client and puts them into
a defensive position . 
Wolff concludes that to be successful , a referral must be “ commonsensical ” meaning that “  [ E ] ven the simplest form of
referral requires that the public health nurse know exactly what she is talking about , that she make sure how the referral
she has made strikes home and whether it is understood in all of its implications . In this sense , even the most factual
form of referral involves much more than writing an address on a piece of paper and handing it to the patient or some
member of his family .  ”  ( p . 253 ) 
Expert Opinion = 59%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 92 Interventions
Will , M .  ( 1977 )  . Referral : A process , not a form . Nursing 77 , 44-55 . 
The author urges nurses to consider “ that referral is much more complex than simply giving some information about a
community resource or filling out a form ”  ( p . 44 )  . She identifies referral as a therapeutic process including the following
phases : 
1 . Define the need : Observations include the client and the client ’ s perception of the circumstances ; an
assessment of the physical , psychosocial , and environmental status ; the extent to which the PHN can respond
under agency policies ; the PHN ’ s own capability with this type of situation
2 . Offer a suitable choice : Present a case for the referral that includes clear statements of the client ’ s choices , 
including the right to refuse a referral
3 . Anticipate possible barriers and work to eliminate them : This holds when considering either the client ’ s
acceptance of a referral or barriers to implementation when / if the client agrees . 
4 . Follow along with the client ’ s follow-through on the referral : A nurse ’ s ultimate goal “ is to help the patient
and his family feel free enough to turn , on their own to any community resource they need ” on their own . 
However , there may need to be allowance for a period of dependency on the nurse until the client and / or his
families has “ learned the ropes .  ” This transference of knowledge could include such things as role playing , 
assisting in the preparation of a list of questions to be asked of the resource , etc . 
5 . Evaluate for effectiveness , i . e .  , provide follow-up : Were the client ’ s objectives met ? If not , why not ? Where
your needs met ? If not , examine whether your expectations meshed with those of the client ’ s ? Does some or
all of the referral process need to be repeated ?  
 “ Referral [ and follow-up are ] a significant part of nursing care , not just an extension of it . Indeed , it is meant to extend
you ”  ( p . 45 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 51 . 5% 
Texts and Monographs
Stanhope , M .  ,  & Lancaster , J .  ( 1984 )  . Community health nursing : Process and practice for promoting
health . St . Louis : Mosby . 
In their textbook , the authors present the referral process as “ another community health nursing strategy related to family
health .  .  .  [ which purpose ] is to introduce the family to community resource , and the goal is to enhance family self-care
capabilities in using resources .  ” The following eight steps describe the referral process : 
1 . Establish a working relationship 
2 . Establish the need for referral
3 . Set objectives
4 . Explore resource availability
5 . Allow clients to decide what to do
6 . Implement referral
7 . Facilitate referral
8 . Evaluate success and perform follow-up . 
Families ’ capacity to carry out the referral process will vary , depending upon the level of families ’ skill and coping and
the complexity and availability of community resources . However , to the largest extent possible , the client and family
should always be involved . 
Text = 53 . 5%
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Case Management
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 93 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : CASE MANAGEMENT
Definition
Case management optimizes self-care capabilities of individuals and families and the capacity of systems
and communities to coordinate and provide services . 
Case management is characterized by : 
• focus on development of the self-care capabilities of communities , systems , individuals , and families
• promotion of the efficient use of resources
• stimulation of the creation of new services where needed
• assurance of quality care along a continuum of service delivery
• decrease in the fragmentation of care across settings
• enhancement of clients ’ quality of life
• cost containment
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All children with special health care needs and their families
Problem : Fragmented service delivery system 
Community Example : 
A PHN works with a local advocacy organization to present programs about the rights of children under
the American Disability Act ( ADA ) to various parents groups within the community . The programs
emphasize potential roles for parents to advocate on their children ’ s behalf . 
Systems Example : 
A variety of professionals who provide services to children with special needs , including public health
nursing and school nursing , cooperatively design a centralized intake process to simplify access to
services for children with special needs 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 94 Interventions
Individual / Family Example : 
A PHN serves a family with a school-aged boy who uses a wheelchair due to his cerebral palsy . The
PHN assists the boy ’ s parents and their primary care practitioner in negotiating a plan with the school
district to meet the child ’ s educational and physical needs during the school day . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Case management is frequently carried out in conjunction or sequence with other interventions . 
• It often generates referrals to others , but it can also be the result of a referral . In fact , referral and follow-up
is often considered a key component of case management 
• Outreach often precedes case management , especially in public health nursing case management models
• Case-finding may precede case management or vice versa , depending on the circumstances
• Implementing case management frequently relies on health teaching , counseling , consultation , advocacy , 
and collaboration
• Case management often leads to advocacy and collaboration at community or systems levels and is paired
with provider education . 
Notes from Abby
Case management has long been a key service provided by public health nursing . The origins of this intervention are
attributed to PHNs who staffed the settlement houses prevalent around the turn of the century , such as Lillian Wald ’ s
Henry Street Settlement House in New York City . In fact , the article by Tahan describes a system of cards used by
settlement house staff to do their case management which would be familiar to PHNs today :  “ list family needs , 
establish a mechanism for follow-up , facilitate the delivery of services , and ensure that families were
connected with the appropriate resources .  ” 
Source : Tahan , H .  ( 1998 , March / April )  . Case management : A heritage more than a century old . Nursing Case Management , 3 ( 2 )  , 55-69 . 
27 Adapted from : Weil , M .  ,  & Karls , J .  ( 1985 )  . Case management in human service practice : A systematic approach to
mobilizing resources for clients ( pp . 29-71 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Boss . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 95 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Case Management
Individual / Family Practice Level27
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Provide effective outreach and case-finding to all individuals and / or families considered at risk or
otherwise meeting your agency ’ s priority criteria and offer case management . 
2 . Involve those individuals and / or families in assessing their level of functioning . Determine the
resources and services necessary to attain and / or maintain an adequate and safe quality of life . 
Through the process , develop a trust relationship ; this step is essential to successful case
management . 
3 . Involve those individuals and families in investigating available resources and services and designing
a plan to access them . 
Effective plans include the following : 
a . clearly defined priority service needs
b . short- and long-term measurable objectives
c . specific actions needed to reach these objectives
d . identification of agencies and resources that will be utilized 
e . establishment of realistic timeframes
f . identification of potential barriers ( for example , waiting lists , client resistance , cost ) and possible solutions . 
4 . Link the individuals and / or families with needed service and resources , including financial resources . 
5 . Work cooperatively with other disciplines as the complexity of the circumstances requires . 
6 . Collaborate with individuals and / or families in coordinating the services and implementing the plan
in a logical sequence . 
7 . Provide advocacy or “ troubleshooting ” to resolve potential or actual barriers in service provision . 
8 . Evaluate progress toward the established health outcomes with the individuals and / or families ; revise
plan elements as needed . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 96 Interventions
Notes from Abby
In public health nursing , assuring efficient use of available resources has long been a key component of case
management . However , it has never been in the context of withholding needed services . Whether working with
individuals or families , a PHN may encounter differences between what the “ client ” wants versus what professional
judgement suggests is needed to promote self-care capabilities . Individuals or families may want to maximize
whatever services they believe they are entitled , even though the PHN deems them unnecessary . This is the balancing
act PHNs inevitably face and manage ; it is often referred to as the “ need versus want ” debate . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 97 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Case Management
System and Community Practice Levels
Working with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Identify discrete sub-groups within the population ( for example , all frail elderly living alone or all
families with children with disabilities ) whose quality of life is at risk . 
2 . Gather and analyze information regarding services and resources that are needed but unavailable , 
inaccessible , or unacceptable ( e . g .  , services that are culturally inappropriate )  . 
3 . Communicate with community organizations and systems in a position to address these gaps . 
4 . Collaborate with community organizations and systems to assure adequacy and equity of resources
and services developed . 
5 . Routinely evaluate the community ’ s capacity to meet the quality-of-life needs of populations-at-risk
identified through community assessment . 
Notes from Abby
The basic steps for case management at the systems and community levels are similar to those for referral and followup . They both largely function to create needed resources where resources do not exist or are inadequate . Case
management and referral and follow-up at these levels share far more similarities than differences . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 98 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Case Management
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the literature
with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or particular order ; each
may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . USES A PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING FRAMEWORK FOR CASE MANAGEMENT . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
After reviewing the case management literature , the expert panelists concluded that a case management plan reflecting
a public health nursing framework is characterized by : 
‚ goals with a prevention focus 
‚ inclusion of health teaching and counseling interventions
‚ consideration of the entire array of health determinants that affect a client ’ s quality of life 
‚ coordination of services and resources . 
In addition , the values and beliefs of the individual , family , or population-of-interest whose care is being “ managed ” is
respected at all times . As experienced PHNs know well , no one wants to be a “ case ,  ” and no one wants to be 
 “ managed .  ” 
Not all nurse case managers use a public health nursing framework . The emphasis of case management may change
depending on the setting in which it is implemented . For example : 
‚ A nurse working in a hospital may understand case management as disease management , where critical
pathways or protocols based on diagnoses or procedures are followed
‚ A nurse working in long-term care focusing on chronic disease management may understand case management
as providing needed services in order to prevent hospitalization or other higher-cost resources 
‚ A nurse working for a managed care or insurance company may see case management as benefits management
or utilization review . 
All may be appropriate within their specific environments , although none may be relevant for public health nursing . 
2 . SELECTS THE CASE MANAGEMENT MODEL WHICH BEST MATCHES THE NEEDS OF THE
INDIVIDUAL , FAMILY , OR POPULATION-AT-RISK . 
Best Evidence : Weil and Karls
General models of case management include : 
‚ service brokers
‚ interdisciplinary teams
‚ primary service providers
‚ family case management
‚ volunteer case management . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 99 Interventions
Weil provides a comprehensive overview of the variety of case management models . Her review is useful in selecting
the model that best fits a given individual or family ’ s situation : 
Professional Models
A . Broker Model , also known as the Generalist Model
An individual or family works with one professional in implementing the entire case management process .  
 “ Broker ” means that part of the case manager ’ s responsibility is to “ get the best deal ” for the client by making
all the necessary connections with the services and resources required
B . Primary-Therapist-as-Case Manager Model
In this model the case management function is an extension of a therapeutic relationship a professional has with
a client . It is primarily used with clients with limited capacity to function , such as the chronically and persistently
mentally ill 
C . Interdisciplinary Team Model
This model is usually implemented in one of two ways : 
‚ each discipline represented on the team manages only those aspects of a given client ’ s needs that relate
to their particular specialty , such as social work , speech therapy , public health nursing , or physical
therapy , or 
‚ separate disciplines contribute to the design of the plan , but one professional is designated as the “ lead ” 
or “ primary ” manager . The person is usually designated , depending on the nature of the client ’ s
greatest need . 
The PHNs must carefully consider their involvement in programs where case management services are provided by
nonprofessionals . Even though the PHN ’ s role may only be training the case manager , the issue of who is ultimately
responsible and accountable for the services that nonprofessionals provide needs to be carefully considered . 
In this category , PHNs provide training and guidance to those assuming the role of case manager . 
A . Family Model
In this case , a relationship is developed between the PHN and the family member serving as case manager , in
which the PHN acts as a mentor or consultant in problem-solving . 
B . Supportive Care Model
This model has been developed and used almost exclusively with the chronically and persistently mentally ill
population living in the community . Nonprofessionals supervised by a PHN develop supportive relationships
with clients and develop linkages to needed services . 
C . Volunteer Model
The volunteer model is similar to the supportive care model in that the volunteers are trained and supervised
by a professional . However , volunteers are not paid and carry out the function as a service to their community . 
Like supportive care , this model has been mostly applied with the chronic and persistently mentally ill population
living in communities . Guardian ad litem programs associated with family or juvenile courts are also examples
of this model . 
The assumption of a supervisory relationship between the PHN and nonprofessionals or volunteers needs to
be clearly understood by all parties and PHNs should consult their states ’ nurse practice act and their agencies ’ 
policies regarding these kinds of situations . 
28 Weil , M .  & Karls , J .  ( 1985 )  . Case management in human service practice : A systematic approach to
mobilizing resources for clients . San Francisco : Jossey-Boss , 35 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 100 Interventions
3 . DEVELOPS EXTENSIVE KNOWLEDGE OF COMMUNITY RESOURCES AND ESTABLISHES
LINKAGES WITH THEM . 
Best Evidence : Beilman , Sowell , et al .  ; Bower / ANA ; Kellogg ; Erkel , Morgan , Staples , et al . 
The linkages serve to assure the following major outcomes of case management : 
‚ continuity of care
‚ achievement of desired health outcomes
‚ cost effectiveness . 
Several authors point out that “ linkages ” depend on the PHN ’ s ability to develop and maintain relationships based
on mutual trust . 
Weil28 points out that “ linking is not simply making a referral , it requires doing whatever needs to be done to get the
client to the service .  ” This demands the case manager have both formal and informal relationships with an array of
those service providers and other resources commonly used by the population-at-risk whose needs are being
addressed . Establishing and sustaining those relationships , in turn , requires that the case manager has skill in
communication , negotiation , interpersonal collaboration , and comfort in using positional and personal power , when
needed , to implement a plan successfully . 
4 . PROVIDES CASE MANAGEMENT THAT IS CLIENT-CENTERED AND RELATIONSHIPBASED . 
Best Evidence : Beilman , Sowell , et al .  ; Bower / ANA ; Kellogg ; Weil and Karls ; Erkel
Effective case management incorporates the following elements : 
‚ respecting that the intervention is client-centered , not systems-centered
‚ anticipating the relationship-based nature of the intervention 
‚ understanding that although much of case management is episodic , it can require sustaining a relationship for
a long time ; usually , the longer the relationship , the more likely the desired outcome will be achieved . 
From the perspectives of individuals or families , the effectiveness of case management is clearly related to the nature
and extent of their interpersonal relationship with the PHN . Individuals and families are most satisfied when their
case manager is someone with whom they have a longstanding relationship . 
Research by Elizabeth Erkel and colleagues demonstrates : 
‚ for those with mental illness diagnoses , case management provided in the client ’ s place of residence , rather
than at an office , resulted in reduction of hospitalization , fewer case manager-client contacts , and compliance
with established care plans
‚ among Medicaid-eligible families with young children seen in public health clinics , families who related to only
one PHN for access to a variety of primary care services ( an integrated model of case management ) were
significantly more likely to utilize preventive services than families who related to a different PHN for each
clinic service ( known as the fragmented model )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 101 Interventions
In her 1995 doctoral dissertation on PHN case management , Kellogg supports the central importance of attaining
and sustaining PHN-client relationships . In her study , PHNs describe strategies for establishing effective PHNclient relationships : 
‚ conveying genuine caring about the family and its circumstances by accepting them as they are and not
judging them by their current behaviors , even when those activities may have been illegal or in opposition to
a PHN ’ s own personal system of values and beliefs
‚ persistence in attempting to develop a relationship with the individual or family , despite multiple prior
refusals . 
5 . DEMONSTRATES THE KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS CRITICAL FOR EFFECTIVE CASE
MANAGEMENT . 
Best Evidence : Bower / ANA ; Kellogg ; Weil and Karls ; Cohen ; Lamb
Knowledge and skills critical for effective case management include : 
‚ interpersonal skills : highly interactive , engaging clients with genuine interest , that is ,  “ being with the person ” 
‚ effective communication skills : listening , counseling , teaching , problem-solving
‚ knowledge of community resources
‚ advocacy skills , including functioning as a liaison to community resources 
‚ ability to work as a member of a multi-disciplinary team and with unlicenced assistive personnel
‚ fiscal management skills . 
Skill in negotiating is often noted as critical for trust development . The main points to remember in negotiation are : 
‚ approach all discussions with a positive attitude ; make emotions explicit
‚ focus always on the objective or the problem–not the people involved
‚ know any timelines that may apply to the process
‚ know as much about the situation as possible before beginning the negotiation
‚ be aware of any power positions being used ( either by you or others ) 
‚ have a clear idea of acceptable outcomes and what you are willing to concede , before beginning
negotiations
‚ negotiate with someone who has the authority to make decisions , whenever possible . 
Public health nurses must also have substantial clinical knowledge about the target populations they serve . Those
PHNs coming into the field in the last 20 years most likely have learned about case management as it applies to a
particular population-at-risk , such as children with special health care needs , persons with active tuberculosis , or
frail elderly maintained in the community . Case management for these specialized or “ targeted ” sub-groups often
are accompanied by a prescribed model or protocol for case management . Regardless of the model , however , the
basic steps for case management are evident . 
29 Knollmueller , R .  ( 1989 , October )  . Case management : What ’ s in a name ? Nursing Management , 20 ( 10 )  , 
42 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 102 Interventions
6 . ROUTINELY EVALUATES CASE MANAGEMENT OUTCOMES AND REFINES THE PLAN
ACCORDINGLY . 
Best Evidence : Beilman , Sowell , et al .  ; Bower / ANA ; Kellogg ; Erkel , Morgan , Staples , et al . 
The major outcomes of case management are : 
‚ continuity of care 
‚ achievement of desired health outcomes
‚ cost effectiveness . 
Depending on the mission of a given nurse ’ s employer , one part of the case management process may be
emphasized over others . However , the theme of cost-containment as the major purpose of case management has
strongly emerged since the early 1980s when health care reform discussions first began . As long ago as 1989 , 
noted PHN leader Ruth Knollmueller warned that the value of case management would be found in improved care
for people and not only containment of costs . 29
The literature suggests a growing tension in attempting to achieve all three outcomes in an era when costcontainment dominates . 
Beilman and Sowell particularly address this issue in their article ,  “ Case Management at What Expense ? A Case
Study in the Emotional Costs of Case Management ”  ( 1998 )  . They analyze a nurse case manager struggling with
competing expectations from clients , physicians , professional organizations , and employers and they arrive at three
conclusions : 
‚ a realistic balance must be struck between cost-containment from the payer ’ s perspective and what is
needed to deliver quality care to patients
‚ health professionals must join together in advocating for quality care
‚ management of a hospitalized client ’ s care must , from the time of admission , incorporate discharge
planning . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 103 Interventions
Notes from Abby
For examples and further reading on population-specific case management , see : 
• Rife , J .  , et al .  ( 1991 , February )  . Case management with homeless mentally ill people . Health and Social
Work , 16 ( 1 )  , 58-67 . 
• Gonzalez-Calvo , J .  , et al . Nursing case management and its role in perinatal risk reduction : Development , 
implementation , and evaluation of a culturally competent model for African American women . Public
Health Nursing , 14 ( 4 )  , 190-206 . 
• Smith , A .  , et al .  ( 1997 , Fall )  . Current applications of case management in schools to improve children ’ s
readiness to learn . J . of Case Management , 6 ( 3 )  , 105-113 . 
• Ardito , M .  , et al .  ( 1997 , Summer )  . Delivering home-based case management to families with children with
mental retardation and developmental disabilities . J . of Case Management , 6 ( 2 )  , 56-61 . 
• Krout , J .  ( 1997 , Winter )  . Barriers to providing case management to older rural persons . J . of Case
Management , 6 ( 4 )  , 142-150 . 
• Mitchell , E .  ( 1997 , Spring )  . Medicaid , Medicare , and managed care : Case management for dually eligible
clients . J . of Case Management , 6 ( 1 )  , 8-12 . 
For PHNs interested in pursuing further information on case management : 
Case Management by Nurses ( 1992 )  , written by Kathleen Bower , was approved by the American
Nurses Association Congress of Nursing Practice and reflects the perspective of the professional nursing
organization ( Pub .  # NS-32 )  . Contact : American Nurses Publishing , Washington , DC , 800 / 637-0323 . 
A variety of certification examinations for case management are available : 
• American Nurses Credentialing Center ( 202 / 651-7000 ) offers certification in case management as a role
component ( module ) of advanced practice certification in each clinical specialty , including community health
nursing ; limited to nurses with BSN preparation
• Foundation for Education and Research / Commission for Case Manager Certification offers a Certified
Case Manager credential ( 847 / 818-0292 ) which targets “ any professionals promoting physical , 
psychosocial , and vocational well being ” 
• National Academy of Certified Care Managers offers a Care Manager , Certified credential ( 800 / 962-
2260 ) which targets social workers , nurses , mental health counselors , and psychologists .  
[ Note : Inclusion of the above sources does not represent their endorsement , nor does it represent encouragement
to seek credentialing .  ] 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 104 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Case Management
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and academic
experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end of each
annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . It
reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Lamb , G .  ( 1995 )  . Case management . Annual Review of Nursing Research , 13 , 117-136 . 
Lamb provides a history of case management ( CM ) research from perspectives other than nursing ; she suggests
that the concept began as a research topic in the late 1970s for such disciplines as behavioral health , social work , 
and health services ’ research as a tool to improve quality and cost outcomes for high-risk adults in the community . 
In the 1980s , the focus shifted to Medicare recipients , although the issues remained the same . In both decades , 
considerable attention was given to case management in relationship to improving outcomes of care for individuals
with chronic mental illness . The lessons learned included : 
1 . CM should be clearly linked to a theoretical framework in order to show significant changes in
outcomes
2 . CM intervention must be defined and specified , including listing task activities
3 . Samples should consist of homogeneous groups of individuals most likely to benefit from case
management ( that is , to show a change ) 
4 . Researchers should strive for consistency in the selection of sensitive outcome indicators . 
Lamb then goes on to describe nurse case management “ state of the art ”  ( as of the early 1990s )  : 
1 . Considerable confusion exists about the purpose , scope , and functions , largely attributable to the
absence of operational definitions of CM , lack of studies that control for the effects of extraneous variables , 
and a dearth of nursing-sensitive outcomes
2 . Case studies abound in the literature which are “ rich with description ,  ” but unexamined . Lamb sees the
following common themes : 
•nurse case managers appear to work with individuals , families , and populations at high risk of
adverse health outcomes
•they are responsible for applying the nursing process in ways that potentially enhance both quality
and cost outcomes
•they have access to individuals and families in more than one localized setting
•most of what has been analyzed has been in relationship to cost with little focus on structure ( e . g .  , 
organizational supports , educational and experiential preparation of case mangers , caseload size , etc .  ) 
or process ( e . g .  , operationalization of often-mentioned functions , such as maintaining long-term caring
relationships , monitoring , pattern recognition , teaching , coordination , and advocacy
•most research that has been done on nurse case management has fallen into two categories : hospitalbased models in which nurse case managers coordinate care for high-risk individuals across nursing
units using managed care tools ( such as critical paths )  , or continuum-based models in which nurse
case managers work with clients and coordinate care across multiple settings . 
Review Article = 54%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 105 Interventions
Erkel , E .  ( 1993 , January )  . The impact of case management in preventive services . J . Nursing
Administration ( JONA )  , 23 ( 1 )  , 27-32 . 
Erkel cites Parker , Quinn , Viehl , et al .  ’ s definition of case management ( CM ) as “ a systematic process of
assessment , planning , service coordination and / or referral , and monitoring and reassessment through which the
multiple service needs of clients are met ”  ( p . 27 )  . She asserts CM is a well-known intervention in public health
nursing , but suggests that greater effectiveness and cost effectiveness could be realized if preventive services were
included as part of the care being managed . Erkel defines these services as “ counseling , screening , immunizations , 
or chemoprophylatic interventions ,  ” which are cost effective because they replace high-cost tertiary medical care
with relatively low-cost primary care . She reports on a study by Buescher et al . which found that Medicaid women
receiving nursing CM service had lower rates of low-birthweight babies and infant mortality and participated to a
greater extent in preventive services . In addition , the study suggested CM effectiveness was influenced by the
intervention ’ s length . However , Erkel also reviewed studies of CM services with chronically and medically fragile
populations and found that while it consistently increased the use of community-based services , CM also increased
the cost of maintenance care to those populations ( p . 30 )  . Erkel concludes that further research is needed to
determine if the key to effective case management is a factor related to the client population , the health problem , or
the qualifications of the case manager . 
Review Article = 53%
Research Reports
Erkel , E .  , Morgan , E .  , Staples , M .  , et al .  ( 1994 , October )  . Case management and preventive services
among infants from low-income families . Public Health Nursing , 11 ( 5 )  , 352-360 . 
Erkel et al . compared differences in utilization of child health preventive services ( counseling , anticipatory guidance , 
health education , health assessment and screening , monitoring of growth and development , immunizations at
periodic intervals , and newborn home visits ) among African-American mothers with Medicaid-eligible infants when
case management was provided by one PHN ( labeled as the “ innovative method ”  ) versus different PHNs for each
component of the preventive services . They demonstrated that continuous care from one PHN was associated with
a 5 . 5 times greater likelihood of achieving adequate child preventive services . 
Experimental ( quasi )  = 90%
Kellogg , B .  ( 1995 , June )  . Public health nursing case management : Bridging the gap in health care . 
Excerpts from doctoral dissertation , Loma Linda Univ School of Nursing , 36-39 , 167-186 , 190-191 . 
This qualitative research sought to determine the common themes of case management ( CM ) as practiced among
PHNs from four county health departments in southern California in the early 1990s . Chief among the themes was
that case manager effectiveness depended on the PHN ’ s ability to establish relationships in three areas : most
importantly in relating to clients , their families , and the community ; second , in the ability to relate to other social
systems ; thirdly , in the ability to relate to their own agencies . Based on her work with the county health
departments and an extensive literature search , Kellogg sees CM ’ s intent among PHNs as “ establish [ ing ] a
connection between the most vulnerable population groups and community services . Fundamentally , the purpose of
CM in the public health sector is to optimize the self-care capabilities of families by promoting the efficient use of
resources and decreasing fragmentation of care . Public health CM ’ s major intent is to improve the overall health of
the family , with the ultimate goal of improving the general health of the community in which the family
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 106 Interventions
resides ”  ( p . 170 )  . The PHN does this by “ assess [ ing ] the entire situation , determin [ ing ] which problems were
amenable to interventions , and link [ ing ] the family to essentials services ”  ( p . 172 )  . 
Kellogg also documents the characteristics of the “ cases ” with whom the PHNs worked ; she portrays them as
extremely complex family situations with multiple social and health problems who were experiencing rifts with their
health care systems . The following critical strategies were employed by the PHNs to intervene effectively : 1 ) 
establishing rapport with the family through demonstrations of caring conveyed to the family as respect , acceptance , 
non-judgement , and persistence , despite frequent rejections early in the relationship ; 2 ) developing extensive skills
in coordinating care across disciplines and services . This , in turn , depended on the PHNs ’ ability to complete
extensive paperwork , keep agency administrators informed and updated , provide information to other disciplines
involved in a timely and efficient manner , and supervise other staff ; 3 ) providing health education effectively by
considering the learning needs of the families and using methods ranging from sharing information , serving as a role
model , and demonstrating ; and 4 ) achieving and maintaining a personal presence in the community . Personal
characteristics of the PHNs providing effective CM included possessing extensive knowledge about the community , 
resources , and health care delivery system ; skill in implementing health education ; and a capacity to function with
high levels of autonomy . 
Qualitative = 74%
Expert Opinion
Beilman , J .  , Sowell , R .  , et al .  ( 1998 , March / April )  . Case management at what expense ? A case study of
the emotional costs of case management . Nursing Case Management , 3 ( 2 )  , 89-93 . 
The authors offer a review of the conventional understanding of case management ( CM ) and then describe what
happens when the cost-management component is given priority over all others . They begin by stating that “ CM
which has its historical roots in community and public health , seeks to coordinate care , decrease costs , and
promote access to appropriate levels of services . Traditionally , CM had most often been used in community
settings , focusing on vulnerable populations such as the elderly , the medically fragile , or the chronically ill . The
objective of community-based CM has been to link persons with appropriate types and levels of services with the
aim of balancing quality and cost of services across the trajectory of the wellness-illness continuum that exists in
chronic illness or aging ”  ( p . 89 )  . They then describe a scenario where the nurse , as case manager for an elderly
woman with a hip fracture and various other problems , is confronted with an ethical dilemma , i . e .  , a client and her
husband whom the nurse believes require additional services beyond those allowed by the couple ’ s medical
coverage and the hospital and physician who are concerned about the cost of providing them . The authors
conclude that 1 ) nurses serving as case managers be given the authority to seek a realistic balance between cost
savings from the employer ’ s viewpoint and the delivery of quality ( i . e .  , necessary ) services to the client ; 2 ) 
physicians become a more integral part of the system ; 3 ) the case manager must have effective working
relationships with a variety of community service providers ; and 4 ) nurses serving as case managers must have
knowledge and training in negotiation and conflict management such as those associated with advanced practice . 
Expert Opinion = 49%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 107 Interventions
Kersbergen , A .  ( 1996 , July / August )  . Case management : A rich history of coordinating care to control
costs . Nursing Outlook , 44 , 169-172 . 
Although not always called case management ( CM )  , CM functions have been carried out in nursing for at least 100
years . She asserts there is no consensus on definition or models , but there is on desired outcomes : maintaining
quality while controlling the costs of health care through coordination and management of care ( p . 169 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 33%
Knollmueller , R .  ( 1989 , October )  . Case management : What ’ s in a name ? Nursing Management , 20 ( 10 )  , 
38-42 . 
In this opinion piece , Knollmueller , at the time speaking from a public health nursing career spanning 20 years , 
reviews 17 models she identifies as being understood as “ case management ”  ( CM ) in the late 1980s . She then
goes on to describe who was providing CM services ( mostly nurses , followed by social workers ) and concludes
from her analysis that their major role was that of gatekeeper to services and resources . Knollmueller
acknowledges public health nursing ’ s long history of doing exactly the same service in the community , stating that
the “ only difference now is that people can get paid for doing it ”  ( p . 40 )  . She also warns , however , that before
local agencies jump into case management , they should first consider the field as it seemed to be evolving in the late
1980s :  “ a scheme for rationing services [ by ] limit [ ing ] the scope of service to management of the benefit or funding
package and disregard [ ing ] the human faces behind the service .  ” Knollmueller concludes that the value of CM
should be measured , instead , in improved care ( for the dollars spent )  . 
Expert Opinion = 30%
Lyon , J . C .  ( 1993 , June )  . Models of nursing care delivery and case management : Clarification of terms . 
Nursing Economics , 11 ( 3 )  , 163-169 . 
This articles seeks to clarify use of the term “ case management ( CM )  ” across care settings . The author attributes
origination of the concept of CM to community health and , in particular , to “ community service coordination ,  ” as
practiced in public health in the early 1900s , adapted to the need for follow-up with the mentally ill moving into
community settings in conjunction with “ deinstitutionalization ” during the 1960s-1970s , and related to the movement
to prevent premature institutionalization of frail elderly following the passage of Medicare and Medicaid programs . 
The purpose of CM is to “ provide a service delivery appropriate to : a ) ensure cost-effective care ; b ) provide
alternatives to institutionalization ; c ) provide access to care ; d ) coordinate services ; e ) improve the patients ’ 
functional capacity .  ”  [ This definition is attributed to Simmons and White ,  ( 1988 )  . Case management and discharge
planning : Two different worlds . In Volland ( Ed .  )  , Discharge planning : An interdisciplinary approach to continuity of
care . Owings Mills , MD : National Health Publication . Characteristics of CM include identification of the target
population ; screening , intake , and eligibility determination ; assessment ; service arrangement ; monitoring and followup ; reassessment ; care planning ; assistance of clients through a complex , fragmented health care system ; continuity
of care ; no provision of direct care ; resource allocation ; and comprehensive coordination along a continuum of
care . 
Nursing care delivery systems ( i . e .  , team nursing , primary nursing , modified primary nursing , and managed-care
models )  , on the other hand , manage patient assessment and delivery of nursing care during hospitalization ( that is ,  
 “ manage the case ” of an in-patient )  . Hospital-based CM is a misnomer and should be understood as utilization
review . Some hospital-based CM models include discharge planning and brief follow-up , but this is usually only 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 108 Interventions
with a pre-set post-hospital service system ( often connected with the hospital ) and not an opportunity to explore all
community options . 
Community CM Models , on the other hand , do explore all options in the community with the client . 
Expert Opinion = 22%
Texts and Monographs
Spradley , B .  ,  & Allender , J .  ( 1996 )  . Community health nursing : Concepts and practice ( 4th ed .  )  . 
Philadelphia : Lippincott , 108-109 , 498-501 . 
The authors use Knollmueller ’ s definition of case management ( CM )  :  “ a systematic process b which the use
assesses clients ’ needs , plans for and coordinates services , refers to other appropriate providers , and monitors and
evaluates progress to ensure that clients ’ multiple service needs are met ”  ( p . 109 )  . They discuss CM in relation to
coordination of home care services for the elderly , however , and in the context of managed care . 
Text = 66%
Bower , K .  ( 1992 )  . Designing case management programs . Case management by nurses . Washington , 
DC : American Nurses Pub , 11-22 . 
Case management ( CM ) is a mechanism through which nurses act as advocates for their clients . However , how it
is done ( i . e .  , the process of CM ) varies according to the context , purpose , objectives , and scope . Some call CM
the “ Rorschach test ” of an organization because , through it , organizational intent and priorities are revealed . 
Elements to consider include the nature of the client population to be served and the nature of the organization ( i . e .  , 
hospital , community-based , third-party payer , or social service program )  . Are case managers also providers of
services ? Is their purpose clinical , administrative , or a combination of both ? 
Characteristics of a conventional CM program include that it is episode-based ( meaning the same case manager is
assigned to the same client across the continuum of care )  ; longitudinally based ( meaning it assures continuity of
care )  ; directed toward targeted or selected client populations ; focused on care coordination ; quality driven ; fiscally
aware and responsive ; centered on clients and families ; results in increased accessibility to services ; proactive and
looking ahead to prevent problems in the future . Nursing CM is not a patient care delivery system . 
The Nursing CM process includes : 
1 . Develop a trusting , supportive relationship with client and the family through communication during early
interaction : initial case finding , screening , and eligibility assessment
2 . Complete an initial assessment of physical health status , functional capability , mental status , personal and
community support systems , financial resources , and environmental condition . The completion of the
assessment component is the review of the client ’ s problems , strengths , and needs with the client and the
family and negotiation of case management outcomes
3 . Develop the plan of care with the client and family
4 . Implement the plan of care ; the case manager may or may not also provide direct services , depending
on the policy of the employing agency ; the case manager remains an advocate on behalf of the client , 
assuring that services negotiated are delivered in a way that is respectful and meets the plan ’ s intention . 
5 . Monitor and evaluate process and outcomes throughout , modifying plan goals as needs change . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 109 Interventions
The core functions of CM is coordination of care and services . In addition , other functions typically included are
listed below . The specific mix is determined by the nature of the setting and circumstance : 
1 . Coordinating care and services ; may include directly providing services and / or managing
payment / reimbursement for those services 
2 . Case-finding and screening to identify appropriate clients for case management 
3 . Assessing comprehensively the client ’ s goals , as well as physical , functional , psychological , social , 
environmental , and financial statuses 
4 . Assessing the client ’ s informal and formal support systems 
5 . Analyzing and synthesizing all data for formulating appropriate problem statements 
6 . Developing , implementing , monitoring , and modifying a plan of care with the client and his / her family 
7 . Linking the client with appropriate institutional and community resources , advocating on behalf of the
client for scarce resources , and developing new resources where gaps exist 
8 . Procuring services , including eligibility decisions , and authorizing hospitalization and home care 
9 . Solving problems
10 . Facilitating access
11 . Providing direct patient care
12 . Providing liaison services
13 . Educating the client , family , and community support services ; facilitating the goal of self-care
14 . Facilitating communication
15 . Documenting
16 . Monitoring progress toward goal achievement , including periodic reassessment of health status
17 . Monitoring activities to ensure that services are actually being delivered and meet the needs of the
client
18 . Evaluating outcomes
In addition , issues of the extent and limits of authorities and to whom the case manager is accountable must be
established . 
Text = 52%
Weil , M .  ( 1985 )  . Key components in providing efficient and effective services . In M . Weil & J . Karls 
( eds .  )  , Case management in human service practice : A systematic approach to mobilizing resources for
clients ( pp . 29-71 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Boss . 
Weil identifies and describes eight key functions necessary to any case management ( CM ) model . These , in turn , 
are supported by three underlying processes : recording and documenting , monitoring service delivery and client
response , and , interacting with the agencies involved in the service network . She also notes that the client is
continually involved in the process . 
The eight functions are : 
1 ) Client identification and outreach : identifying the target population and the individual clients within this
population
2 ) Individual assessment : requires establishing a relationship with the client and developing the data base to
be used for service planning
3 ) Service planning and resource identification : considers such typical items such as : 
•defined priority areas requiring services
•long- and short-term objectives to measure progress for each priority area
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 110 Interventions
•specific actions related to each objective
•referral ( s ) planned
•realistic timeframes for completion
•identification of potential barriers to service utilization and delivery
4 ) Linking clients to needed services : requires establishing and using both formal and informal service
agreements with other service providers ; Weil also points out that simply making the referral is
insufficient–the client may also have to be helped to use it
5 ) Service implementation and coordination : includes “ troubleshooting ” in the service network as the plan is
implemented
6 ) Monitoring service delivery : assures that the client is receiving the expected services and that these
services are necessary and appropriate for the client . This requires an ongoing relationship with the client , 
as well as skill in interprofessional collaboration and expediting problems
7 ) Advocacy : carried out at two levels–pressing for the needs and best interests of clients and working at
the systems level for changes that will benefit the entire target population ; Middleman and Goldberg ’ s 
 “ principle of least contest ” describes advocacy as a progression of intensity from “ conferee ” to “ broker ” to
full-blown advocate and suggests using the least amount of intensity necessary to make the change occur ; to
make this decision , the following questions should be addressed ( from McGowan )  : 
•What is the source of the problem ? 
•What is the appropriate target system ? 
•What is the objective ? 
•What is the sanction for the proposed intervention ? 
•What resources are available for the intervention ? 
•With whom should the intervention be carried out ? 
•At what level should the intervention take place ? 
•What methods of intervention should be employed ? 
•What is the desired outcome ? 
8 ) Evaluation : includes looking at the outcomes realized by the client , as well as the functioning of the CM
system itself . 
Weil and Karls provide numerous models for case management , but emphasize that , while the look of the models
differ in order to best accommodate the needs of a particular target population , all must address these eight
functions . In addition , regardless of the model , the professional serving as case manager will need to fulfill three
basic types of services : 1 ) direct work with clients and families ; 2 ) coordination of services ; 3 ) advocacy for access
to services , creating them where they do not exist , and assuring the appropriateness and quality of the services . 
Text = 46%
Cohen , E .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1996 )  . Nurse case management in the 21st Century . St . Louis : Mosby . 
Chpt 1 : The New Practice Environment by V . DeBack , E . Cohen
The authors summarize recent dramatic changes in the delivery of U . S . medical services and predict that we are
moving away from the “ medical model paradigm ” thinking ( described as “ diagnoses / treatment / cure ”  ) to “ holism ,  ” 
where “ disease and the associate symptoms are seen as information rather than the focus of heath care .  .  .  . The old
paradigm sees persons as machines in either a state of good or bad repair . The new approach sees persons as
open systems of energy in constant exchange with the environment ”  ( p . 4 )  . The authors predict that in future the
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 111 Interventions
emphasis will be on provision of community-based primary care by advanced practice nurses . Besides providing
direct care services , these nurses-of-the-future will also provide care coordination and case management , to advise
clients on health behaviors , triage and monitor , advocate for families , help clients choose health services wisely , and
evaluate outcomes of care and services . To be community-based , future nurses will also need to function at the
systems and community levels , which will require the following ( from Farley )  : respect for individual and community
values ; emphasis on issues that are important to the community ; continuous leadership development ; and
community celebration . 
Chpt 18 : Case Management as a Response to Quality , Cost , and Access Imperatives by K . Bower , C . Falk
The authors propose case management ( CM ) as one of several strategies to use in assuring effective and efficient
coordination of care , along with care management , critical paths , program management , and resource management . 
The result of improved care coordination is maximal quality , managed costs , and accessibility . The authors
promote Bower and Falk ’ s five principles of case management : 
1 . Focus on clients and families with complex issues where “ complex issues ” are defined as “ the interaction
of multiple concerns , including health , social , economic , spiritual , psychological , emotional , and
environmental ”  ( p . 163 )  . They further suggest that “ all patients need their care managed ; not every patient
needs a case manager ,  ” again borrowing from Bower and Falk . 
2 . Involves negotiating , coordinating , and procuring services and resources needed by clients and families
3 . Entails using a clinical reasoning process , often exemplified in the development of critical paths . 
Minimally , the process includes referral and screening ; assessment of needs , issues , resources , and goals ; 
definitions and integration of goals ; coordination and implementation of a plan through direct or indirect
interventions ; evaluation of the plan ’ s effectiveness and efficiency ; and revision of the plan based on
changing needs and assessments 
4 . Involves developing a network based on multiple , interdisciplinary relations appropriate 
to the case manager ’ s specialty ( if any ) 
5 . Is episode- or continuum-focused , meaning the case manager may be involved just through one episode
of care coordination , or may work with a given client and family throughout several episodes . 
Text = 41%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 112 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Delegated Functions
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 113 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : DELEGATED FUNCTIONS
Definition
Delegated functions are direct care tasks a registered professional nurse carries out under the authority
of a health care practitioner , as allowed by law . Delegated functions also include any direct care tasks a
registered professional nurse entrusts to other appropriate personnel to perform . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : entire community
Problem : potential for tuberculosis infection 
Community Example : 
An eight-year-old child is diagnosed with active infectious tuberculosis . PHNs coordinate with the
school nurse to screen all potential contacts at the child ’ s school--over 800 students , faculty and staff . 
The screening clinics detect another student with active TB and many others with latent tuberculosis
infection . The PHNs subsequently screen the families of all positive students and staff . After X-rays
and diagnostic work-ups , over 35 people in eleven families are determined to require directly observed
therapy of prescribed medications . 
Systems Example : 
Public health nursing directors from several counties meet with managed care plans to negotiate a
reimbursement plan for directly observed therapy for the students and families , including the costs of
interpreters . 
Individual / Family Example : 
Physicians prescribe the proper treatment and prophylactic tuberculosis medications , and per CDC
recommendations , PHNs negotiated directly observed therapy ( DOT ) schedules with the families . This
means appointments in clinic for some people and home visits for others . The PHNs also follow up
everyone who does not keep their DOT appointments in clinic . Many of these families are non-English
speaking and require coordination with interpreters . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 114 Interventions
Relationships to Other Interventions
Delegated functions focuses on a single aspect of nursing practice , that of delegation . The intervention is described
in two ways–the PHN as the initiator of delegated functions to others ( that is , the delegator ) and as the recipient of
delegated functions from other health professionals ( that is , the delegatee )  . For PHNs whose assignment involves
the delivery of home health services or other personal health functions under delegation from a physician , the
concept of the nurse as the delegatee is undoubtedly very familiar . However , it is just as important that PHNs have
a thorough understanding of their role as delegators or initiators of delegated functions . 
Delegation primarily occurs at the individual / family level of practice . The act of delegation by the PHN to other
health personnel is theoretically possible in every other intervention . For example , a PHN may delegate a family
health aide to do health teaching on parenting to a young family , or delegate parts of vision and hearing screening to
a school health aide , or delegate certain outreach tasks to a community paraprofessional . 
In each of these examples , however , the PHN is exercising independent nursing functions .  “ Delegated functions ” is
the only intervention with the potential for PHN actions to be directed by another health professional with the legal
authority to delegate . None of the other public health nursing interventions–health teaching , counseling , 
consultation , screening , outreach , surveillance , referral / follow-up , case management , disease investigation , case
finding , collaboration , coalition building , community organizing , advocacy , social marketing , or policy development
and enforcement–requires another health professional ’ s authority . The PHNs practice these interventions
independently under the authority of their states ’ respective nurse practice act . 
This is not to suggest it is not important to communicate often and thoroughly with other health professionals with
whom you regularly collaborate . However , communication is done in the spirit of good practice , not as a legal
requirement . 
30 The National Council of State Boards of Nursing has produced an excellent resource on the topic of
delegation : Delegation and UAP Issues . Developed beginning in 1995 and regularly updated , it is available at 
< www . ncsbn . org >  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 115 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Delegated Functions 30
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
Within the scope of nursing practice , delegation is highlighted , since it is a critical judgement professional nurses
frequently make . The nurse must consider a variety of factors in making the judgement to accept delegation from a
health care professional or delegate to nursing personnel . It is not unusual for some of these factors to be in conflict
with one another . 
When accepting delegation from other health care professionals such as physicians or advanced practice nurses , as
allowed by law , the nurse must determine its appropriateness . When deciding to delegate independent nursing
functions to nursing personnel such as home health aides or school health aides , the nurse must decide what is
appropriate under the circumstances , since the accountability for the consequences of the action remains with the
person who has the authority to delegate–the professional nurse . 
When the PHN is the delegator ( that is , giving delegation to nursing personnel )  , consider
these five R ’ s : 
1 . Right Task 
Is this a delegatable task ? 
• In many states , assessment may not be delegated to others . 
• Is the complexity of the task relatively simple ? In general , if the task requires extensive training in
order to perform it reliably , consistently , and safely , it probably cannot be delegated
• Does the task require alteration based on client response ? If so , recognizing the signs for the need to
alter the task requires professional judgement and , therefore , cannot be delegated . 
2 . Right Circumstances : 
Are the care setting , available resources , and other relevant factors conducive to assuring client safety ? 
• Is there a low potential for harm to the client ? 
• Is the complexity of the nursing activity low ? 
• Is there minimal required problem solving and innovation ? 
• Is the outcome of the task predictable ? 
• Is there ample opportunity for patient interaction ? 
• Is the RN available to supervise adequately ? 
3 . Right Person : 
Is the right person delegating the right task to the right person to be performed with the right client ? 
• An RN may delegate all functions to another RN , as long as that individual agrees . 
• Others to whom a RN delegates should have reasonable knowledge , training , and experience to
assure consistent and safe performance of the task . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 116 Interventions
• Likewise , an RN should not accept the responsibility for carrying out tasks without the proper training
or experience to assure safe and effective care . 
• The client ’ s stability and / or response to the task must be predictable and not require judgements in
order for effective response . 
4 . Right Direction / Communication : 
Is what is expected clearly and concisely stated , including objectives , limits , and expectations ? 
• If the task is new to the RN or developmental in nature or its description requires complex or multiple
steps , the task probably cannot be delegated . 
5 . Right Supervision : 
• Is the supervising RN accessible for answering questions and directly supervising ? 
• Are appropriate monitoring , evaluation , and feedback assured ? As a rule , the more complex the task , 
the less experienced the delegatee , and / or the more unstable / unresponsive the client , the more
physically close the supervising RN should be . 
Although the “ five rights ” are written assuming the nurse is the delegator , the same set can be adapted
for situations in which the nurse is the delegatee ( that is , accepting delegation from a health care
professional as allowed by law )  : 
1 . Right task ? 
Is this within my given scope of practice ?  [ Note : This has nothing to do with whether you are knowledgeable
or skilled enough to carry out a given task safely . If it is outside the legal scope of practice , it is not “ right .  ”  ] 
2 . Right circumstances ? 
A task which might be appropriate to carry out in the acute care setting might not be in a home , where
environmental conditions are very different and supportive services likely unavailable . Just because a task can
be done does not necessarily mean it should be done . The major question is whether the task or function
being delegated also fits within the framework of the agency ’ s policies and procedures . 
3 . Right person ? 
Do I have the needed knowledge , training , and experience to assure safe performance of the task ? 
The Five Rights of Delegation
Right task ? 
Right circumstances ? 
Right person ? 
Right directions or communication ? 
Right supervision ? 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 117 Interventions
4 . Right directions or communications ? 
Are the orders accurate and clear ? 
5 . Right supervision ? 
Who is responsible ? Who is accountable ? Although physicians can legally delegate whatever task they wish
to whomever , the nurse still is limited by the legal scope of nursing practice . 
Remember : A registered professional nurse can delegate responsibility but not accountability , 
unless it is to someone with the same licensure . 
31 An additional resource in the relationship between professional nurses and unlicenced assistive
personnel ( UAP ) is ANA ’ s document # NP89A ( 1997 , July )  . Discussion on delegation is included . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 118 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Delegated Functions
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or particular order ; 
each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . ACCURATELY INTERPRETS THE NURSE PRACTICE ACT AND RELATED RULES . 31
Best Evidence : NCSBN Delegation : Concepts and Decision-Making Process , 1997
This includes knowledge of the scope of practice and authorities and constraints regarding direct-care tasks and
procedures , including delegation . Whether the PHN is considering accepting delegation from other health
professionals or is considering delegating independent nursing functions to nursing personnel , the “ Five Rights of
Delegation ” should be reviewed : 
‚ Right task ? 
‚ Right circumstances ? 
‚ Right person ? 
‚ Right directions or communication ? 
‚ Right supervision ? 
2 . OPERATES UNDER ESTABLISHED AGENCY AND / OR PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS , 
PROCEDURES , AND PROTOCOLS . 
Best Evidence : NCSBN Delegation : Concepts and Decision-Making Process , 1997
This applies whether the RN is the initiator or the recipient of delegation . When relevant policies and procedures
do not exist within an agency , it is the PHN ’ s responsibility to prompt the agency to generate them . They promote
consistency and establish what is “ usual and customary ” action . 
3 . RELIES ON QUALITY IMPROVEMENT MECHANISMS TO DIRECT THE DEVELOPMENT
AND IMPROVEMENT OF DELEGATION PROCESSES . 
Best Evidence : NCSBN Delegation : Concepts and Decision-Making Process , 1997
Quality improvement process should include a systematic review of delegation appropriateness . Improvement
actions include developing procedures , promoting compliance assessments , imposing sanctions , and providing
education and counseling . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 119 Interventions
4 . MONITORS PRACTICE TRENDS AND INTERPRETS THEIR IMPACT ON DELEGATION . 
Best Evidence : NCSBN Delegation : Concepts and Decision-Making Process , 1997
This recognizes that what is understood to be acceptable practice , including delegation , evolves over time . 
Acceptability will be affected by economics , technological advancements , social changes , trends in the health care
work forces , and community standards over time . 
5 . DOCUMENTS DELEGATION ACTIONS EITHER TO THE NURSE OR BY THE NURSE . 
Best Evidence : NCSBN Delegation : Concepts and Decision-Making Process , 1997
Documentation , a required function under most states ’ nurse practice acts , includes all actions reflecting use of
nursing judgment , including delegation .  

Notes from Abby
The National Council of State Boards of Nursing ( NCSBN ) document offers definitions to keep in mind : 
• Accountability : 
being responsible and answerable for actions or inactions of self or others in the context of delegation . 
• Delegation : 
transferring to a competent individual the authority to perform a selected nursing task in a selected situation . 
The nurse retains accountability for the delegation . 
• Supervision : 
providing guidance or direction , evaluation , and follow-up by the licensed nurses for accomplishment of a
nursing task delegated to unlicenced assistive personnel . 
• Unlicenced assistive personnel ( UAP )  : 
any unlicenced personnel , regardless of title , to whom nursing tasks are delegated . 
BEST EVIDENCE for Delegated Functions
The National Council of State Boards of Nursing has produced an excellent resource on the topic of delegation
which serves as the major reference for this intervention . Although considerable literature exists regarding
delegation in home health care , little literature specific to the context of public health nursing was available . The
council ’ s material is titled Delegation and UAP Issues and can be downloaded from < www . ncsbn . org >  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 120 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Health Teaching
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
32 * From The American heritage college dictionary ( 3rd ed .  )  .  ( 1993 )  . New York : Houghton Mifflin )  ; all other
definitions are from Green , Kreuter , et al . Health education planning : A diagnostic approach .  ( 1980 )  . Palo Alto , CA : 
Mayfield Pub . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 121 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : HEALTH TEACHING
Definition
Health teaching communicates facts , ideas , and skills that change knowledge , attitudes , values , beliefs , 
behaviors , and practices and skills of individuals , families , systems , and / or communities . 
• Knowledge is familiarity , awareness , or understanding gained through experience or study . 32
• Attitude is a relatively constant feeling , predisposition , or set of beliefs directed toward an object , person , 
or situation , usually in judgment of something as good or bad , positive or negative . 
• Value is a core guide to action .  * 
• Belief is a statement or sense , declared or implied , intellectually and / or emotionally accepted as true by a
person or group . 
• Behavior is an action that has a specific frequency , duration , and purpose , whether conscious or
unconscious . 
• Practice is the act or process of doing something ; performance or action or doing or performing habitually
or customarily ; making a habit of .  * 
• Skill is proficiency , facility , or dexterity that is acquired or developed through training or experience .  * 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All pregnant and childbearing women
Problem : Alcohol use during pregnancy 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 122 Interventions
Community Example : 
A PHN participates in a coalition working to reduce alcohol use by women during preconceptual
and child-bearing years . The coalition develops a series of relevant posters and distributes them to
bars , restaurants , other establishments serving alcoholic beverages , and liquor retailers . 
Systems Example : 
A PHN provides an inservice training to physicians , midwives , and family planning specialists
highlighting new research findings on the effect of alcohol on pregnancy . The PHN promotes
providers screening all pregnant women for alcohol use and consistently giving the message 
 “ absolutely no alcohol use during pregnancy .  ” 
Individual / Family Example : 
The PHN incorporates information on the impact of alcohol use on fetal development into the
reproductive health class that the PHN teaches to high school and community college students . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Health teaching is used in conjunction with virtually all interventions . It is frequently implemented in conjunction
with , or sequentially to , counseling and / or consultation . Health teaching influences the knowledge , attitudes , 
values , beliefs , practices , skills , and behaviors of individuals , families , systems , or communities . While counseling
focuses on the emotional component inherent in any attempt to change , consultation seeks to generate alternative
solutions to problems . 
For example , if you provide health teaching about the prevalence , incidence , and causes of family violence at a
community meeting , the information is likely to trigger emotional responses . Implementing counseling strategies in
conjunction with health teaching allows you to build on the energy associated with the emotional response and
further enhance the learning opportunity . A community may respond to information on family violence with powerful
emotions like anger , outrage , fear , and grief . These emotions can motivate it to learn more about the problem and its
causes . If the community accepts this new information and decides that something must be done to change its
tolerance of family violence , you may assist it in exploring alternatives . That is , you provide consultation . 
While you can effectively implement each of the three interventions alone , they most often occur together , or in
succession , and are often repeated in a cycle : 
new knowledge
consideration of emotional response 
alternative 
actions 
actions
This cycle is repeated until an acceptable solution is found . 
33 Adapted from : Glanz , K .  & Rimer , B .  ( 1997 , September )  . Theory at a glance : A guide for health promotion practice 
( NIH Pub .  # 97-3896 ) National Cancer Institute , pp . 18-20 . The Health Belief Model is highlighted because of its wide use and
over 40 years of development . However , other conceptual frameworks are certainly also applicable in the resolution of public
health issues . Those PHNs seeking further information are advised to see Glanz and Rimer ’ s text edited with Frances Lewis 
( 1997 )  , Health behavior and health education : Theory , research , and practice ( 2nd ed )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 123 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Health Teaching33
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
Step 1 : Assess the client ’ s knowledge and perception of the risk or threat to health . 
Premise : A client ( that is , an individual , family , group , organization , system , or community ) whose beliefs
and values prioritize good health is more likely to take action to promote health than one who does not care
about health or who enjoys ill health . 
Example : Does the client believe that smoking is related to lung disease ? 
Step 2 : Personalize risk based on a client ’ s current behavior or characteristics . 
Premise : Clients believe they are at risk for acquiring a problem are more likely to act than those who
perceive minimal or no risk . Likewise , a client who believes acquiring a condition would have serious
negative consequences is more likely to take action . 
Example : What is the client ’ s smoking or tobacco use history ? What does that suggest for levels of
risk ? 
Step 3 : Identify the perceived susceptibility , if too low . 
Premise : If a people do not believe that they are at risk , they are not likely to take any action for change . 
The reality of their vulnerability and susceptibility needs to be challenged . 
Example : Can providing new facts and information change the client ’ s belief about personal risk ? 
Could specifying the consequences of the risk and / or the condition increase perceived susceptibility ? 
Step 4 : Define actions to take : How , where , when . Assist the client in understanding what can be done , what
needs to be done , and that change is possible . 
Premise : Client who believe themselves capable of successfully performing the suggested behavior are more
likely to take action . 
Example : Review the variety of ways to reduce or eliminate use of tobacco products ; help the client
see how to master what needs to be done . 
Step 5 : Provide training and / or guidance to perform the desired action . 
Premise : Rehearsing the action provides clients with confidence that they are able to take it . 
Example : Role playing , or coaching the client through a walk-through of the action . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 124 Interventions
Step 6 : Clarify the positive effects to be expected by personalizing benefits to the client ’ s particular
situation . 
Premise : Clients ’ perceptions of risk , benefits , and self-efficacy are modified by three sets of variables : 
• Demographic : age , sex , race , ethnicity , education , and income
• Interpersonal : expectations of significant others , family patterns of health expectations , and
interactions with health professionals
• Situational : cultural acceptance of health behaviors , reference-group norms , and information from
nonpersonal sources ( such as mass media ) 
Example : If a pregnant teen understands that smoking during pregnancy is related to babies with
lower birth weights , she may perceive that as a benefit , allowing an easier labor and delivery and
quicker return to her pre-pregnancy weight . 
Step 7 : Identify and reduce barriers through reassurance , incentives , and assistance . 
Premise : In order for the individual to act , the perceived benefits from taking action ( pros ) must outweigh
the perceived costs ( cons )  . This step focuses on anything an individual might believe to inhibit or prohibit
taking action . Cost , inconvenience , unpleasantness , and extent of required change in lifestyle are all
examples . 
Example : Determine what the client believes to be barriers and assist in their resolution . 
Step 8 : Provide how-to information , promote awareness , and provide reminders . 
Premise : An individual with equally weighted pros and cons to taking action may be motivated finally by
the addition of just a few variables . This category includes experiential motivators meaningful to the
individual that prompt immediate action , or the “ final straw that broke the camel ’ s back .  ” Cues can be just
about anything , but typically include such things as a sudden heightened awareness of vulnerability ( such as
having a same-age friend unexpectedly die )  , intensified availability of information or new information ( such
as gaining computer access to the Internet )  , natural life transitions , such as aging , or an intensified sense of
self-efficacy . 
Example : Break down whatever action is required into small , doable steps ; pair the client with
others who have been successful in taking the desired action ; provide reinforcement and assurance . 
Step 9 : Evaluate progress . 
Premise : Providing feedback on progress toward goals is in itself reinforcing . Small concrete measures of
progress are best ; celebrate success . 
Example : The client now has a workable plan of how she will get herself and her children to safety
the next time her partner becomes violent in their home . 
34 Much of the best practices material cited is from Marilyn Boyd ’ s chapter on teaching strategies in her
book co-authored with Graham , Gleit , and Whitman , Health Teaching in Nursing Practice ( 1998 )  . She notes that 
 “ effective teaching is a combination of the use of good communication skills , an in-depth assessment [ of learners ’ 
capabilities and preferences ]  , and effective teaching strategies ”  ( p . 203 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 125 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Health Teaching
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or particular
order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . ASSESSES THE KNOWLEDGE , ATTITUDES , VALUES , BELIEFS , BEHAVIORS , PRACTICES , 
AND SKILLS OF THE LEARNER AND THE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT . 34
Best Evidence : Boyd , Graham , and others
The PHN collects data through : 
A . Observations regarding the learner
‚ cognitive developmental characteristics
‚ presence / absence and nature of support system
‚ general health status
‚ current health maintenance practices
‚ risk factors
‚ access to care
‚ psychological status
‚ culture
‚ belief and values system . 
B . Observations regarding the learning environment
‚ facilities
‚ physical aspects
‚ organization of services available
‚ philosophy , policies , procedures of setting
‚ health delivery system
‚ community orientation and values
‚ roles of other health-care providers
‚ government intervention in health care
‚ geographic location of practice site . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 126 Interventions
2 . POSSESSES CONTENT KNOWLEDGE OF WHAT IS TO BE TAUGHT AND SELECTS THE
APPROPRIATE TEACHING METHODS . 
Best Evidence : Boyd , Graham , and others ; Spradley , and Allender
Not only do you have to know what you are teaching , but you have to know how to deliver it . The Expert
Panel strongly recommends that PHNs must have complete , up-to-date knowledge and theory of any subject they
teach . 
A . Effective methods for oral communication in 1 : 1 teaching
‚ Provide comfortable learning environments , free from outside distractions
‚ Provide “ advance organizers ” or previews of what the learner will learn in order to shape learning
expectations
‚ Present the most important information in the first third and last fourth of the presentation , as that is
when the learner retains the most information
‚ “ Check-in ” with the learner to test understanding throughout the presentation by asking open-ended
questions as time permits
‚ Use vocabulary and language style at the level of the client ’ s understanding ; be as simple and clear and
plain as possible
‚ Use repetition to strengthen learning
‚ Do not overload the learner with inessential information ; people forget about half of what they hear
within five minutes . 
B . Effective methods of nonverbal communication in 1 : 1 teaching 
Be alert and sensitive to cultural differences in the meaning conveyed by such nonverbal communication as eye
contact and the distance between persons . 
Be alert and sensitive to immediacy , or the degree of “ closeness ” between individuals who are interacting : 
‚ touching
‚ physical distance between teacher and learner
‚ forward lean ( distance from your shoulders to your hips , if you are leaning sideways ) 
‚ looking directly into the face of the other
‚ measure of the body ’ s torso rotation ( how much you turn at the hips )  . 
Be alert and sensitive to relaxation : 
‚ hold your arm asymmetrically increases the look of relaxation ( arms not straight ) 
‚ lean sideways ( away from the vertical ) 
‚ place leg asymmetrically ( do not stand with ankles together ) 
‚ relax hands
‚ relax neck 
‚ relax with a backward lean . 
Be alert and sensitive to responsiveness : 
‚ face
‚ voice
‚ speech rate
‚ speech volume . 
35 Much of the best practices material cited for group teaching is from Health Teaching in Nursing
Practice ( 1998 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 127 Interventions
Learning occurs most effectively when verbal and nonverbal communication are in synch with one another ; 
nonverbal behavior can either reinforce or negate what is being said . 
C . Effective methods for group teaching35
For maximum interaction , limit the size of the group to 6-8 persons ; if larger groups are necessary , arrange
for small-group interactions within the session . It is the interaction which is critical to learning . Be alert and
sensitive to group development and adapt teaching methods to group stages : 
Stage One : establishment of a sense of belonging and identification of goals , facilitated by creation of an
open and accepting environment . 
Stage Two : role assumption within the group . In general , members assume the function of one or more of
the following roles : 
a . Task Roles ( that is , those with formal purpose in the group ) 
‚ Clarifier – interprets and seeks understanding of group goals
‚ Informer – shares information from personal experience or knowledge
‚ Evaluator – measures group progress toward goals
b . Maintenance Roles ( that is , those with informal purpose in the group ) 
‚ Gatekeeper – helps keep communication lines open within the group and keeps members
engaged
‚ Compromiser – seeks acceptable decisions or actions ; is willing to yield or admit error
‚ Encourager – praises individual contributions to the group ; serves as morale booster
Stage Three : attachment to group solidifies , and it becomes more independent from facilitator 
Barbara Graham points out that , whether an educational activity is planned for an individual or a group , 
principles of teaching and learning apply . In group teaching , however , there are more individual differences
to consider ( p . 308 )  . She notes that , besides the obvious efficiency which
group teaching provides , it also has the following advantages : 
‚ provision of a supportive environment in which members can learn new skills and behaviors
‚ interactions fulfill members ’ need for belonging and importance
‚ potential of rich learning from others ’ experiences
36 The American Academy of Nursing produced a report on culturally competent care in 1995 that serves as
an excellent resource . Diversity , Marginalization , and Culturally Competent Health Care : Issues in Knowledge
Development , written by Davis , Dumar , and Ferketich , is available as Pub .  # G-189 by calling 1-800-637-0323 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 128 Interventions
D . Effective methods of written communication 
Preparing written materials is an important teaching tool for PHNs . Boyd provides important tips in this
area , noting that most written material tends to be beyond its readers ’ ability . The last grade of formal
education is not a good indicator . Studies have shown that average reading levels do not exceed the
eighth-grade level . Twenty-five percent of the adult population is functionally illiterate , meaning they read
below the eighth-grade level . 
Keeping the following tips in mind can improve the chances your writing will be understood : 
‚ when describing a procedure , use a question-and-answer format
‚ use one idea per paragraph ; limit each paragraph to no more than three or four sentences
‚ use questions to engage the reader
‚ limit sentences to 10 words or less , and avoid complex structures
‚ use the active , rather than the passive , voice
‚ limit words to those with three or fewer syllables
3 . ADAPTS TEACHING METHODS TO MEET THE NEEDS OF THE LEARNER . 
Best Evidence : Freimuth and Mettger
In their article on “ hard to reach ” audiences ( such as persons of low socioeconomic status , ethnic minorities , and / or
those with low literacy ) Freimuth and Mettger ( 1990 ) challenge readers to stop thinking about these groups as
difficult to reach and teach and start thinking about them as different to reach and teach . 
They suggest : 
‚ emphasizing differences rather than deficits
‚ acknowledging that all people have the same underlying competence as those in the mainstream of
the dominant culture ( that is , operating from the position that all people can learn ) 
‚ placing responsibility for changes in health behaviors on the social system within which a person
lives , rather than only on individuals themselves
‚ saying ,  “ What would you like to know ?  ” rather than ,  “ Here ’ s what I think you need to know .  ” 
4 . ADAPTS THE TEACHING METHODS TO ACCOMMODATE THE CULTURAL
PREFERENCES36 OF THE LEARNER . 
Best Evidence : Heiss in Smith and Mauer ; Swanson and Nies ; Malavisic
The effective teacher considers the influence of cultural beliefs and values on well-being , health , illness , and disease . 
Public health nurses must be knowledgeable about the health beliefs of cultures other than his or her own , given the 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 129 Interventions
increasing mobility of populations across the globe . Thus , it is particularly important for the PHN to address the
challenging health needs of immigrant and refugee populations . 
Swanson and Nies provide advice from Davis and others regarding how to increase cultural sensitivity : 
‚ confront your own racism and ethnocentrism
‚ be sensitive to both commonalities and diversity within ethnic minority populations
‚ seek knowledge about the dynamics of biculturalism ( that is , how a particular ethnic group may be a
synthesis of several cultures ) 
‚ seek understanding of how social and structural factors influence and shape behaviors
‚ avoid a “ blame the victim ” ideology ( p . 169 )  . 
5 . APPROPRIATELY APPLIES ADULT LEARNING PRINCIPLES AND THEORIES . 
Best Evidence : Arnold ; Freimuth and Mettger ; Swanson and Nies
Several authors focus on the importance of the teacher understanding differences when the learners are adults . 
Swanson and Nies , for instance , report on Knowles ’ assumptions about adult learners : 
Need to know : 
adults need to know why they should learn this new thing ; therefore , the PHN must present the
direct benefits early in the teaching . 
Self-concept : 
adults are accustomed to independence and self-direction and , therefore , need to be provided
choices and options . 
Experience : 
adults have many life experiences from which they have learned ; this will transfer to new situations
and may bias their perspective on new or differing information ; the PHN can reduce potential
barriers by using experiential methods , problem solving , case studies , and discussion . 
Readiness to Learn : 
the PHN understands that adult learners ’ capacity to learn is influenced by their age and life stage 
( such as being a parent to children or providing care for aging parents )  . 
Orientation to Learning : 
adults respond best to “ present oriented ” teaching , which provides information and problem solving
within the context of their everyday lives . 
Motivation : 
adults are driven by powerful internal factors such as self-esteem , life goals , quality of life , and
responsibility ; the more the PHN can use these factors to “ hook ” the learner , the greater the
likelihood of success . 
6 . COLLABORATES WITH OTHERS IN THE COMMUNITY COMMITTED TO IMPACTING
THE SAME ISSUE . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 130 Interventions
Since most health teaching strategies are planned and implemented in conjunction with other partners , PHNs must
know how to promote effective mass communication .  ( Media used in mass communication include radio , television , 
films , e-mail , Internet , newspapers , magazines , flyers , etc .  ) Although this is often where health teaching overlaps
with some aspects of social marketing , Helvie cites Flay and Burton ’ s principles : 
Acceptability : 
the message of what is to change and the credibility of the source promoting the change must be acceptable
to the audience
Message Dissemination : 
‚ the selection of media to promote the change must include the benefit to the media provider ( that is , 
it is to their benefit to be associated with the change project ) 
‚ the message should be repeated often and consistently over a long time in order to be effective
Attention Grabbing : 
the communication must grab the audience ’ s attention and provide a memorable message
Stimulates Interpersonal Communication : 
the more the message is discussed among audience members , the more likely those discussing it will take
action
Instigates Change : 
the more society changes , the more individuals within society change ( pp . 299-300 )  . 
7 . EVALUATES EFFECTIVENESS OF THE INTERVENTION . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
An important part of the initial planning for health teaching is to select relevant measures or indicators of change in a
personal or community health capacity . For instance , each component of the Health Belief Model has indicators
that can be tracked and measured for change . 
If health teaching is intended to change , for instance ,  .  .  . 
‚ knowledge , then measure cognitive changes , such as increased or decreased retention of information
and / or accuracy in applying that new information 
‚ attitude , then measure increased positive or decreased negative responses to a person , action , or idea
‚ values , then measure changes in certainty about core guides to action 
‚ belief , then measure changes in what a person believes to be true
‚ behavior , then measure increased frequency of the desired behavior or decreased frequency of the
undesired behavior 
‚ practice , then measure changes in actions or the process of doing something 
‚ skill , then measure observed changes in an individual ’ s accuracy , proficiency , and / or speed in carrying out
desired tasks or functions
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 131 Interventions
Provider Education
Definition
Provider education is the application of health teaching to change the knowledge , attitudes , values , 
beliefs , behaviors , practices , and skills of systems within communities , whose missions also impact the
health status of populations . 
Occasionally , PHNs encounter circumstances where their professional partners lack current knowledge of issues . 
Or , as is more often the case , because of the training and socialization other professionals experience , they prefer
different models or styles of working . This is challenging , when members of a multidisciplinary group are expected
to function as a team . When a PHN needs to change attitudes , behaviors , beliefs , knowledge , practices , and / or
skills of groups and organizations in the community ( that is , create a systems ’ change )  , provider education is the
intervention of choice . 
The basic steps of health teaching at the systems level are the same as the basic steps of health education at any
other practice level . However , there is a small , but growing literature surrounding the specifically focused provider
education intervention . Thus , provider education has its own set of best practices . While the majority of the
literature focuses on providing education to physicians , the findings have general application across disciplines . 
BEST PRACTICES for Provider Education
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or particular
order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . COMPLETES A COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT OF SYSTEMS IN A COMMUNITY THAT
INFLUENCE HEALTH . 
Best Evidence : Neff , Gaskill , Prihoda , and others ; Sechrest , Backer , and Rogers
As with any health teaching activity , the first step is to find out as much as one can about the “ audience ,  ” or those
whose knowledge , attitude , and beliefs you are attempting to influence or change . Of particular interest are : 
‚ social influences
‚ level of knowledge
‚ nature of the practice setting
‚ perceived barriers
‚ level of interest or motivation to change
‚ openness to change
‚ anticipated barriers to change . 
Thorough assessment of these areas allows for selection of strategies more likely to succeed . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 132 Interventions
2 . TARGETS THE EDUCATIONAL CONTENT TO THE LEVEL OF THE PROVIDER . 
Best Evidence : Mittman , Tonesk , and Jacobson
Many methods designed to alter knowledge and attitudes of professionals , especially physicians , are described in
the health care literature . Most of these rely on the traditional model of providing information , education , and
financial incentives to achieve behavioral change ; however , at best , these have demonstrated only modest , if any , 
effectiveness . 
Given that traditional models have not worked well , Mittman and others developed models based on social
influence theory . These models activate other more subtle , but powerful influences , such as : 
‚ emphasizing shared beliefs and assumptions
‚ group norms
‚ organizational culture
‚ related behavioral factors . 
These models basically fall into three groups . 
‚ strategies using interpersonal influence , such as academic detailing , providing training such as
apprenticeships , consultation and peer discussions , and socialization programs ( for example , 
orientation to a new position )  ; these are usually 1 : 1 or small groups
‚ strategies using persuasion , such as opinion leaders , quality assurance programs , study groups , 
involvement in generating solutions to perceived problems , and socialization efforts ( for example , 
grand rounds )  ; these are usually moderate-sized groups
‚ Strategies using mass media , such as cable-TV inservice programs , distribution of printed
materials , etc .  ; these accommodate large groups . 
In general , interpersonal strategies such as training or apprenticeships and persuasion strategies such as
implementing and maintaining quality assurance programs , study groups , and rounds resulted in the greatest transfer
of knowledge and norm change , but required considerable effort . Conversely , none of the strategies requiring
minimal effort ( for example , distribution of printed material ) resulted in significant change in both knowledge and
norms . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 133 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Academic detailing is a method widely used to influence knowledge and attitude of health care professionals . 
Soumerai and Avorn ( 1990 ) offer an in-depth view of the process of academic detailing : 
• assess and analyze motivators for change using such methods as focus group interviews
• establish credibility ; attach yourself to someone with known credibility if need be
• approach the most significant opinion leaders available to you within the group you are trying to influence
• anticipate arguments and address them as one of several ways to see an issue ; do not discount arguments
that may be offered
• get the person or group that you are attempting to influence to ask questions ; engaging them in a dialogue is
essential for them to “ buy ” your concept
• concentrate on a small number of important messages that you want understood and repeat them 
• provide feedback and positive reinforcement for even the smallest steps toward change in the desired
direction
• provide well-illustrated written material that emphasizes the main points in a straightforward way as
important complements ; they will not trigger change by themselves , but will serve as reminders after you
leave
• always have a practical alternative if you cannot achieve the entire change desired ; some movement in the
desired direction is better than no movement
• be well prepared to “ make your case ” in five to eight minutes 
3 . ENHANCES THE BASIS OF HIS / HER PROFESSIONAL CREDIBILITY . 
Best Evidence : Tomson , Hasselstrom , and others ; Sechrest , Backer , and Rogers
Most professionals prefer to learn new information from someone they consider of the same or higher stature within
their own discipline . Tomson and others found , for instance , that , to improve physicians ’ prescribing behavior , it
took sending a team of a clinical pharmacologist and a pharmacist to provide short , intense teaching on the best use
of drugs to control asthma . 
Those PHNs involved in provider education activities need to present themselves as credible . Being well read in the
related scientific literature and as knowledgeable as possible about the issue are crucial . The PHN ’ s credibility can
also be enhanced by considering what researchers have learned attempting to change physicians ’ knowledge levels . 
For instance , researchers determined whomever was delivering the new information was most successful when they
could : 
‚ present it in the language physicians were accustomed to using
‚ do it within a minimum amount of time
‚ frame it in a way that quickly identified their benefit . 
Likewise , Sechrest , Bacher , and Rogers noted that it is critical to determine accurately the way an audience prefers to
get its information . Persons with highly scheduled time use , for instance , are unlikely to use reading material to any
extent . They suggest one of the most powerful strategies to change provider behavior is to influence the opinion 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 134 Interventions
leader within the group . Other group members are more likely to value the opinion of a peer whom they respect than
take the time to research and formulate their own opinion . 
4 . STRUCTURES THE APPROACH . 
Best Evidence : Soumerai ; Gomel ; Tomson ; Davis ; Soumerai and Avorn
A structured approach to provider education should include both targeted and balanced messages , use of
complementary methods , active participation of providers , intermittent reinforcement and follow-up , and practice
application . 
These authors ’ suggestions for effectively changing professionals ’ practices apply the principles of adult education
and learning . In general , their recommendations use principles of altering knowledge , attitudes , and behaviors
described in the HBM and other models for change . 
‚ A literature review by Dave Davis , a physician at the University of Toronto , found that attempts to change
physicians ’ performance , using both appeared more effective 
< external methods ( such as academic detailing and opinion leaders )  
< practice-based methods ( such as reminders and patient-satisfaction information ) in changing practice than
audit and educational materials . In addition , providing training seminars without enabling or practice
reinforcement follow-up resulted in little change
‚ Gomel and others tested three methods to increase physicians ’ use of a brief intervention to reduce alcohol
use among patients . The physicians received information through direct mail , telemarketing , or academic
detailing . While academic detailing was found to result in the greatest change , telemarketing was found to
be most cost effective . Based on the evidence reviewed , both personalizing the information when
delivered ( that is , assisting the physician in anticipating how practice and / or patient outcomes would be
improved ) and providing some kind of reinforcement as follow-up were important to adoption of a
change . 
5 . CAREFULLY CRAFTS THE PROCESS TO EFFECTIVELY DISSEMINATE INFORMATION . 
Best Evidence : Mittman , Tonesk , and Jacobson ; Sechrest , Bacher , and Rogers
The PHN should keep in mind the clear findings from research that simply mailing or delivering statements of the
desired change ( such as written standards , guidelines , evidence summaries , etc .  ) does not work . It is reported that
for every dollar spent to research and develop new information , an additional dollar should be expended for
effective dissemination . That is , dissemination that results in actual use of the information . In a summary of ideas
for effective dissemination of health information presented at a national conference in 1991 , Sechrest , Bacher , and
Rogers provide the following insights : 
Regarding Audiences .  .  . 
‚ Know the audiences ’ general capacity to understand and tailor information accordingly . What is obvious to
a PhD-prepared researcher is not going to be obvious to those with lesser preparation . Conversely , what 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 135 Interventions
is obvious to a practitioner with years of “ front line ” experience may not be understood by a researcher
unless expressed in academic language
‚ Know what will motivate audience members to care about the message or “ attend ” to it 
‚ Understand that , within a given audience , members can vary greatly in their motivation toward change . 
Audience segmentation ( that is , knowing the age , sex , and occupation of the audience ) is useful in
understanding those variances . 
Regarding Messages .  .  . 
‚ Short and succinct is best
‚ “ Repetition and redundancy are the allies of communicators and disseminators ”  ( p . 191 ) 
‚ Relatively small “ chunks ” of information are more easily absorbed by most audiences ; use serial messages
to convey a larger amount of complex information
‚ Most audiences do not care about the source of a message , as long as it is thought to have come from a
reliable source relevant to the topic . 
Regarding the Methods .  .  . 
‚ Know the audience and their prime sources of information
‚ Understand the informal network of information sharing among peers , identify opinion leaders within the
network , and know how to access them
‚ Every audience will require multiple communication approaches to assure the message is heard
‚ The most effective communication methods will likely be highly interactive , allowing users a high degree of
discretion in how the message is received and when . 
Notes from Abby
In a recent article published in Public Health Nursing , Lia-Hoagberg and others report on the outcome of a
project by the Minnesota Department of Health / Section of Public Health Nursing to develop and disseminate
guidelines for public health nursing in two practice areas : promoting positive parenting in two age groups ( schoolaged children and adolescents ) and preventing violence against women and children . The dissemination process
consisted of a two-hour inservice for PHN staff held at convenient regional sites . The inservice introduced staff
nurses to the purpose and intent of practice guidelines and ways to use the manuals , but provided no training on the
content itself . Six months after dissemination , follow-up surveys and telephone interviews found a high value placed
on the guidelines , but minimal utilization . Barriers identified included lack of time in the work day , complex guideline
structure , and competing agency demands and priorities . Recommendations included assuring agency management
support for guideline use , developing a simplified guideline format , and providing mentorship in their use . 
Lia-Hoagberg , B .  , et al .  ( 1999 , December )  . Public health nursing practice guidelines : An evaluation of dissemination and use . 
Nursing Outlook , 16 ( 6 )  , 397-404 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 136 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Health Teaching
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and academic
experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end of each
annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . It
reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Kok , G .  , van den Borne , B .  ,  & Mullen , P . D .  ( 1997 )  . Effectiveness of health education and health
promotion : Meta-analyses of effect studies and determinants of effectiveness . Patient Education and
Counseling , 30 , 19-27 . 
Kok and van den Borne use models for health education and promotion developed by American researchers ( and
especially the work of Patricia Mullen ) to analyze recent efforts in the Netherlands . As they introduce concepts
and findings from earlier meta-analyses on the subjects [ see note ]  , they provide a good overview of the issues for
anyone new to the topic and its related issues . They rely on Greene and Kreuter ’ s ( 1991 ) definitions : 
Health promotion is “ the combination of educational and environmental supports for actions and conditions of living
conducive to health .  ” 
Health education is “ any combination of learning experiences designed to facilitate voluntary behavior conducive to
health .  ” 
The authors conclude that “ health education often is only useful , when other means are chosen as well , such as
means for action or laws ”  ( p . 21 )  . They also conclude that health education interventions can only be effective
when the “ epidemiological and psycho-social bases are sound ” and suggest three major pitfalls : designing a health
education campaign against a non-existing problem ; focusing on the wrong behavior to change ; or directing a
program toward the wrong determinant of behavior . To avoid these , the authors drew these conclusions from their
analyses : 
1 . Health education effectiveness depends on an intervention ’ s quality and especially on the extent to which it
adheres to social learning theory : the program must be relevant to the learner ; it must provide learners with the
opportunity to individualize new information to their own circumstances ; learners must receive relevant feedback ; 
the program must provide reinforcement of the new behavior through social supports ; the program must reduce any
barriers to the learners ’ taking action . 
2 . Health education must be clearly positioned in the health promotion program . 
3 . Systematic planning includes analysis of behavioral determinants , development of an intervention based on those
determinants , and implementation of the interventions . 
4 . Use of learning principles in developing the intervention is critical . 
5 . Systematic implementation of the intervention to its conclusion is crucial for success . The authors note that
findings of ineffective health education are often related to incomplete implementation or deviation from the planned
approach .  
[ Note : These authors ’ work is based on a subset of an earlier work : Lipsey , M . W .  ,  & Wilson , D . B . The efficacy
of psychological , education , and behaviors treatment : Confirmation from meta-analysis . Am Psychologist , 48 , 
1181-1209 .  ] 
Meta-analysis = 46 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 137 Interventions
Research Reports
Reutter , L .  ,  & Ford , J .  ( 1997 , July )  . Enhancing client competence melding professional and client
knowledge in public health practice . Public Health Nursing , 14 ( 3 )  , 143-150 . 
Part of a larger study looking at changing PHN practice in Canada , this qualitative study includes interviews with 28
Alberta PHNs . The article describes how PHNs exchange information with their clients to improve the clients ’ 
competence in self-care . The authors conclude that PHNs do this primarily through sharing their own professional
knowledge ( by providing information for immediate concerns , being direct , providing options , and presenting a
different viewpoint ) and building on the client ’ s experiential knowledge ( by acknowledging and valuing the client ’ s
current situation , giving positive feedback ,  “ being there ” –or supporting the clients ’ right to pursue a course of action
based on their experience , and using gentle persuasion )  . This is described as “ the strategy of validating , and then
building on , client strengths [ which ] is a cornerstone of public health nursing and foundational to health promotion ”  
( p . 149 )  . The authors suggest that PHNs are successful when their “ expertise lies in knowing how to provide
informational , emotional , and appraisal support ”  ( p . 149 )  . 
Qualitative = 68%
Cantrell , J .  ( 1998 )  . District nurses ’ perceptions of health education . Journal of Clinical Nursing , 7 , 89-
96 . 
In this study from Scotland , the author , a nurse educator , interviewed a convenience sample of district nurses
regarding their perceptions of health education , their own practice in regard to health education , and facilitators and
barriers to their accomplishing health education .  [ Note : In this case , Downie et al .  ’ s ( 1990 ) definition of heath
education was used :  “ Health education is communication activity , aimed at enhancing positive health and preventing
or diminishing ill-health in individuals and groups , through influencing the beliefs and attitudes and behaviours of
those with power and of the community at large .  ”  ] Although the purpose of the interviews was to gather
information for a survey design , the author saw the findings as compelling on their own . She concludes : 1 ) Health
education is seen as a core function of the district nurse , but evaluation of its impact is needed ; 2 ) Nurse managers
and general practitioners need to acquire a greater awareness ( and support ) of the district nurse ’ s health education
role ; and 3 ) a broader investigation should be carried out to determine the value placed on health education by
clients . 
Qualitative = 25 . 5%
Expert Opinion
Freimuth , V .  ,  & Mettger , W .  ( 1990 , June )  . Is there a hard to reach audience ? Public Health Reports , 
105 ( 3 )  , 232-238 . 
The authors offer alternative conceptualizations of audiences typically considered “ hard to reach ” or “ difficult ” in
community health campaigns . They review characteristics attributed to these groups and conclude that they reflect
the “ communicators ’ frustration in trying to reach people unlike themselves in the failure of many campaigns to
change high-risk behaviors ”  ( p . 232 )  . They select three characteristics in particular–SES , certain ethnic minorities , 
and low literacy–plus several preconceptions , as they target their own investigation . The preconceptions include
that the “ hard to reach ” are fatalistic , with a pervasive sense of helplessness , have poor information processing
skills , have limited access to communication channels ( that is , rely almost totally on TV as their information source )  , 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 138 Interventions
and distrust any dominant institution . They proceed to debunk these and offer alternative conceptualizations : 1 ) 
that differences among people , rather than deficits should be emphasized ; 2 ) that blame should be directed toward
society , rather than individuals ; 3 ) that communication should be seen as a dialogue , rather than a “ telling to ”  ; this
suggests that any attempt at successful communication considers Dervin ’ s approach ( see note )  : people inform
themselves primarily at moments of need , and people rely first on their own cognitive responses . If these are
insufficient , they turn to sources close to them or those contacted habitually . People judge information on how it
helps them , rather than on its expertise or credibility . The authors conclude that health education will be successful
if , 1 ) the unique strengths possessed by the audience are respected and , 2 ) communication is defined as an active
exchange between participants .  [ Note : see Dervin , B .  ( 1989 )  . In Rice , R . E .  & Atkin , C . K .  ( Eds .  )  , Audience as
listener and learner , teacher and confidante : The sense-making approach in public communication
campaigns ( pp . 67-86 )  . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications )  . 
Expert Opinion = 47 . 5%
Malavisic , A .  ( 1996 , June 26 )  . Power to the people . Nursing Times , 92 ( 26 )  , 54-55 . 
An international health worker , this author provides firsthand evidence of what happens when the importance of
health is placed in the context of individuals ’ daily lives rather than of foreign or other inappropriate concepts ( such
as those of Western culture )  . She suggests that “ when learning is a two-way process , where the individual ’ s ideas
and opinions are respected and where people are encouraged to question and criticize openly , only then can
positive change occur ”  ( p . 54 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 44%
Stubblefield , C .  ( 1997 , July / Aug )  . Persuasive communication : Marketing health promotion . Nursing
Outlook , 45 ( 4 )  , 173-177 . 
The author , a nurse educator , proposes that nurses can increase their effectiveness as health educators by
integrating marketing principles into their health promotion efforts ; she suggests adopting the “ message-learning ” 
approach to persuasion . Characteristics of the message “ sender ” which promote acceptance include : if the
message is heard from someone considered an authority or professionally competent regarding the subject and , 
when the topic is serious , alternating rates of speech ( but not pitch ) is associated with improved recall . 
Characteristics of the message itself that improve its being heard ( that is ,  “ message framing ”  ) include using
persuasive messages that arouse fear ; using messages that intentionally create some cognitive dissonance ; providing
vivid , concrete information ( e . g .  , using case studies ) versus abstract information , or using negative , rather than
positive , appeals for health behavior change .  ( For instance , telling women about the risks of not obtaining
mammography proved more motivational than telling them about its benefits .  ) For those concerned that using 
 “ marketing ” strategies to change health behaviors is manipulative , Stubblefield offers Lefebvre and Flora ’ s list of 
 “ ethics ” questions to consider : 1 ) What are we selling ? 2 ) Who are we selling it to ? 3 ) How are we selling it ? 4 ) 
Whose side are we on ? 
Expert Opinion = 29%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 139 Interventions
Texts and Monographs
Swanson , J .  ,  & Nies , M .  ( 1997 )  . The nurse ’ s role in health education : The cement . Community Health
Nursing ( 2nd ed .  )  .  ( pp . 168-177 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
The authors suggest that although PHNs must be familiar with learning theories and health education models ,  “  [ a ] t
the core of health education is a therapeutic relationship that develops between the nurse and individuals , families , 
and the community . Nurses are the cement of the process and serve as catalysts for change by delivering
humanistic care .  .  .  ”  ( p . 168 )  . The capacity to include all involved sets up the trust or “ cement ” necessary in order
for learning to happen .  “ Educating does not begin with the first instructional word but rather starts with establishing
an atmosphere conducive to learning ”  ( p . 169 )  . This requires PHNs to 1 ) confront their own racism and
ethnocentrism ; 2 ) be sensitive to intergroup and intragroup cultural diversity and commonalities in ethnic minority
populations ; 3 ) seek knowledge about the dynamics of biculturalism ; 4 ) seek understanding of how social and
structural factors influence and shape behaviors ; and 5 ) avoid “ blame the victim ” ideology . Swanson and Nies offer
the National Cancer Institutes ’ six-stage framework based on principles of social marketing , health education , and
mass communication theory as a framework that works at all levels of health education intervention . The stages are : 
1 ) planning and strategy selection that requires understanding the learning needs and preferences of the target
audience ; 2 ) selecting channels ( that is , how will the target audience be reached ?  )  , choosing format ( that is , one-onone , use of groups , lecture , role playing , brainstorming , etc .  )  , and materials / media ( that is , what tools to use in
getting out the message )  ; 3 ) developing materials and pretesting to help assure comprehension , acceptability , and
personal relevance to the audience ; 4 ) complementing implementation with continuous monitoring to assure the right
message is getting to the correct audience ; 5 ) assessing effectiveness with both formative and summative evaluation ; 
6 ) using feedback ( i . e .  , such questions as what was learned ?  ) to refine the program . What can be improved upon ? 
What worked well , and what did not ? Are the goals and objectives relevant ? What changed ? Complete
assessment ? Audience perceptions of the problem ? How can this information be used to refine the process ? 
Text = 94%
Boyd , M .  , Graham , B .  , Gleit , C .  ,  & Whitman , N .  ( 1998 )  . Health teaching in nursing practice . Stamford , 
CT : Appelton-Fairchild . 
Chpt 1 : Health Teaching in Nursing Practice
The authors assert that education about health is important in the U . S . because of American society ’ s belief that
people are its most valuable resource and that by “ protecting and promoting the health of its members , the best
interests of society will be served . The higher the level of health in a population the more likely that individuals will
be productive .  .  .  ”  ( p . 3 )  . A 1995 review of the cost effectiveness of health education by Bartlett finds that , for every
dollar invested in health education , $3-$4 is saved .  [ See : Bartlett , E . E .  ( 1995 )  . Cost-benefit analysis of patient
education . Patient Education and Counseling , 26 , 87-91 .  ] Health teaching is traced as a core component of
professional nursing from its inception . A teaching model developed by the University of Virginia School of Nursing
is used as a framework for the book . The components include : 
1 ) Social Services Ideal , meaning that society grants nurses ( and other professionals ) the right to practice , 
provided certain principles are maintained : operating in the best interest of the public ( as opposed to
themselves or a small group )  ; assuring a high level of quality practice through self-governance , codes of
ethics , licensure , and standards of practice ; emphasizing the client , rather than tasks or functions ; providing
client advocacy ; maintaining professional autonomy . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 140 Interventions
2 ) Nature of the Client State , meaning that the nurse adapts the teaching to meet current client needs and
expectations ; 
3 ) Practice Environment , meaning that the social , cultural , and physical environments in which nurses
practice contribute to the manner in which health teaching is accomplished ; 
4 ) Practice Strategies , or the techniques used to communicate with clients . 
Chpt 4 : Theories of Learning
The author ( Gleit ) proposes that above all , nurses must be able to adapt their methods of teaching to meet their
clients ’ learning preferences . The chapter outlines the three major perspectives on learning with this in mind : 
1 . Behaviorist Perspective : This approach emphasizes learning as a result of conditioning , where conditioning is the
changing relationships between stimuli and responses and the attachment of a particular response to a particular
stimulus . Examples of learning theories based on this perspective include operant conditioning , behavior
modification , social learning theory , and behavioral therapy . The assumption is that what a person does is a
function of his or her environment and not such “ internal events ” as thinking , forgetting , or wanting . Reinforcement
is the key to behavioral change , with positive reinforcers ( the nature of which vary from person to person ) being
used to help the learner identify which behaviors are desired and which are not . Shaping is used to change pattern
characteristics gradually over time . Once the behavior is established , the teacher gradually decreases participation
with reinforcers , or “ fades ” it out . When no reinforcement occurs , the behavior becomes less frequent and finally
disappears or becomes extinct . The behaviorist perspective also supports the self-control approach , where
individuals establish self-management regimens and provide their own reinforcers . Modeling , where one individual
attempts to match the behavior of another in order to gain the same reward , is a variation of behaviorism and the
basis for Bandura ’ s widely used social learning model . He maintains that people choose what and whom they will
model , although their imitation may be conscious or unconscious . The four processes involved in modeling are : A ) 
attention , B ) retention ( remembering )  , C ) reproduction , and D ) reinforcement . It is not the random copying of
behaviors , but something a person must willfully carry out . It is generally considered better to encourage an
individual to use his or her own style of remembering , so that the use of the behavior will more likely be correct for
reinforcement . 
2 . Cognitive Perspective : Cognitive approaches to learning are the mainstay of client education and are directed at
helping clients improve their thinking ability . The structure of knowledge is important to the cognitive process and
ranges from the concrete to the abstract , and from data and facts to concepts and then on to generalizations and
rules . Bruner ’ s , Gagne ’ s , and Bloom ’ s specific taxonomies are reviewed The latter , for instance , developed a sixlevel hierarchy , with retention of knowledge occupying the lowest step ; next are comprehension , translation , 
interpretation , extrapolation , application , analysis , synthesis , and evaluation . The implications of cognitive structure
for health teaching include knowing A ) it is critical to deal with the concrete before introducing the abstract and B ) 
better conceptual growth tends to occur when a wide variety of experiences is provided . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 141 Interventions
3 . Humanist Perspective : These theorists are also concerned with the mechanics of cognitive learning , but place
more emphasis on the development of “ self-hood .  ” There is “ a focus on self and interpersonal awareness in
personal development as well as creative problem solving and effective information-processing capacity ”  ( p . 85 )  . 
The teaching approach is non directive and focuses on the teacher ’ s facilitating learning instead of imparting
knowledge . A prime example of this perspective is the work of Carl Rogers . 
The author also discusses the following as important concepts to learning , although not theories : 
1 ) Self-Care and Self-Efficacy ( near theories )  . These include the work of Orem and others . They are not strictly
theoretical , but they surface often and should not be ignored . In self-care , patient teaching is the primary
intervention used by nurses to promote self-care . Orem proposes three types of self-care : universal , or those
associated with life processes and maintaining the integrity of human structures ; developmental , or those conditions
and events that occur at various stages of life ; and health deviation , or self-care that arises from genetic and
constitutional defects and human structural and functional deviations and their effects . Self-efficacy is the belief
that one can respond effectively to a situation by using available skills and the belief that he or she can actually
implement a skill . The more capable and confident the individual feels about performing health-related activity , the
more likely the individual will proceed with behavioral change . 
2 ) Empowerment : This is not a learning theory , but an interactive process of cultivating power in others through the
sharing of knowledge , experience , and resources . One cannot empower someone else , only facilitate selfempowerment . 
Chpt 11 : Strategies for Effective Health Teaching
The author ( Boyd ) states that the “ nurse does pick and choose the strategies based on the assessment , time
available , patient preference , and guiding educational principles ”  ( p . 202 )  . She also notes that the two most
common mistakes nurses make are 1 ) using too few strategies , and 2 ) using inappropriate strategies for the
situation . She then outlines various strategies effective in changing clients ’ knowledge and behavior : 
1 . Teaching strategies
a ) 1 : 1 teaching : This strategy relies on oral communication , which has the advantage of ease in establishing rapport , 
giving information and instruction quickly , and allowing for immediate feedback . However , it is often not done
effectively . Effectiveness depends on :  
= minimizing external barriers to learning , such as noise and comfort 
= reducing internal barriers , such as fear , anxiety , worry , tiredness , and pain 
= accurate assessment of a client ’ s learning preferences and capabilities 
= using “ advance organizers ,  ” or telling the client ahead of time what they will learn 
= being as specific as possible when providing description 
= providing a summary and clear closure to the learning session
b ) Nonverbal communication considerations 
= Immediacy : touching , distance , forward lean , observation , and body orientation 
= Relaxation : arm position asymmetry 
= Sideways lean 
= Leg position asymmetry 
= Hand relaxation
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 142 Interventions 
= Neck relaxation 
= Reclining angle
c ) Responsiveness 
= Facial activity 
= Vocal activity 
= Speech rate 
= Speech volume 
[ Note : For further information on nonverbal communication , the author suggests : Mehrabin , A .  ( 1971 )  . Nonverbal
Communication . New York : Aldine-Atherton . 
2 . Educational Strategies ( adapted from Green , 1979 )  : 
a ) Be as specific as possible when giving instructions
b ) Repeat the content , appealing to a variety of the client ’ s senses
c ) Be brief ; individuals tend to forget half of what they hear within five minutes ; present , emphasize , and summarize
key information ; do not overload the learner with “ nice to know ” information
d ) Organize the material from simple to complex and from concrete to abstract
e ) Recognize primacy : learners remember the first third and last fourth of the information best , so organize material
considering this
3 . Behavioral Strategies ( i . e .  , techniques used to facilitate the adoption of specific behaviors ) 
a ) Contracting ( i . e .  , learner and teacher establish rules regarding what is expected ) 
b ) Graduating behavioral change ( this may be the most feasible way of altering behavior ) 
c ) Tailoring the teaching plan to meet the client ’ s interests and needs
d ) Encouraging client self-monitoring , whenever appropriate
4 . Teaching Aids
a ) Written materials ( i . e .  , be aware of client reading levels ; as a “ rule of thumb ,  ” most people read two to five grade
levels below the last grade of formal school completed )  
= use one idea for each paragraph ; no paragraph should have more than four sentences 
= space new concepts with the use of analogies or examples 
= use questions to involve the reader 
= avoid complex sentences ; each sentence should be less than 10 words 
= use active , rather than passive voice ; make sure a verb follows the noun in each sentence 
= limit words to two syllables or less ; use shorter words whenever possible 
= normal vision requires 8-10 point type ; 12-14 is best for those with vision problems and children 
= use lines no more than 70 characters long , with white space and serif type to rest the eyes 
= consider using the SMOG rating scale for readability of written materials [ See : McLaughlin , G .  ( 1969 , May )  . 
SMOG grading–A new readability formula . Journal of Reading , 12 , 639-646 .  ] 
b ) Displays ( i . e .  , chalkboards , bulletin boards , and flannel boards )  ; good when used as reinforcers for simple material
c ) Graphics ( i . e .  , nonlanguage elements of print such as graphs , flow charts , line drawings , and illustrations )  ; 
pictures are better than words when concrete concepts are involved
d ) Overhead transparencies and slides 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 143 Interventions
e ) Audio and audiovisual aids : self-learning by tapes can be as effective as 1 : 1 , when prepared well
f ) Video and TV : good but costly
5 . Computer-assisted instruction : allows for self-paced learning , but is expensive to develop
6 . Use of Internet sites : promotes independence of learning , but accuracy of information must be scrutinized
7 . Three-dimensional teaching aids : good for kinetic learners or when psychomotor skills are emphasized
8 . Games , simulations , and demonstrations : good for learning , but time consuming
Chpt 15 : Strategies for Group Teaching
The author ( Graham ) suggests that , because much of the work of nursing is accomplished through team effort , skill
in group teaching is essential . Groups allow for efficiency , provide a supportive environment to learn new skills and
behaviors , and allow for sharing feelings . Several elements of group teaching are reviewed : 
1 . Group size : 6-8 members is ideal ; the larger the group , the less it is likely to accomplish and the less likely that
individual needs will be met ; if a large group is unavoidable , try breaking it down into smaller groups
2 . Group process : groups develop or “ gel ” by recycling through three basic stages : 
A ) establishment , that can be facilitated by having a specific plan with clear group objectives
B ) role differentiation , in which the members sort out task roles ( i . e .  , initiator , clarifier , informer , or evaluator ) and
maintenance roles ( i . e .  , gatekeeper , compromiser , or encourager )  ; this can be facilitated by designing group
activities that force interaction among the participants 
C ) identification , in which the group functions with greater independence . 
3 . Group methods
A . Lecture : cost-effective , but must be well-delivered and dynamic to engage the varied learning styles inevitable
among group members ; hand-outs , breaks for questions and answers , short exercises related to the material , and
use of media ( even chalkboards or flip charts ) to emphasize points help to keep participants engaged
B . Demonstration : most productive when each member of a group performs a “ back demonstration ” until they
reach a level of comfort with the new skill
C . Case Study : most productive when used as the basis for small group discussions with reporting back to the
larger group for further discussion , if warranted
D . Role Playing : useful when consequences of actions or behaviors need demonstrating ; videotaping can serve as a
useful alternative , if group members are resistant to assuming roles
Text = 88%
Swanson , J .  ,  & Nies , M .  ( 1997 )  . Community health education . Community health nursing : Promoting
the health of aggregates ( pp . 168-177 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
The authors suggest ,  “ At the core of health education is a therapeutic relationship that develops between the nurse
and individuals , families , and the community . Nurses are the cement of the process and serve as catalysts for change
by delivering humanistic care .  .  .  . The critical step of inclusion sets the foundation for possible health action to occur . It
is the cement that solidifies the relationship ”  ( pp . 168-169 )  . When working with individuals and families , it is important
first to establish a “ positive , proactive , and personalized relationship .  ” With communities , it is important to promote
community empowerment , which is achieved through participatory decision making and planning from the bottom up
and is culturally sensitive . In planning community education programs that promote empowerment , the authors 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 144 Interventions
suggest using the six-stage , continuous-loop framework developed by the National Cancer Institute [ See : US Dept
of Health and Human Services . Making Health Communication Programs Work ( NIH Pub # 92-1493 ) 
Bethesda , MD : Office of Cancer Communications , National Cancer Institute ]  : 
Stage One = selection of planning and strategy ; the keys are understanding the learning needs of the target audience
and targeting the program to it
Stage Two = selection of channels and materials ; this stage builds on the understanding of the target audience
achieved in Stage One and reaches out to include other organizations and groups within the target audience or
attempts to reach it
Stage Three = development of materials and pretesting ; pretesting the message ( s ) to be communicated and the
methods of their delivery is essential
Stage Four = implementation
Stage Five = assessment of effectiveness ; considers both the process and the outcomes of the implementation
Stage Six = feedback to refine the program ; answers to the following questions help to fine-tune the program for
increased effectiveness :  
= What was learned ?  
= What can be improved on ?  
= What worked well , and what did not ?  
= Are the goals and objectives relevant ?  
= Has anything changed about the target audience ?  
= Was the assessment complete ?  
= Did the audience perceive the problem ?  
= Are the methods and formats tailored to the target audience ?  
= Were some barriers overlooked ?  
= What modifications would strengthen the effort ? 
Text = 77 . 5%
Smith , C .  ,  & Maurer , F .  ( Eds .  )  .  ( 1995 )  . Community health nursing : Theory and practice . Philadelphia : 
WB Saunders . 
Teaching is defined as “ the process of imparting cognitive knowledge , skills , and values .  .  .  .  [ However , a ] basic truth
about the teaching-learning process is that information alone is not sufficient to change human behavior . Telling
someone what to do or how to do it will not result in modified behavior unless the person sees the relevance of the
behavior to his or her values and goals and believes that the behavior change will contribute to the achievement of
aspirations ”  ( p . 17 )  . The authors differentiate between patient education , which is learning activities designed for
individuals , families , or groups who have an identified alternation in health , versus health education , which is directed
toward individuals or groups who are not experiencing an alternation in health , but have been identified through a
community assessment as potentially benefitting from information on healthy behaviors . They suggest clients ’ 
readiness to learn should also be assessed in two dimensions : emotional readiness ( that is , the internal or external
factors motivating the learner to put forward the effort needed ) and experiential readiness ( that is , the clients ’ 
background , skill , and ability to learn )  . 
Text = 71 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 145 Interventions
Helvie , C .  ( 1998 )  . Advanced practice nursing in the community ( 2nd ed .  )  ( pp . 289-303 )  . Thousand Oaks , 
CA : Sage . 
Helvie reviews several health education models ( i . e .  , Health Belief , Fear Drive , Dual-Process Self-Regulatory , 
Ajzen-Fishbein , and Behavioral Decision-Making / Stages of Change , as well as those of Monahan and Pfau )  . He
places relatively more emphasis on the Stages of Change model proposed by Holtgrave .  [ See : Holtgrave , D .  , 
Tinsley , B .  ,  & Kay , L .  ( 1995 )  . Encouraging risk-reduction : A decision-making approach to message design . In E . 
Maibach ,  & R . Parrot ( Eds .  )  , Designing health messages . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage ]  . Helvie offers Flay and
Burton ’ s suggestions for effective mass communication : acceptability , message dissemination , gaining audience
attention , stimulation of interpersonal communication , instigation of behavioral change ( that is , knowledge , skill , and
behavior ) by modeling the desired behavior , showing that it achieves desirable goals such as feeling good or looking
better , showing the behavior as pertinent to real-life situations , nurturing the motive to avoid harm or improve wellbeing associated with the behavior , portraying the behavior as being approved and supported by the community , 
mobilizing public support , providing self-guidance for self-management of the change and coping with relapses , 
encouraging interpersonal social support , providing the infrastructure to support the change , and encouraging
activism against those parts of the system seeming to resist the desired behavior .  [ See : Flay , B .  ,  & Burton , D .  
( 1990 )  . Effective mass communication strategies for health campaigns . In C . Aitkins ,  & L . Wallch ( Eds .  )  . Mass
communication and public health . Newbury Park , CA : Sage .  ] 
Text = 64%
Rankin , S .  ,  & Stallings , K .  ( 1996 )  . Patient education : Issues , principles , practices ( 3rd ed .  )  . Philadelphia : 
Lippincott . 
Chpt 1 : The Nurse as Patient Teacher : Changing Needs and Mandates
The authors view teaching as a dimension of the integral part of nursing practice known as caring . The nurse-aseducator role is traced throughout the profession ’ s history , and current interpretations and guidelines are reviewed . 
The authors make clear that , although serving as patient teacher is not solely the nurse ’ s responsibility , nurses play a
crucial role in assisting the patient and family to anticipate what integrating the new knowledge and skill will mean to
their daily lives . 
Chpt 6 : Educational Theories for Teaching and Motivating Patients
The authors ’ perspective is that patient education results in the empowerment of the patient and family and not in
compliance to a suggested regimen . They rely on the work of Paulo Freire and view his concept of participatory
education as the model for patient and community health education .  [ See : Freire , P .  ( 1970 )  . Pedagogy of the
oppressed . New York : Continuum .  ] The premise is that patient / community education is never neutral and is always
enmeshed in the value systems of educators . Therefore , educators must first discover the issues of concern to the
target population ; this means “ clients ” name their own problems , find their own solutions , and , through the process , 
transform themselves and their communities . The components of empowerment are sufficient knowledge to make
rational , informed decisions ; sufficient control and resources to implement decision ; and sufficient experience to
evaluate the effective of their decisions . The Health Belief Model , Pender ’ s Health Promotion Model , Bandura ’ s
Social Learning Theory ( a . k . a . Self-Efficacy Theory )  , Prochaska ’ s Transtheoretical Model , and stress , coping , and
social support theories are reviewed as frameworks for teaching . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 146 Interventions
The process of learning is also explored . Three types of learning are identified : psychomotor ( learning of skills and
performance )  ; affective ( learning that requires a change in feelings or belief )  ; and cognitive ( learning that requires
thinking )  . The sequence of events in the learning process ( regardless of type of learning ) is organized into eight
phases : 
Phase 1 : motivation ; a belief that desired rewards will result from the changed knowledge or behavior to be
learned ; may be internally or externally derived
Phase 2 : apprehension ; learners are exposed to the stimulus , which they take in and process in a manner that
requires discriminative abilities ; a learner ’ s state of mild or moderate anxiousness promotes this phase
Phase 3 : acquisition ; central nervous system changes undergird and concretize the new learning
Phase 4 : retention ; new learning is stored in the nervous system as memory
Phase 5 : recall ; retrieval of new learning
Phase 6 : generalization ; new learning is applied to situations other than the one in which it was learned
Phase 7 : performance ; observable changed behavior or skill
Phase 8 : feedback ; reinforcement ; in psychomotor learning , the reinforcement is usually the successful
accomplishment of the task ; in affective and cognitive learning , reinforcement is generally external or provided by
the educator or someone else besides the learner
Chpt 10 : Designing Patient Education Program in the Community and in the Home
Two case studies , one of patient teaching and the other of a community education program , are used to illustrate
their similar components : consideration of unique background and environmental circumstances ; grounding in an
assessment of need ; and general appeal ( that is , timely , well presented , and able to attract the interest of many )  . 
Chpt 12 : Community Health Promotion : Assessment and Intervention
Health education is defined as the major component through which health promotion is achieved and the
accomplishment of health promotion as a major contributor to health empowerment . Community health education
outcomes include learning factual information ; developing self-confidence ; reexamining or changing values ; 
decreasing fear ; and developing competence to make informed decisions and perform desired behaviors . Overall
success in community education methods is increased by thorough assessment of the need to start ; general
acceptance of the goal by the majority of those involved ; involvement of community members in planning ; costs of
production equal to , or less than , the benefits seen ; enhancement of overall community ( rather than just a few
individuals or families )  ; emphasis on self-help ; a theory or theories providing the organizing framework ; and
effective media coverage . Om addition , the nature of the community and its environment are well understood , both
those factors that promote change and those that hinder it . Personal health promotion strategies include informing 
( direct learning with or without the use of audiovisual materials )  ; motivating ( self-instruction , bibliotherapy or
structured reading , mass media persuasion )  ; skill building ( demonstration / return demonstration , simulation , role play , 
inoculation , activism participation )  ; modifying attitudes and behavior ( imagery , cuing , tailoring , contracting , 
contingency contracting , graduated regimens , self-monitoring , self-confrontation , self reinforcement , external
reinforcement , or self-generated aversive behavioral control )  ; hypnosis ; acupuncture ; and pharmacology . 
Text = 55%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 147 Interventions
Spradley , B .  ,  & Allender , J .  ( 1996 )  . Community health nursing : Concepts and practice ( 4th ed .  )  . 
Philadelphia : Lippincott . 
The authors describe teaching as “ a specialized communication process in which desired behavior changes are
achieved . The goal of all teaching is learning .  .  .  . Effective teaching is a cause ; learning becomes the effect ”  ( p . 302 )  . 
Three learning domains are described in depth : 
Cognitive Domain : recall or recognition of knowledge and the development of intellectual abilities and skills ; 
occurs in six major levels
1 . Knowledge : lowest level of learning ; involves recall
2 . Comprehension : combines recall with understanding
3 . Application : transfer of learning occurs ; learner not only understands material , but is able to apply it to
new situations
4 . Analysis : preliminary step to problem solving ; learner can break material down into parts , distinguish
between elements , and understand the relationships among the parts
5 . Synthesis : ability to not only break down and understand the elements of a situation , but to form
elements into a new whole ; the capacity to solve problems
6 . Evaluation : highest level of learning ; learner judges the usefulness of new material compared with a
stated purpose or special criteria ; judges the adequacy of solutions
Affective Domain : learning involves emotion , feeling , or affect ; deals with changes in interest , attitudes , and values ; 
occurs on several levels : 
1 . Receptive : willing to listen and be attentive
2 . Actively participating : responding to information in some way
3 . Valuing : learner attaches value to the information ; ranges from acceptance through appreciation to
commitment
4 . Internalization : the new value system now controls the behavior consistently
Affective learning impacts the cognitive domain ; in order for learned behavior to be maintained , the cognitive and
affective domains must be consistent with each other or , at least , not in conflict . Affective learning is accomplished
mainly through imitation and conditioning , using role modeling and positive reinforcement . 
Psychomotor Domain : visible , demonstrable performance skills requiring neuromuscular coordination ; three
conditions must be met : 
1 . Learners must be capable of the new skill
2 . Learners must have a sensory image of how to perform the skill
3 . Learners must practice the skill . 
The authors also provide principles of effective teaching , emphasizing that teaching is only one end of a continuum
resulting in learning . 
1 . Client Readiness : receptiveness and knowledge level must be assessed as well as educational background and
maturational level ; the existence of a moderate level of anxiety promotes readiness
2 . Client Perceptions : the impact of values , past experiences , culture , religion , personality , developmental stage , 
educational and economic levels , surrounding social forces , and the physical environment should be considered
3 . Educational Environment : physical comfort must be promoted as well as atmosphere of mutual respect and trust
4 . Client Participation : the amount of learning is directly proportional to the learner ’ s involvement
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 148 Interventions
5 . Relevance to Client : learners gain the most from subject matters immediately useful to their own purposes
6 . Client Satisfaction : learners need to feel a sense of steady progress in the learning process ; afforded by
establishing realistic goals
7 . Client Application : application reinforces learning
Text = 45%
Arnold , E .  ( 1995 )  . Interpersonal relationships : Professional communication skills for nurses ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
Health teaching is defined as “ a flexible , person-oriented process in which the helping person provides information
and support to clients with a variety of health-related learning needs ”  ( p . 375 )  . It is regarded as much broader than
imparting information and results in change , restructuring , development of new perspectives , and / or problemsolving . The nurse assumes the role of guide , information provider , and partner in learning . Arnold suggests three
learning models as most appropriate for health teaching : 
1 . Person-Centeredness : based on Carl Rogers ’ work , which suggests the teacher act as a guide and monitors
learning to assure it is factual and strategically correct , responding to students ’ needs and motivational levels 
2 . Critical Thinking : a reflective process with cognitive and emotional components , which provides a framework
for problem solving ; based on the premise that it is as important to learn how to learn as it is to learn about specific
content ; relies on use of analogies and metaphors to help ; consideration of the universal elements of similar
situations
3 . Behavioral Models : based on Thorndike and Skinner ’ s early work , which suggests that given a stimulus in the
environment , a learner responds and that response can be shaped or conditioned by a reinforcement which is of
value to the responder ; modeling is another behavioral approach . 
Text = 21%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 149 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Provider Education
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and academic
experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end of each
annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . It
reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Soumerai , S .  ( 1998 )  . Principles and uses of academic detailing to improve the management of psychiatric
disorders . Intl . J Psychiatry in Medicine , 2891 , 81-95 . 
Review = 44%
Davis , D .  ( 1998 )  . Does CME work : An analysis of the effect of educational activities on physician performance or
health care outcomes ? Intl . J . of Health Services , 28 ( 2 )  , 21-39 . 
Review = 37%
Sechrist , L .  , Backer , T .  ,  & Rogers , E .  ( 1994 , December )  . Synthesis of ideas for effective dissemination . Effective
dissemination of clinical and health information : Conference summary ( DHHS / AHCPR Publ # 95-0015 )  . 
187-196 . 
Review = 24%
Research Reports
Mazmanian , P .  , Daffron , S .  , et al .  ( 1998 , August )  . Information about barriers to planned change : A randomized
controlled trial involving continuing medical education lectures and commitment to change . Academic Medicine , 
73 ( 8 )  , 882-886 . 
Quantitative / experimental = 52 . 5%
Neff , J .  , Gaskill , S .  , Prihoda , T .  , et al .  ( 1998 )  . Continuing medical education versus clinic-based STD and HIV
education interventions for primary care service provides : Replication and extension . AIDS Education and
Prevention , 10 ( 5 )  , 417-432 . 
Quantitative / non-experimental = 41%
Tomson , Y .  , Hasselstrom , J .  , et al .  ( 1997 )  . Asthma education for Swedish primary care physicians : A study on the
effects of academic detailing on practice and patient knowledge . Eur . J . Clin Pharmacol , 53 , 191-196 . 
Quantitative / experimental = 29%
Goldberg , H .  , Wagner , E .  , et al .  ( 1998 , March )  . A randomized controlled trial of CQI teams and academic
detailing : Can they alter compliance with guidelines ? J . of Quality Improvement , 24 ( 3 )  , 130-142 . 
Quantitative / experimental = 29%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 150 Interventions
Butler , B .  ,  & Erskine , E . A .  ( 1970 , October )  . Public health detailing : Selling ideas to the private practitioner in his
office . Am J Public Health , 60 ( 10 )  , 1996-2002 . 
Quantitative / experimental = 27 . 5%
Meador , K .  , Taylor , J .  , et al .  ( 1997 , February )  . Predictors of antipsychotic withdrawal or dose reduction in a
randomized controlled trial of provider education . J . Am . Geriatric Society , 45 ( 2 )  , 207-210 . 
Quantitative / experimental = 17 . 5%
Expert Opinion
Soumerai , S .  ,  & Avorn , J .  ( 1990 , January 26 )  . Principles of educational outreach (  “ academic detailing ”  ) to improve
clinical decision making . JAMA , 263 ( 4 )  , 549-556 . 
Expert Opinion = 42 . 5%
Glass , R .  ( 1994 )  . An editor ’ s perspective on dissemination . Conference Summary : Effective Dissemination of
Clinical and Health Information ( USDHHS / AHCPR Pub .  # 95-0015 )  . 159-164 . 
Expert opinion = 11 . 5%
Mittman , B .  , Tonsek , X .  ,  & Jacobson , P .  ( 1992 , December )  . Implementing clinical practice guidelines : Social
influence strategies and practitioner behavior change . QRB , 413-422 . 
Expert Opinion = 39%
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Counseling
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 151 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : COUNSELING
Definition
Counseling establishes an interpersonal relationship with a community , system , family , or individual
intended to increase or enhance their capacity for self-care and coping . Counseling engages the
community , system , family , or individual at an emotional level . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All adolescents and their parents
Problem : Depression and the potential for suicide
Community Example : 
The PHNs partner with the mental health center , schools , and faith community to raise community
awareness about depression in teens . Their goal is to change community acceptance of depression
as just “ something that teens go through ” to a realization that depression is a real , treatable
problem . They use billboards , radio spots , and theater trailers to disseminate the message . 
Systems Example : 
A community suffers a devastating loss when three teens carry out a suicide pact . In response to the
community ’ s distress , the PHN partners with social workers , school service providers , and
community clubs to design a teen suicide community response plan to prevent repeats of the teen
suicide cluster . The plan outlines the roles that each organization will play if a teen suicide or
suicide attempt occurs . 
Individual / Family Example : 
The PHN facilitates a support group for families coping with the loss of a member through suicide . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 152 Interventions
Relationships to Other Interventions
Counseling is an intervention frequently implemented in conjunction with , or sequentially to , health teaching
and / or consultation . Health teaching influences the knowledge , attitudes , values , beliefs , practices , skills , and
behaviors of individuals , families , systems , or communities . While counseling focuses on the emotional component
inherent in any attempt to change , consultation seeks to generate alternative solutions to problems . 
For example , if the PHN provides health teaching about the prevalence , incidence , and causes of family violence
at a community meeting , it is likely to trigger emotional responses . Implementing counseling strategies in
conjunction with health teaching allows the PHN to build on the energy associated with an emotional response
and further enhances the learning opportunity . A community may respond to information on family violence with
powerful emotions like anger , outrage , fear , and grief . These emotions can motivate it to learn more about the
problem and its causes . If the community accepts this new information and decides that something must be done to
change its tolerance of family violence , the PHN may assist the community in exploring alternatives . That is , the
PHN provides consultation . 
While each of the three interventions can be effectively implemented alone , they most often are done together or in
succession and are often repeated in a cycle : 
new knowledge 
consideration of 
alternative emotional response 
actions
actions
This cycle is repeated until an acceptable solution is found . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 153 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Differentiating Counseling from Psychotherapy .  .  . 
Although PHNs do not provide psychotherapy , much of public health nursing deals with emotionally charged “ client
situations .  ” These range from individuals attempting to cope with chronic pain , a couple grieving for the loss of their
infant to SIDS , women involved with partners who batter them , or an elderly couple attempting to cope with the
loss of all their possessions in a flood . Public health nursing also occurs at systems and community levels of
practice . Examples include such situations as mediating a heated debate between providers competing for the same
public contract to provide home health services or a PHN facilitating a community meeting on teen pregnancy
prevention where the members are polarized around their beliefs . 
While counseling as practiced by a PHN should have a therapeutic outcome ( that is , have a healing effect )  , it should
not be confused with providing psychotherapy . Counseling is intended to clarify problems , relieve tension , facilitate
problem solving , encourage friendship and companionship , enhance understanding , encourage insight , and relieve
stress . 
See : Burnard , P .  ( 1992 )  . Counseling , a guide to practice . In Nursing ( p . 17 )  . Oxford , England : Butterworth-Heineman . 
37 Adapted from : Burnard , P .  ( 1992 )  . Counseling : A guide to practice in nursing . Oxford , England : ButterworthHeineman . 
38Understanding the client ’ s cultural or ethnic context is important to perception . For further information , please see
Sue , D . W .  ,  & Sue , D .  ( 1999 )  . Counseling the culturally different : Theory and practice ( 3rd ed .  )  . NY : Wiley . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 154 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Counseling37
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Meet the “ client ” –the individual , family , system , or community . 
Establishes rapport by listening and attending to what the client is saying and how it is said . 
2 . Explore the issues . 38
Gains the client ’ s perception of the nature and cause of the identified problem or issue and what needs to
change . 
3 . Identify priorities . 
Gains the client ’ s perspective on the urgency or importance of the issues ; negotiates the order in which they
will be addressed . 
4 . Establish the emotional context . 
Explores , with the client , emotional responses to the problem or issue . 
5 . Identify alternative solutions . 
Establishes , with the client , different ways to achieve the desired outcomes and anticipates what would
have to change in order for these to happen
6 . Agree on a contract . 
Negotiates , with the client , a plan for the nature , frequency , timing , and end point of the interactions . 
7 . Support the individual , family , system , or community through the change . 
Provides reinforcement and continuing motivation to complete the change process . 
8 . End the relationship . 
Brings closure at the point the PHN and client mutually agree that the desired outcomes are achieved . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 155 Interventions
Notes from Abby
The Therapeutic Use of Self in Counseling
Implementing the counseling intervention depends upon the PHNs use of themselves as vehicles for change . This
requires high levels of self-awareness . Burnard defines issues to consider in developing self-awareness : 
• Beliefs 
• Likes and dislikes 
• Prejudices 
• Ways others see you 
• Skills
• View of self
• Religious beliefs or lack of them
• Political biases 
• Strengths
• Sexual preferences 
• Deficits 
• Fears and anxieties 
• Knowledge
• Values . 
Burnard ( 1992 )  , pp . 43-44 
What to Do and Not to Do in Counseling .  .  . 

Do .  .  . Do Not .  .  . 
• listen
• believe what the client says
• encourage further talking
• allow expression of feelings
• encourage personal problem solving
• take advice from others
• take care of yourself
Burnard ( 1992 )  , p . 9
• “ interpret ” what the client says
• use “ psychobabble ” 
• attempt psychotherapy
• moralize
• patronize
• argue
• compare your experience with the
client ’ s
• hesitate to refer the client when needed 

Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 156 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Counseling
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or particular
order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . SELF-MONITORS THE COUNSELING RELATIONSHIP . 
Best Evidence : Poskiparta and others ; Burnard
Three sets of questions should be asked : 
‚ What am I getting out of this as the PHN / counselor ? Am I doing this for myself or the client ? 
‚ What are the agreed-upon goals for this interaction ? What progress is being made ? 
‚ What kind of evaluative feedback is the client providing ? That is , is the client engaged in the interaction ? 
2 . PHN ASSURES THAT THE CLIENT DEFINES THE FOCUS OF THE COUNSELING . 
Best Evidence : Burnard ; Tschudin ; Lewis and others
Assuring that the “ client ” establishes the focus of the counseling can be complex when the individual or family
believes they are without hope , or collaboration members are at odds with one another , or the community is reeling
from some tragedy or injustice . Helping the client to define the focus is a long and slow-moving process , but
essential for counseling effectiveness . 
The PHN must heed Burnard ’ s principles , which are supported in Tschudin and Lewis ’ s work : 
‚ counseling involves listening and reflection far more than providing advice
‚ the client knows best ( whether they know it or not ) 
‚ interpretation by the nurse rarely helps
‚ entrance into the client ’ s frame of reference is important
‚ judgement and moralizing are rarely appropriate
‚ the nurse ’ s experience is not the same as the client ’ s
‚ listening is the first and last principle of effective counseling . 
3 . ESTABLISHES AND MAINTAINS BOUNDARIES . 
Best Evidence : Mullen and others ; Tschudin ; Burnard
Because counseling requires an interpersonal relationship that presumes an emotional level of involvement , it is
critical that the PHN be aware of appropriate boundaries . Burnard ’ s description of a therapeutic relationship is
useful : 
‚ the intention is to help , not control
‚ the relationship is of benefit to the client , not the PHN ; the nurse may find professional fulfillment in the
benefits realized by the client , but the benefits clearly must belong to the client . 
39 Minnesota Board of Nursing .  ( 1995 , Fall )  . For your information , 11 ( 3 )  , 3-4 ;  ( 1996 , Winter )  . 12 ( 1 )  , 2-3 ;  
( 1996 , Spring )  . 12 ( 2 )  , 2-3 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 157 Interventions
‚ the relationship is always within the bounds of professional ethics and without risk of exploitation by the
PHN–especially emotional exploitation .  
 “ Boundaries are defined as limits that protect the space between the professional ’ s power and the client ’ s
vulnerability .  ” 39 In a recent three-part series , the Minnesota Board of Nursing discussed this issue and
encouraged nurses to view the concept not as a line , but as a gray zone between appropriate and
inappropriate actions . Based on a review of the literature , the series concludes that four elements usually
appear in boundary violations : 
‚ Role Reversal
where the client takes care of the nurse ’ s emotional needs 
‚ Secrecy
where the client is asked to hold some information about their relationship in confidence or only 
selectively share it
‚ Double Bind
where the client is placed in the position of wanting to terminate the relationship but realizes that
doing so will end any help from the professional
‚ Indulgence of Professional Privilege
where information obtained in the relationship with a client is used for the benefit of the PHN . 
Notes from Abby
Signs that you may be approaching the boundary “ gray zone ”  : 
• Perception - is this what other nurses would do ? 
• Time - is more time spent with the client than with other clients ? Is “ off duty ” time spent with the client ? 
• Location - would you see other clients in this location ? 
• Gifts to client - is there an accompanying sense of obligation on the part of the recipient ? 
• Forms of address - has it switched from friendly to familiar , or from familiar to intimate ? 
• Personal attire – is greater care being taken in how you look when with the client ? 
• Making exceptions – what is the therapeutic purpose ? 
• Internal cues – Do you trust what you sense and check it out ? What is the nature of your behavior when with
the client ? Do you become defensive when questioned about client interaction ? 
• Dual relationships – are services being provided outside of the professional plan ? 
• Confidentiality – is it not being violated unless you are legally compelled to do so . 
• Choosing sides – do you take the side of the client against the client ’ s significant other ? 
• Self-disclosure – whose need is being met in the disclosure–yours or the client ’ s ? 
• Touch – is it being used therapeutically , as long as is culturally appropriate , but never indiscriminately ? 
• Communication – is information recorded selectively ? 
• Be prepared – do you know professional standards and employer ’ s policies ? 
Minnesota Board of Nursing .  ( 1995 , Fall )  . For your information , 11 ( 3 )  , 3-4 ;  ( 1996 , Winter )  . 12 ( 1 )  , 2-3 ;  ( 1996 , 
Spring )  . 12 ( 2 )  , 2-3 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 158 Interventions
4 . REMAINS SENSITIVE TO CLIENTS ’ UNIQUENESS AND VULNERABILITIES . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Authors reviewed for this intervention were consistent in addressing the need for sensitivity to all persons ’ unique
characteristics . An assessment of these characteristics produces information essential for the development of
rapport and empathy , as well as an understanding of the client ’ s perceptions , emotional response , and coping
mechanisms . 
5 . ENHANCES CLIENTS ’ STRENGTHS , REGARDLESS OF PRACTICE FOCUS .  ( INDIVIDUAL , 
FAMILY , SYSTEMS , OR COMMUNITY ) 
Best Evidence : Tschudin ; Stanhope and Lancaster 1st ed ; Lewis
Enhancing clients ’ strengths results in their increased capacity to solve their own problems . All authors noted that it
is impossible to develop necessary rapport if the PHN cannot find a point of genuine regard ( that is , strength ) for
the client–no matter how far removed the client may be from the PHN ’ s own beliefs or values system . 
Notes from Abby
The skill most critical to effective counseling is communication–the capacity to say what is meant and accurately
hear what others say . William Howell , in his book The Empathetic Communicator , discusses how the following
elements give meaning to words being said and heard : 
• Style is the way we say what we say ; style includes most nonverbal elements of communication such as
posture , facial expression , and tone of voice
• Content is the cognitive material in what is being said , conveyed by both words and “ nonverbal word
equivalents ” such as head shakes or hand gestures
• Context is the flow of events or the situation in which the communication occurs . Experts estimate that in any
communication only 10-20 percent of understanding comes from words or content . The majority of what is
communicated and understood comes from nonverbal content . 
We all learn communication patterns and non-verbal meaning within the context of the culture in which we were
raised . No matter how much life experience or education we go through , the way we give and receive information
is culturally ingrained . This is why understanding other cultures is essential if we are to be an empathetic
communicator . Howell maintains that it is this capacity for empathetic communication which provides the “ counter
force that keeps power from dominating our relationships ”  ( p . 3 )  . 
Adapted from : Howell , W .  ( 1982 )  . The empathetic communicator . Prospect Heights , IL : Waveland Press . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 159 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Qualities Essential for Effectiveness in Counseling
• Personal warmth
• Genuineness
• Empathy
• Unconditional positive regard
• Intuition ( i . e .  , knowledge and insight that arrives independently of the senses ) 
• Caring , including knowledge of the other person / entity , learning from experience , patience , honesty , trust , 
humility , hope , and courage
• Sense of humor
• Sense of the tragic
• Self-awareness
Burnard ( 1992 )  , pp . 32-44 . 
Consider the saying commonly seen hanging 
over the desk of many experienced PHNs .  .  . 
No one cares how much you know
Unless they know how much you care . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 160 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Counseling
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and academic
experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end of each
annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . It
reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
Mullen , P .  , et al .  ( 1997 )  . A meta-analysis of trials evaluating patient education and counseling for three
groups of preventive health behaviors . Patient Education and Counseling , 32 , 157-173 . 
The authors reviewed 71 randomized and non-randomized clinical control trials measuring behavioral changes
regarding smoking and weight loss in patients without diagnoses . The studies were analyzed for the principles of
education adhered to ( i . e .  , tailoring to patients ’ needs , individualization of instruction , feedback and
reward / reinforcement provided , use of multiple communication channels )  , the nature of the intervention ( i . e .  , 
whether cognitive only , behavioral only , or both )  , and the number of contacts . The results demonstrated that using
behavioral techniques ( particularly self-monitoring ) and using several communication channels ( such as media plus
personal communication ) produced larger effects . 
Meta-analysis = 39%
Poskiparta , M .  , et al .  ( 1999 )  . Nurses ’ self-reflection via videotaping to improve communication skills in
health counseling . Patient Education and Counseling , 36 , 3-11 . 
In teaching nurses to understand the importance of personal attitudes and affective faculties , as well as the use of
cognitive functions in effective counseling , the authors videotaped nurses interacting with clients , provided them with
education on self-reflection , and then videotaped them six months after the training . On both occasions nurses selfrated themselves using Meziorw ’ s levels of reflectivity . Self-rating was found to be a useful tool in improving nurses
competence in communication during counseling . 
Quantitative / Observational = 32 . 5%
Expert Opinion
Minnesota Board of Nursing .  ( 1995 , Fall )  . For your information , 11 ( 3 )  , 3-4 ;  ( 1996 , Winter )  . 12 ( 1 )  , 2-3 ;  
( 1996 , Spring )  . 12 ( 2 )  , 2-3 ; copies may be obtained by contacting the board at Minnesota Board of Nursing , 2829
University Ave . SE # 500 , Minneapolis , MN 55414-3253 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 161 Interventions
Texts and Monographs
Tschudin , V .  ( 1995 )  . Models for counseling . In Counselling skills for nurses .  ( pp . 38-55 )  . Bailliere
Tindall Publishing . 
The author differentiates between the nursing process , which is directed toward problem solving , and counseling , 
which is directed toward problem management . Counseling is focused on the person , not the problem . Its intent is
to help people solve their problems themselves through focusing on their feelings , first of all , and then on the
meaning of those feelings to them . The author analyzes several models and then proposes her own , which she
labels “ the four questions ”  : What is happening ? What is its meaning ? What is your goal ? How are you going to
do it ? The counselor ’ s role is to assist the client in progressing from one question to the next by viewing them as
stages where the answer to one question automatically moves the client into addressing the next . 
Text = 60%
Lewis , J .  , et al .  ( 1998 )  . Community counseling : Empowerment strategies for a diverse society ,  ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
Brooks-Cole . 
The authors , mental health professionals , propose a comprehensive helping framework of intervention strategies and
services that promote the personal development and well-being of all individuals and communities . They identify
four “ service components ” to achieve this : direct work with clients , indirect work with clients , direct work with
communities , and indirect work with communities . The authors suggest that individual mental health potential is
impacted by the overall health of the community ( that is , a group or gathering of people who share common
interests and needs ) in which they live , and therefore , work must be done in all components . Community counseling
is defined as “ a multifaceted approach combining direct and indirect services to help community members live more
effectively and to prevent those problems most frequently faced by people who use the services ”  ( p . 20 )  . 
Direct Community Services = educating or training the population at large
Direct Individual Services = outreach and counseling to vulnerable populations
Indirect Community Services = systemic changes and public policy
Indirect Individual Services = advocacy and consultation
Persons providing counseling to individuals from the community counseling framework focus on strengthening
clients ’ sense of hope and personal mastery by encouraging them to take responsibility for solving each problem , 
but not necessarily to shoulder the blame for it ; this is known as the compensatory model ( p . 123-124 )  . 
Persons providing community counseling must be well versed in systems theory to understand the impact of the
community itself on health and behavior . 
Text = 47%
Burnard , P .  ( 1992 )  . Counselling : A guide to practice in nursing . Oxford , England : Butterworth-Heineman
and Burnard , P .  ,  & Hulatt ( 1996 )  . Nurse counselling : The view from the practitioners . Oxford , England : 
Butterworth-Heineman .  
[ NOTE : material from the Burnard ’ s later book is presented in italics for contrast } 
Chpt 1 : Counselling in Nursing ( pp . 7-21 ) 
Burnard describes the common elements of the counseling process , which he suggests is “ essentially a
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 162 Interventions
practical enterprise in that its aim is problem solving ”  ( p . 7 )  : 
PIt involves two people , one of whom is the counselor and the other the client
PThe role of the counselor is to help the client
PThe client presents a situation to the counselor , sometimes clearly identified and sometimes not
PA relationship exists that is different from plain conversation and yet not psychotherapy . 
Counselling “ aims to help the person recognize what may be changed and how ; and what must be left for
acceptance .  .  .  . Counselling is assumed to be mainly about helping someone to review a specific life situation , 
consider , and ( perhaps ) to enact options . The counsellor is under no obligation to ‘ change ’ the person ”  ( pp . 
8-9 )  . 
Burnard also describes the characteristics of a therapeutic relationship , such as that within the scope of nursing
practice : 
PThe nurse ’ s intention is to help
PThe relationship benefits the client
PThe nurse cares about the client
PThe relationship is reciprocal to some extent , but the client ’ s needs are the focus
PThe relationship is always an ethical one and never exploited by the nurse . 
A therapeutic relationship with a nurse differs from a friendship in that professional boundaries are held , it does not
continue outside of the counseling setting , and it is always geared toward the client . At the same time , it is not
psychotherapy , in that general academic and experiential preparation for the practice of professional nursing does
not provide the necessary depth of knowledge and skill required . 
Burnard advises that at its core , counseling involves listening and reflection more than talking and providing advice . 
He also acknowledges that counseling works best with people who can clearly articulate their problems and who
are prepared to self-disclose . The following principles of counseling are provided : 
PThe client knows best
PInterpretation by the nurse rarely helps
PIt is important to enter into the client ’ s frame of reference
PJudgement and moralizing are rarely appropriate
PThe nurse ’ s experience is not the same as the client ’ s
PListening is the first and last principle of good counseling . 
Offering a counseling relationship is appropriate when the client desires such outcomes as : 
PClarification of problem issues
PRelief from tension
PEnhanced problem solving
PEncouragement of worthiness for friendship and companionship with others
PImproved clarity of understanding and insight
PRelief from stress . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 163 Interventions
Chpt 3 : Qualities of the Counsellor ( p . 31-47 ) 
Burnard offers a list of qualities essential for a nurse to provide effective counseling . He states ,  “ We need to be
able to face the other persons as a reasonably normal , ordinary human being .  .  .  . We need to be natural . 
Unfortunately , it often takes a long time to learn to be natural !  ”  ( p . 31 )  . 
PPersonal warmth , meaning the nurse is approachable , open to others , and assures the client regard , absence of
blame , non-defensiveness , and closeness . It is offered by the nurse , whether reciprocated or not
PGenuineness , or owning real interest , not so much in or about the client ’ s problems , but in the fact the nurse-client
relationship is functional
PEmpathy , or the ability to enter the perceptual world of the other person and to see it as they see it , without
judging or placing value ; empathy does not include sympathy
PUnconditional positive regard and valuing the client as a person
PTrust in intuition , or knowledge and insight the nurse arrives at independently of the senses 
PCaring , in the sense of offering the other person opportunities for personal growth which , in turn , requires selfknowledge , capacity to learn from experience , patience , honesty , trust , humility , hope , and courage
PSense of humor , allowing for diffusion of tension , stress relief , and a sense of perspective on a situation
PSense of the tragic , allowing for true understanding of another ’ s suffering
PSelf-awareness , precluding the nurse from confusing personal problems with those of the client .  [ Note : Burnard
provides a 55-item checklist to assist the nurse in exploring depths of self-awareness .  ] 
Text = 45%
Stanhope , M . O .  ,  & Lancaster , J .  ( 1984 )  . Community health nursing : Process and practice for promoting
health ( 1st ed .  )  .  * St . Louis : Mosby . 
Health counseling is defined as “ a helping process used to facilitate the client ’ s development of independence , ability
in decision making , and ability to take action related to the family ’ s health . There are aspects of anticipatory
guidance ( defined as assisting in developing resistance to situational or development stress events ) and anticipatory
problem solving ( defined as assisting in estimating risks and stresses likely to occur in relation to anticipated
problems ) in health counseling ”  ( pp . 356-357 )  . It is intended to assist in clarifying beliefs , values , and feelings
associated with problems and their resolution . 
Text = 45% 
*  [ Note : In Stanhope & Lancaster ’ s 5thed .  ( 2000 )  , counseling is defined as “ Helping people achieve workable solutions for their
problems or conflicts ”  ( pp . 6-8 )  . Counseling is treated briefly as a function of public health nurses .  ] 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 164 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Consultation 
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 165 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : CONSULTATION
Definition
Consultation seeks information and generates optional solutions to perceived problems or issues through
interactive problem-solving with a community , system , family or individual . The community , system , 
family or individual selects and acts on the option best meeting the circumstances . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : Entire community
Problem : Domestic abuse 
Community Example : 
The PHN responds to a request from community leaders and stakeholders for information
about domestic abuse after yet another woman is murdered by her husband in a domestic
dispute . They call a meeting and the PHN presents an analysis on domestic abuse in the
community . He presents not only the data , but also anecdotal information from the women
with whom he works at the battered women ’ s shelter . The stakeholders pick up on the
information that the PHN presents on the impact of children witnessing violence . They decide
to make “ children witnessing violence in the home ” a priority issue and seek consultation from
the PHN about potential effective strategies for addressing this problem . 
Systems Example : 
Local police in a community refer all domestic violence calls to public health nursing for a
follow-up home visit . The PHNs who do these home visits meet quarterly with a team of local
law enforcement officers to review the domestic referrals . The police use this information to
improve their response to domestic disputes . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 166 Interventions
Individual / Family Example : 
The PHN works with a client temporarily living in a shelter for battered women to develop a
plan for moving into the community . They discuss options available to her , identify financial
requirements and community resources , and establish a list of actions to be made by the client
before the next visit . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Consultation is an intervention frequently implemented in conjunction with or sequentially to health teaching
and / or counseling . Health teaching influences the knowledge , attitudes , values , beliefs , practices , skills , and
behaviors of individuals , families , systems , or communities . While counseling focuses on the emotional component
inherent in any attempt to change , consultation seeks to generate alternative solutions to problems . 
For example , if you provide health teaching about the prevalence , incidence , and causes of family violence at a
community meeting , the information is likely to trigger emotional responses . Implementing counseling strategies in
conjunction with health teaching allows you to build on the energy associated with the emotional response and
further enhance the learning opportunity . A community may respond to information on family violence with
powerful emotions like anger , outrage , fear , and grief . These emotions can motivate it to learn more about the
problem and its causes . If the community accepts this new information and decides that something must be done to
change its tolerance of family violence , you may assist in exploring different alternatives . That is , you provide
consultation . 
While you can effectively implement each of the three interventions alone , they most often are done together or in
succession and are often repeated in a cycle : 
new knowledge 
consideration of 
alternative emotional response 
actions 


actions
This cycle is repeated until an acceptable solution is found . 
40 Adapted from Nurses as Consultants : Essential Concepts and Processes by Susan Norwood ( New York : 
Addison-Wesley ) 1998 . 
41 As expressed in The Cornerstones of Public Health Nursing . Minnesota Department of Health / Section
of Public Health Nursing , June 1999 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 167 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Consultation 40
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Establish an interpersonal relationship with the client by engaging in actions that establish the
PHN ’ s credibility and promote a sense of trust on the part of the client . 
Effectiveness in consultation depends heavily on the PHN ’ s capacity to develop and maintain relationships , 
an underlying element of all public health nursing practice . 41
2 . Clarify the client ( s )  ’ perception of the problem or issue , the underlying causes , and the expected
results from the consultation process . 
The “ client ” may be an individual , family , group , organization , system , or community . You must allow
sufficient time for this dialogue to assure a mutual understanding of the issue and the expected outcomes . 
Information gained in subsequent steps may require you and the client to return to this step for clarification
of the problem and / or expectations . 
3 . Assess the client ( s )  ’ circumstances , involving them in data collection . 
The following factors should be included : 
• describe the client ( s )  ’ experience resulting from the problem / issue
• identify the stakeholders involved in the problem / issue and the way they are affected
• determine to what extent the client ( s )  ’ attitudes , beliefs , and behaviors may contribute to the
problem / issue
• discover what environmental factors may contribute
• determine what factors might serve as promoters or barriers to solving the problem / issue 
• identify what assets the client ( s ) bring to the process
• anticipate what will be gained or lost by solving the problem or addressing the issue
• determine how a solution might affect the client ( s ) and the client ( s )  ’ family or stakeholders . Who
stands to win or lose ? 
4 . Establish a plan of action or contract . 
Together , the PHN and the client : 
• determine the desired outcome
• develop options for achieving this outcome
• weigh the advantages and disadvantages of each outcome
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 168 Interventions
Client ( s ) select the preferred option . Action steps are developed based on this decision . You may or may
not be involved at this point , as the client desires . 
5 . Identify the support necessary to facilitate plan implementation . 
This step is included regardless of whether or not you become part of the action steps . This step assists
client ( s ) in anticipating barriers to implementation and designing contingency plans . 
6 . Evaluate the process and outcome . 
You and the client must establish a plan for closure or come to a mutual agreement about when the
consultation will end . 
42 Adapted from Ulschak , F and SnowAntle , S ( 1990 ) Consultation Skills for Health Care Professionals
San Francisco : Jossey-Boss
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 169 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Consultation
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come from
a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the literature
with their practice expertise to develop them . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . DEVELOPS A CONTRACT WITH THE CLIENT . 
Best Evidence : Stanhope and Alford ; Gebelein
While this may appear obvious , PHNs must spend sufficient time with the client discussing expectations of the
consultation . This holds whether the PHN implements consultation as a problem-solving follow-up to health
teaching or as a component of case management . It also holds regardless of the practice level at which
consultation may be implemented–individual / family , system , or community . 
A “ contract ” means that both the PHN and the client clearly understand what is expected . It does not necessarily
mean anything in writing . It ordinarily requires considerable discussion and allows both the PHN and client to
establish a relationship if one does not already exist . Ulschak and SnowAntle 42 offer a model for contracting . In the
CPR + F Model , the PHN and client repeat a loop consisting of “ Commitment X Purpose X Roles + Feedback ” 
until they both are satisfied that they mutually understand what the request is and what the expected outcomes are . 
In the model : 
‚ Commitment = investment both PHN and client are willing to put into this endeavor
‚ Purpose = what client wants / what PHN can provide
‚ Roles = who will do what and when 
‚ Feedback = planned points of evaluation where client and PHN evaluate how they are doing and if
they should continue
Ulschak and SnowAntle also identify common contracting pitfalls : 
‚ promising more than can be accomplished , given the resources available
‚ taking on a problem or decision for which a PHN does not have appropriate training or experience
‚ agreeing to provide consultation in situations where intuition suggests something is not being fully
disclosed or the client has a “ hidden agenda ” 
‚ agreeing to provide consultation without measurable desired outcomes ; without them , success can
never be determined
‚ agreeing to a contract despite lack of clarity in any of the CPR + F model elements
43 Adapted from Ulschak , F and SnowAntle , S ( 1990 ) Consultation Skills for Health Care Professionals 
( San Francisco : Jossey-Boss ) 39-42 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 170 Interventions
2 . ADAPTS THE CONSULTATION ROLE TO CLIENT NEED . 
Best Evidence : Lippitt and Lippitt ; Stanhope and Alford ; Puetz and Shinn
PHNs fulfill multiple roles when they provide consultation . Most authors reviewed describe similar types of roles , all
reflecting “ providing advice to others ”  : 
Puetz and Shinn identify a list appropriate for adaptation to public health nursing : 
‚ coach
‚ motivator
‚ mentor
‚ teacher
‚ facilitator 
‚ confidant
‚ sounding board
‚ change agent
‚ fact finder
‚ expert
‚ observer
‚ counselor
Ulschak and SnowAntle43 suggest these consultation roles : 
‚ advocate
the PHN is actively engaged with the client in directing the problem solving
‚ joint problem-solver
the client and PHN collaborate to determine optional solutions
‚ identifier of alternatives and linker to resources
see referral and follow-up
‚ fact finder
The PHN acts as a researcher , finding information the client requires in order to consider
options
‚ process consultant
The PHN and client work together through the problem-solving process , with the PHN
offering advice on improving process steps
‚ information specialist
the client defines the problem and the desired outcomes , and the PHN proceeds to supply the
optional solutions
3 . COLLABORATIVELY FORMULATES OPTIONS WITH THE CLIENT . 
Best Evidence : Norwood
Norwood [ p . 22 ] makes the case that consultation plans are most effective when they are : 
‚ developed collaboratively with the client
‚ specify clearly the sequence in which plan components are to be implemented
44 Nurse authors consistently identified other “ resources ” such as education and support systems in
addition to financial resources . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 171 Interventions
‚ identify resources needed [ and at whose cost ] 44
‚ verify the availability of needed resources
‚ acknowledge and explore client ’ s objections to the plan , if any . 
4 . ASSISTS ALL CLIENTS IN IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES FOR CHANGE AND
IMPROVEMENT . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Even though most PHNs initially learn about consultation through their work with individuals , families , and groups , 
the expert panel was clear that the consultation intervention is also applicable to work with systems and communities . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 172 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Ulschak and SnowAntle * provide a checklist useful for the PHN to complete a self-appraisal of
skills and traits considered essential for consultation effectiveness . Although these were developed
on the assumption of providing consultation to organizations , the list has general applicability . 
Nurses are asked to rate themselves as + if they believe themselves to be well-skilled and
competent , 0 if okay , or - if lacking in the following areas : 
General 
1 . Listening to others 
2 . Asking direct questions 
3 . Listening to self and awareness of own
feelings 
4 . Understanding organizations 
5 . Getting site-specific information 
6 . Thinking before reacting 
7 . Comfort with education and skill
background 
8 . Understanding why 
9 . Separating personal from professional
issues
10 . Building an atmosphere of trust and 
openness
11 . Not needing to be needed
12 . Saying no
13 . Letting go
14 . Taking risks
15 . Asking for help
16 . Exhibiting flexibility
Establishing a Plan 
1 . Negotiating 
2 . Reaching agreements ( i . e .  , closing a
contract ) 
3 . Managing conflict and anger directed at
you 
4 . Managing conflict and anger directed at
someone else 
5 . Offering suggestions appropriately 
6 . Drawing out others 
7 . Accepting the client ’ s definition of the
problem 
8 . Helping the client solve the client ’ s own
problems 
9 . Being realistic about what you can
deliver
10 . Setting realistic goals
11 . Helping the client clarify the problem
12 . Costing out projects in terms of resource
consumption
13 . Thinking through the problem with the
client in a logical sequence
14 . Offering your own ideas freely
15 . Providing feedback in a manner that will
be heard and understood
16 . Working with another whom you do not
necessarily like or appreciate
17 . Exhibiting flexibility in consulting styles 
* Ulschak , F .  ,  & SnowAntle , S .  ( 1990 )  . Consultation skills for health care professionals , p . 98 . San Francisco : 
Jossey-Boss . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 173 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Consultation
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing . It
was then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and academic
experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end of each
annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . It reflects
the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice in the opinion of the experts . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
none
Expert Opinion
Gebelein , S .  ( 1989 , March )  .  “ Profile of an internal consultant : Roles and skills for building client
confidence ” Training and Development Journal , 52-58 . 
Gebelein describes internal consultants as those individuals charged with influencing fellow employees over whom
they have no direct job responsibility . She sets out six functional areas of internal consultation and identifies 20 skills
required . 
Influence : leadership , organizational savvy , coaching and advising
Administrative : priority and time management , project management
Communication : speaking and informing , listening
Problem-solving : diagnosis , decision making , business and technical knowledge
Interpersonal : relationship building , facilitation skills , conflict management , ability to give feedback
Personal : adaptability , trust and integrity , results orientation , service orientation
Expert Opinion = override
Texts and Monographs
Puetz , B .  & Shinn , L .  ( 1997 )  . The consultants ’ s handbook ( pp . 1-21 )  . New York : Springer . 
The authors define consultation as “ providing advice to others . The advice might be in the form of guidance , 
information , knowledge , expertise , or solutions ”  ( p . 1 )  . The book was developed from the responses of 18 nurse
consultants surveyed in 1995 . The authors report that “ successful consulting is a two-way street involving a mix of
the consultant ’ s skills and the client ’ s needs with both participating thoroughly in the process ”  : 
Roles : coach , motivator , mentor , teacher , facilitator , confidant , sounding board , change agent , fact finder , 
expert , observer , counselor
Frameworks : process consultation , expert or content consultation
Skills : diagnostic ability , problem-solving skills , specialized knowledge , communication skills , marketing
expertise , business sense
Personal Traits : listener , observant , objective , flexible , patient , persistent , self-confident , humble , 
possessing integrity
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 174 Interventions
The book is intended as advice to other nurses considering providing consultation as a business . 
Text = 61 . 5%
Stanhope , M .  & Alford , R .  ( 1984 )  . The community health nurse consultant role . In M . Stanhope & J . 
Lancaster . Community health nursing : Process and practice for promoting health ( pp . 689-703 )  . St . 
Louis : Mosby . 
The authors provide no particular definition of consultation but do suggest its goal is “ to stimulate clients to take more
responsibility , feel more secure , deal constructively with their feelings and with others in interaction , and internalize
skills of a flexible and creative nature .  .  .  . The real thing is a cooperative effort between consultant and client , 
established to share equally in the resolution of a problem ”  ( p . 690 )  . They compare and contrast several models of
consultation , but promote adoption of Schein ’ s Process Model , as it closely parallels the nursing process . Schein
defines consultation as “ a process involving a set of activities on the part of the helper which assists the client to
perceive , understand , and act on events occurring in the client ’ s environment ”  ( p . 699 )  . The process model is
portrayed as a triangle , with “ client + consultant ” at the top , assessing the situation . Together , they determine the 
 “ client ”  ( that is , the one who has the “ problem ” and needs to change )  ; they then plan the action interventions , 
implement them in order to solve the problem , and finally , at the base , evaluate outcomes . 
The authors offer Blake and Mouton ’ s five intervention “ modes ” for problem-solving ( p . 695-696 )  : 
Acceptance , or the use of “ a catharsis process to clear emotional blockages [ in order to ] engage in more
objective problem solving ” 
Catalytic ,  “ whereby the consultant assists clients to broaden their view of an existing situation by gaining
additional information or by unifying existing data ” 
Confrontation , which “ provides clients with an objective look at how their values and beliefs control their
behavior ” 
Prescriptive , which tells the client what to do but is most effective when used in conjunction with other
modes
Theory-principles , in which the consultant teaches the client appropriate theories which the client then
applies to the situation 
The client and the problem determine which mode is appropriate for which situation . In general , when the problem
at hand is either a morale / cohesion issue ( that is , when the client has lost confidence in the ability to solve problems
and feels powerless to institute corrective action ) or power / authority issue ( that is , a questioning of who has the right
to make decisions )  , the best mode is usually acceptance . When the issue is one of norms / standards ( that is , group
norms , professional or organizational standards are violated or changed ) or goals / objectives ( that is , new or changed
goals or the inability to meet them )  , the preferred mode is catalytic . The theory-principles mode is useful in situations
where additional insights are needed . The prescriptive mode is best reserved for situations in which the client is
unable to cope and needs immediate direction or answers to solve the problem . 
The authors suggest there are three stages of consultation , each with related tasks : 
1 . Trust-building : initial contact , definition of the relationship , selection of the setting and intervention approach
2 . Problem-solving : gathering data , formalizing the problem , and intervening
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 175 Interventions
3 . Closure : disengagement and termination
Text = 57 . 5% 
* Note : Stanhope and Lancaster ’ s fifth edition of their test , published by Mosby in 2000 , retains the material from
their first edition but greatly expands it . It includes consultation concepts such as service leadership , client
empowerment , and balance between people and tasks , as well as an enhanced section on the interpersonal skills
required for effective consultation . 
Norwood , S .  ( 1998 )  . Nurses as consultants : Essential concepts and processes . Menlo Park , CA : 
Addison-Wesley . 
Chpt . 1 : The Nature of Nursing Consultation ( p . 1-13 ) 
Consultation is a process intended to solve problems and , by doing so , to bring about change . Its purpose is to help
the “ client ” learn to solve problems , and it is a recognized component of nursing practice , regardless of the setting . 
However , consultation is not counseling ; counseling is a direct service provided for the purpose of stimulating selfawareness and promoting personal growth , whereas consultation is an indirect service to clients that focuses on
work-related issues . Consultation is also not teaching ; teaching is a direct intervention directed at patients , whereas
consultation is indirect . 
Chpt . 2 : The Nursing Consultation Process ( p . 14-28 ) 
Phase 1 : Gaining Entry includes environmental scanning , contracting , gaining physical entry , initiating psychological
entry
Phase 2 : Problem Identification utilizes assessment , diagnostic analysis , presentation of findings
Phase 3 : Action Planning consists of goal setting , selecting an intervention , developing the action plan , facilitating
implementation
Phase 4 : Evaluation utilizes formative , summative , process , and outcome methods and measures
Phase 5 : Disengagement relies on determining readiness , maintaining change , managing psychodynamics , achieving
closure
Chpt . 3 : Interaction Patterns for Nursing Consultation ( p . 29-43 ) 
Norwood proposes three basic patterns : 
‚Purchase Expertise , suitable when the client says “ Solve this problem for me .  ” 
‚ “ Doctor-Patient ” Pattern , saying “ Tell me what my problem is and how to solve it .  ” 
‚Process Consultation Pattern , where client says ,  “ I don ’ t know what I need , but I need help .  ” 
Chpt 4 : Nurse Consultant Roles and Skills ( p . 44-60 ) 
Roles Set : 
ËTask Oriented : fact-finding , diagnosing , advocating , directing solution implementation , educating , 
coordinating resources
ËProcess Oriented : joint problem solving , process counseling
Universal : providing expertise , presenting information , role-modeling , providing leadership
Skills Set : technical and human
Text = 51%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 176 Interventions
Lippitt , G .  & Lippitt , R .  ( 1978 )  . The consulting process in action . La Jolla , CA : University Associates , 
Inc . 
Consultation is defined as a general label for many variations of relationships . 
Chpt 3 : Multiple Roles of the Consultant ; pp . 27-44
The authors provide a continuum of roles based on the extent to which the consultant is directly involved in the
problem solving : 
Consultant-As-Advocate ( most directive )  , in which the consultant proposes guidelines , uses persuasion , and directs
the problem-solving process
Informational Expert , where the consultant provides policy or practice decisions and linkages
Trainer / Educator , where the consultant trains the client 
Joint Problem Solver , where the consultant offers alternatives and participates in decisions
Alternative Identifier and Linker , where the consultant identifies alternatives and resources for the client and helps
assess consequences
Fact Finder , where the consultant gathers data , stimulates thinking , and provides interpretation
Process Counselor , where the consultant observes the problem-solving process and raises issues , mirroring
feedback
Objective Observer / Reflector ( least directive )  , where the consultant raises questions for the client ’ s reflection
Chpt . 4 : Intervention Decisions and Actions : Dilemmas , Strategies , and Learning
The authors suggest using two frameworks to identify and classify intervention decisions . 
1 . Five areas or focal points of consultative interventions
Phelping with the task work of clarifying the job to be done and the tools and methods needed 
Phelping with the process work , or assessing the extent to which the use of procedures and relationship
sensitivity is functional
Pclarifying the value orientation underlying a client ’ s decision making
Pworking on resources , or assuring they are sufficient to manage the problems needing solving
Passessing , or monitoring , progress toward established goals
2 . Review of the inventory of 58 decisions to be made within the 6 consultation phases : 
Pinitial contact and entry
Pformulation of a contract and establishment of a working relationship
Pproblem identification and diagnosis
Pgoal setting and planning
Pconversion of plans into actions
Pcontract completion
Text = 36%
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Collaboration
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
45 Adapted from Henneman , Lee ,  & Cohen .  ( 1995 )  . Collaboration : A concept analysis . J . Advanced Nursing , 21 , 103-
109 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 177 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : COLLABORATION
Definition
Collaboration commits two or more persons or organizations to achieving a common goal through
enhancing the capacity of one or more of them to promote and protect health . 45
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : Older adults
Problem : Potential for injury due to falls
Community Example : 
A PHN join forces with the local senior citizens to plan a program for seniors to change the
community perception that falling is inevitable as a person ages . The PHN provides home safety
checklists and educational materials . The seniors add stories of their experiences and what they
would have done differently had they known more about fall prevention . The seniors and the PHN
present the program together at congregate dining centers throughout the community . 
Systems Example : 
PHN forms a collaboration to prevent falls in older adults with the ambulance service , fire
department , Senior Center , CAP agency , Extension Services , and several hospital departments
including Emergency , pharmacy , rehabilitation services , physical therapy , and home care . The
collaboration ’ s goal is that all service providers bring up the topic of fall prevention any time they
provide a service to an older adult , and that they complete a short screen for risk automatically
make appropriate referrals for home assessment . One of the project goals is to change how
provider ’ s approach seniors and their potential for falls . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 178 Interventions
Individual / Family Example : 
Senior citizens self-refer themselves to a program in which PHNs make home visits to older adults
to prevent falls . Together the PHN and the older adult make a plan to remove / reduce injury risks
that includes a review of medications that may affect balance , home modifications to reduce fall
hazards , such as installing grab bars , improving lighting , and removing items that may cause
tripping , and exercise to improve strength , balance , and coordination . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Collective action is the generic term for interventions characterized by groups of people or organizations that
come together to address issues that matter to them jointly . Community organizing , coalition building , and
collaboration are all examples of collective action . Because of this , they share many features , especially at the
community level of practice . 
Like community organizing and coalition building , collaboration is one method of building collective action . 
Similarities 
• Empowerment is an enabling process through which individuals or communities take control of their
lives and environment . It is a basic concept of collective action , although it is not always called 
 “ empowerment .  ” 
• Emphasis is placed on “ beginning where the people are .  ” 
• Reliance on the process of community engagement at the level of community-focused practice ; all
reflect the principles of collective action [ see next note from Abby ]  . 

Differences
• Unlike coalition building and community organizing , collaboration requires a willingness to enhance
the capacity of one or some of the collaborative ’ s members over and above one ’ s own interests in
order to achieve the desired collective goals . In this sense , by collaborating , a person or organization
agrees to the risk ( or benefit ) of becoming transformed or changing themselves through their
involvement . In that regard , collaboration represents the highest level of collective action short of total
merger . 
• Unlike coalition building and community organizing , collaboration can and should occur at the
individual / family level of PHN practice . In most of the current literature , this client / PHN relationship is
referred to as “ partnering ,  ” which proposes the PHN has as much to learn from the encounter as does
the client . 
Collaboration also relates to other interventions . Like coalition building and community organizing , collaboration
can be implemented in conjunction with policy development to change the way systems in a community operate
or to change a community-held norm or belief . Collaboration is also often a co-intervention with advocacy and a
preferred co-intervention with delegated functions . In fact , collaboration , with its intent on accomplishing a
common goal through enhancing the capacity of one or more of its members , has potential for use with any
activity in which the PHN partners with others . At the individual / family level of practice , collaboration is often
paired with health teaching , counseling , consultation , and case management . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 179 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Collective action , or groups of people or organizations coming together for mutual gain or problem solving , is part of
the American democratic tradition . Alexis de Tocqueville , writing in Democracy in America in 1840 , notes :  
 “  .  .  . Americans are a peculiar people .  .  .  . If , in a local community , a citizen becomes aware of a human need that is not
met , he thereupon discusses the situation with his neighbors . Suddenly a committee comes into existence . The
committee thereupon begins to operate on behalf of the need , and a new common function is established . It is like
watching a miracle .  ” 
Effective collective action generally incorporates the following principles , or tenets , described by Leavitt and
Herbert-Davis : 
• The whole is greater than the sum of its parts . 
This is the underlying assumption of all collective action . It acknowledges that the group process will increase
the power of the collective , reflect the broadest perspective , and create a process that results in an outcome
that is likely to be more innovative and comprehensive than if an individual or organization acted alone . 
• While the goals and outcomes of collective action may vary , the process of coming together for joint
action is the same . 
The requirements of working together demand expertise in communication , negotiation , and conflict
management . 
• All politics is local : organizing a collective at the local level has more of an impact on the national level
than the other way around . 
Those closest to the problem or issue are most affected and therefore more likely to be committed to action . 
• All collective action involves a challenge to the existing power structure . 
The resulting conflict is inevitable , and , since it can be anticipated , efforts should be made to depersonalize it . 
This is true whether the collective is between two individuals or two hundred . The most effective collective
action finds ways to share power . 
• The goals of any collective action should include not only a change in a particular problem or issue , but
the empowerment of large numbers of people to be active participants in the process . 
The ultimate goal of acting collectively is to empower those involved . 
Source : Leavitt , J . K .  ,  & Herbert-Davis , M .  ( 1993 )  . Collective strategies for action . In Mason , Talbott ,  & Leavitt ( Eds .  )  , Policy
and politics for nurses : Action and change in the workplace , government , organizations and community ( 2nd ed .  )  . 
Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
46Adapted from : The National Assembly of National Voluntary Health and Social Welfare Organizations .  ( 1991 )  . The
Community Collaboration Handbook ( pp . 8-27 )  . For more information contact : National Collaboration for Youth at 202 / 347-
2080 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 180 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Collaboration46
Systems and Community Practice Levels
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Decide whether or not to collaborate ( that is , to work together mindful of the potential to be
transformed in the process )  . A decision is made through the following steps : 
A . Convene or join an originating group . 
Originating groups are informal groups of community members ( that is , constituencies ) or
representatives of organizations who come together to discuss whether a collaboration could or should
be formed to address a community issue . If the group finds the issue is substantial and the community
would support addressing it , they move to the next step . 
B . Organize an initiating committee . 
The initiating committee accomplishes the following tasks : 
• determines the goal
• drafts a mission statement 
• develops a list of potential members
• gathers data about the issues to be addressed
• determines if other existing groups are already addressing the issue 
• negotiates , if other groups are active , to join forces 
• considers if .  .  . 
• the identified issue is verified through data 
• no other relevant groups exist
• consensus is clear to continue
If so , proceeds to plan the organizational meeting step . 
C . Plan the organizational meeting . 
The purpose of the organizational meeting is to broaden the membership to capture all necessary
representation and decide whether or not to proceed . 
If a decision is made to proceed , the next step is developing the planning committee . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 181 Interventions
D . Convene the planning committee . 
The planning committee ’ s charge is to : 
• design the collaboration
• define or refine the proposed mission , goals , and objectives
• define or refine roles and responsibilities of the participants
• recommend possible priority activities for the collaborative
• determine whether sufficient support exists 
• report recommendations to the originating group . 
If a decision is made to proceed , the planning committee can either continue as a transitional leadership
team or officers can be elected . 
2 . Select structure for the collaborative . 
Structure options include : 
• ad hoc versus ongoing
an ad hoc collaborative accomplishes a given task over a specified length of time and then
disbands
• informal versus formal
collaborations often start as informal groups and evolve into more formal ones with established
leadership and decision-making systems
• unincorporated versus incorporated legal status
• open versus closed membership
members do or do not need to meet criteria for commitment of resources
• outward versus inward-directed
focus is on the needs of the community ( or a population-of-interest ) or inward , focusing on
enhancing the capacity of the member organizations to better meet the community ’ s needs . 
3 . Determine method of leadership selection . 
Leadership options include : 
• rotated leadership among members
• elected leadership
• board appointed . 
4 . Structure the decision-making process . 
Decision-making options include : 
• consensus
• rule of majority 
• members representing their respective organizations
• members representing themselves
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 182 Interventions
The collaboration group must also determine criteria for deciding which decisions need broad action . 
5 . Fashion a list of collaborative actions that fit the collaborative ’ s goal and mission . 
Collaborative actions include : 
• planning and research
• advocacy
• communication and public relations
• service . 
6 . Develop the plan . 
Elements of a plan include : 
• review / refine community assessment
• review / refine / adopt mission statement
• review / refine / adopt goals and objectives
• specify resources needed and develop a budget
• prepare a work plan
• design a monitoring plan
• design an evaluation plan . 
7 . Minimize barriers to collaborative action . 
Actions to reduce barriers include : 
• keep the commitment and activities simple at first
• make clear communication a priority
• spend time getting to know the other members
• make an extra effort , when new members join the collaboration , to include them in the social and
business activities of the group
• encourage members to be “ up front ” about their needs
• do not avoid turf issues and hidden agendas
• develop clear roles for members and leaders
• plan activities that are fun . 
8 . Evaluate results . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 183 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Michael Schrage ( 1990 ) takes a somewhat less serious ( but probably just as meaningful ) tack to his discussion of
collaboration . 
The Rules of Collaboration
• Competence : 
a collaboration of incompetents , no matter how diligent or well-meaning , cannot be successful
• A shared understood goal : 
a collaborative is not described in terms of the relationships among its members , but by the goals and
objectives it seeks to achieve
• Mutual respect , tolerance , and trust : 
successful collaborations do not require friendship ( or even that members like each other )  , but members
must agree to at least a base level of mutual respect , tolerance , and trust to be successful ; they focus on
managing one another ’ s strengths , rather than on one another ’ s lesser qualities
• Creation and manipulation of shared spaces : 
the requirement to come together around shared physical space is the tool that assures that the whole of
the relationship is greater than the sum of the individuals ’ experience . Closeness fosters joint problemsolving or other creative activities . 
• Diverse representation : 
the goal of collaborative work must–to assure mutual understanding–be described separately for each
participating member in language and form that best suits that member ’ s discipline
• Play with the possibilities : 
by tinkering with the goal or model or asking the “ what if ” questions ( as in ,  “ What if we were to do it
this way ?  ”  )  , insights or new possibilities may be found
• Continuous , but not continual communication : 
communication is necessary , but must be done on a basis that does not interfere with members ’ 
individual work , while still assuring the collaborative work is on pace
• Formal and informal environments : 
taking the collaborative process into new and different environments can stimulate creativity among
members
• Clear lines of responsibility , but no restrictive boundaries : 
collaborators should have a clear understanding of their functional role and what is expected , but not
how it should be done 
• Decisions do not have to be made by consensus : 
collaborators should have an unwritten agreement about where they are going , but leave enough room
for debate and disagreement
• Physical presence is not necessary : 
communication is
• Selective use of outsiders : 
successful collaborators constantly look for those people and information that will help them achieve
their mission but only some will be invited
• Collaborations end :  
 “ successful collaborations are more like trysts than great romances ” 
See : Schrage , M .  ( 1990 )  . Shared Minds . New York : Random House . 
47Minnesota Department of Health / Section of Public Health Nursing .  ( 1999 , June )  . The cornerstones of
public health nursing . 
48Courtney , R .  ,  & Ballard , E .  ( 1996 , June )  . The partnership model : Working together with individuals , 
families and communities toward a new vision of health . Public Health Nursing , 13 ( 2 )  , 177-186 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 184 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Collaboration
Individual / Family Practice Level
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
Examples of collaboration between PHNs and individuals or families abound . However , references are rarely
found when searching the literature under the key word ,  “ collaboration .  ” What is found are numerous articles
emphasizing the importance of developing a relationship based on mutual regard and trust . This is a requirement
for collaboration , as well as a cornerstone of public health nursing . 47 In current literature , however , this
relationship basis is increasingly described in terms of “ empowerment ” and “ partnering .  ”  [ See related Abby Note for
more on this .  ] 
Of these , the partnering process described by Courtney and Ballard48 comes closest to the spirit of collaboration
used in this intervention . It serves here as the basic steps for practice at the individual and family level , although
the authors are clear regarding its applicability at the community level , also . 
1 . Explore Potential Partners
A . Familiarize yourself with potential partners
• assess for their unique personal perspective ; that is , determine “ where they are coming from ” 
• gain an awareness of the community context 
• use traditional means of community assessment blended with the personal experience of being in
the community to gain this awareness
B . Initiate facilitated dialogue
• create opportunities for dialogue ( for example , a home or clinic visit ) 
• listen carefully to discover or identify the individual ’ s or family ’ s goals ; this is not to create an
action plan , but , rather , to serve as a catalyst for their thinking and reflecting about what they
want to accomplish through this partnership
• ask questions such as 
 “ What would you like to see happen ?  ”  
 “ What role do you want to take ?  ”  
 “ How would you like to begin ?  ”  
 “ Who else should be involved ?  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 185 Interventions
2 . Invite Partners
A . Risk Taking
• for the PHN , this means abandoning the professional role and assuming a co-equal , 
nonhierarchical relationship
• for the partner , it means assuming more responsibility for taking action and creating solutions and
results
B . Commitment to Role Change
• changing roles requires time , patience , considerable trial and error , and more than an intellectual
understanding of the process
3 . Develop Partnership Action
A . Initiation of action once the partner agrees
• facilitate deeper exploration of issues and concerns
• assist the partner in developing a list of possible issues to be addressed
• ensure the PHN ’ s role is that of facilitator and enabler , not “ fixer ”  ; this can be frustrating at first
for the client , who may prefer to have the PHN assume the role of the “ expert ” 
B . Working phase cycle
Action
• develop a plan with mutually agreed-upon steps to be taken by both partner and the PHN
• allow sufficient time and resources for the partner to develop any new skills required to carry out
his / her steps
Evaluation / Renegotiation
• have partner and PHN regularly reflect on progress toward goals
• renegotiate changes in action steps as needed
• revise and re-initiate action plan , as needed
C . End
The partnership ends when both parties agree to end . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 186 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Empowerment implies the development of a person , family , group , system , or community ’ s capacity to take
charge , make choices deliberately , and believe that the future can be influenced . Although Joyce Zerwekh , 
associate professor of nursing at Florida Atlantic University , calls her third foundation of public health nursing
practice “ building strength ” and not “ empowerment ,  ” by definition and usage , they are very much the same
concept . In fact , in earlier writing , Zerwekh used the term empowerment extensively .  
[ See : Zerwekh , J .  ( 1992 , March )  . Laying the groundwork for family self-help : Locating families , building trust , and building
strength . Public Health Nursing , 9 ( 1 )  , 15-21 . Also , Zerwekh , J .  ( 1992 , Summer )  . The practice of empowerment and coercion by
expert public health nurses . IMAGE : Journal of Nursing Scholarship , 24 ( 2 )  , 101-105 .  ] 
Partnering is usually used to differentiate the approach used by PHNs ( that is ,  “ doing with ”  ) from that of the 
 “ professional ” model ( that is ,  “ doing for ” or “ doing to ”  )  . Courtney and Ballard , for instance , define partnership as 
 “ the sharing of power between health professional and individual , family , and / or community partners . These
partners agree to be involved as active participants .  .  .  . The ultimate goal of the partnership process is to enhance
the capacity [ of others ] to act more effectively on their own behalf ”  ( p . 180 )  . As another example , note the
change in title between Anderson and McFarlane ’ s first , second , and third editions of their text on the
community-focused level of practice . The 1988 edition is titled Community As Client . The 1996 and 2000
editions are titled “ Community As Partner .  ” Additionally , the third edition includes a new chapter on 
 “ Community empowerment and healing ” which are described as the “ theoretical underpinnings to the concept , 
community as partner ”  ( p . 92 )  .  
[ See : Courtney , R .  ,  & Ballard , E .  ( 1996 , June )  . The partnership model : Working with individual , families , and communities toward
a new vision of health . Public Health Nursing , 13 ( 2 )  , 177-186 . 
Anderson , E .  ,  & McFarlane , J .  ( 1996 , 2000 )  . Community as partner : Theory and practice ( 2nd and 3rd eds .  )  . Philadelphia : 
Lippincott .  ] 
It would appear that these are overlapping concepts , each derived from a somewhat different school of thought , 
but essentially pointed in the same direction . The one difference noted is that collaboration implies a risk of
transformation for both the PHN and client ; the literature reviewed on empowerment and partnering attributes
transformation only to the client . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 187 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Collaboration
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . SELECTS THE MODEL OF COLLECTIVE ACTION THAT BEST MEETS THE
CIRCUMSTANCES . 
Best Evidence : Himmelman , 1993 ; Hoffman ; Public Health Practice Program Office ( PHPPO ) 
Collaboration is considered the most intensive form of collective action and , as such , requires the greatest
commitment of time and resources . Collaboration is the preferred model , if the goal is to transform the way
communities and organizations “ do business .  ” However , if less intensive ways of working together can achieve
the goals desired , developing collaborative action may be excessive . 
Himmelman provides a useful framework to assist in this model selection : 
Networking : exchanging information for mutual benefit
‚ is the most informal
‚ is the easiest to form
‚ reflects an initial level of trust and commitment among member organizations
‚ is a good structure if only exchange of information is needed
Coordination : exchanging information AND altering activities for mutual benefit and to achieve a common
purpose
‚ is a good strategy to use when persons or organizations choosing to link have neither worked
together in the past nor have experience with coordination
‚ works best when all affected persons or organizations share in decisions about their intended and
unintended outcomes
Cooperation : exchanging information , altering activities , AND sharing resources for mutual benefit and to
achieve a common purpose
‚ requires greater commitments , even legal arrangements in some cases
‚ shares a wide variety of human , financial , and technical resources
Collaboration : exchanging information , altering activities , sharing resources , AND enhancing the capacity of
another for mutual benefit and to achieve a common purpose
‚ requires sharing risks , resources , responsibilities , and rewards , all of which can increase the
potential of collaboration beyond other ways of working together
‚ involves seeing each other as partners , not competitors , and seeking to enhance their partners ’ 
individual capacities to help accomplish a common purpose
‚ is best used only when networking , coordination , or cooperation cannot achieve mutual goals
‚ challenges values of others frequently
‚ involves complex processes
‚ requires considerable time 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 188 Interventions
2 . ASSURES THAT THE COMPONENTS OF EFFECTIVE COLLABORATION ARE PRESENT . 
Best Evidence : Bailey and Koney ; Hennemen ; Hoffman ; Mattessich and Monsey ; Polivka , 1995 ; Polivka , 1997 ; 
Spradley and Allender ; White and Wehlage ; Wimpfheimer , Bloom , and Kramer
The core components of effective collaboration include : 
‚ effective leadership , both formal and informal
‚ members who , with the leaders , are committed to the work
‚ shared values and sense of purpose among leaders and members
‚ functioning linkages or relationships between the collaborative and related groups and individuals
‚ effective strategies and sufficient resources for achieving goals
‚ functional structure that supports the collaborative work
‚ internal systems that are adequate to support the structure . 
Collaboration is challenged by several paradoxes , or seemingly contradictory , but true circumstances . Bailey
and Koney provide insight into some of these : 
‚ Leaders of collaboratives must be simultaneously assertive ( in terms of keeping the collaborative
partners focused on the jointly held goal ) and responsive to those same partners ’ interests , since
they are the ones setting the agenda
‚ Collaborative partners must work with the collaborative leadership , while at the same time being
leaders themselves in their respective organizations 
‚ The interorganizational structures and systems that provide for collaborative action must be both
rigid and loose , open and closed ( that is , flexible ) in order to be effective . 
3 . NEGOTIATES WIN / WIN OUTCOMES , COMMUNICATION , SHARED RISKS AND
BOUNDARIES . 
Best Evidence : Gray ; Henry and others ; Hennenman ; Himmelman , 1993 ; Lindeke and Block ; Mattessich and
Monsey ; McCloskey and Maas ; Spradley and Allender ; Uphold and Graham ; Wimpfheimer , Bloom , and
Kramer
Effective collaborative action depends on the following conditions : 
‚ Perception of potential “ win-win ” outcomes for all collaborators
‚ Existence of an open communication system among the partners , which allows for ownership of the
problem , as well as responsibility for its resolution
‚ Shared risks among all partners ; risks become the essential motivators for working together
‚ Early establishment of those boundaries which an agency or its representative will not go beyond
Collaboratives vary from other forms of collective action in the level of risk involved . The risk is that the person
or their organization may be transformed ( or change how they do business ) as a result of their involvement with
the collaborative . The commitment to the mutual goal makes the risk of change necessary . It is made tolerable
only by the existence of open communication among the partners ( that is , no one has a hidden agenda )  . Because
of this risk of transformation , however , PHNs ( and other collaborators ) must be clear about their boundaries or
limits . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 189 Interventions
Lindeke and Block , for instance , describe the ethical dilemmas encountered in interdisciplinary collaboration for
delivering health care . They found that four main sources of constraints or barriers to true collaboration are : 
‚ communication styles and assumptions
‚ power and authority differences
‚ professional socialization
‚ structural factors such as salary differences . 
These barriers were resolved by remaining focused on client outcomes , while at the same time modeling nursing ’ s
core values and principles . 
McCloskey and Maas share this perspective , but broaden the discussion to a more political level . They contend
that interdisciplinary collaboration does not mean that the participating disciplines take on each others ’ features
and become something different . They propose that the heart of collaboration is recognizing and building on each
others ’ strengths to provide a complementary , rather than a competitive , approach to health care delivery . 
4 . PROVIDES LEADERSHIP TO THE COLLABORATIVE WORK . 
Best Evidence : Bailey and Koney ; Flynn ; Gray ; Wimpfheimer , Bloom , and Kramer ; Wood and Gray
The PHN provides leadership to the collaborative work by : 
‚ interpreting accurately data about the issues being addressed and their actual or potential impact on
health
‚ enhancing partners ’ understanding of the multiple determinants of health
‚ modeling the appropriate use for , and resolution of , conflict
‚ listening to those who will be affected by the decisions made and assuring their inclusion in the
decision-making process
‚ contributing to the development of consensus
‚ understanding volunteerism in collaborative work and helping to manage its consequences 
‚ providing information on the effectiveness of strategies implemented elsewhere which address similar
issues
‚ planning , developing , and implementing community-based health services
‚ advocating for health-promoting policy . 
Providing leadership to a collaborative effort is frequently referred to as serving as “ convener ,  ” or someone who
facilitates the forum through which the work is done . However , this role is more than facilitation ; the convener is
often also the person who has to keep the group focused on accomplishing the collaborative goal and prevent the
group ’ s energy or resources from being diverted to competing interests . 
Most members of collaboratives are not paid to serve . In that sense , they are “ volunteers ” –although they may be 
 “ volunteered ” by their respective organizations . This guarantees a certain frequency of turnover in the
collaborative ’ s membership , as individuals change jobs or functions . Another barrier is that serving in a
collaboration is usually “ added ” to an individual ’ s other job responsibilities . Thus , the collaboration competes for
time with the person ’ s “ real ” job . 
49Minnesota Department of Health / Section of Public Health Nursing .  ( 1999 , June )  . The cornerstones of
public health nursing . St . Paul , MN . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 190 Interventions
Wood and Gray describe the main “ tools ” available to the convener to influence the collaboration : 
‚ legitimation , or the recognition by collaborative members of the conveners ’ right to lead
‚ facilitation , or expertise in group process and communication
‚ mandate , or leadership specified by some outside authority such as a legislative order
‚ persuasion , or capacity to motivate others to act
5 . DEVELOPS INTERPERSONAL TRUST RELATIONSHIPS WITH PARTNERS . 
Best Evidence : Flynn ; Henry and others ; Hennenman ; Himmelman , 1993 ; Mattessich and Monsey ; McCloskey
and Maas ; Paavilaninen and Astedt-Kurki ; PHPPO ; Spradley and Allender ; Stanhope and Lancaster
This best practice holds true regardless of the level of practice . Public health nurses are “ naturals ” for
collaborative work , given that the relationship-basis is one of the cornerstones of the discipline . 49 Examples from
all levels of practice are found in the literature reviewed . For instance : 
At the individual / family level of practice : 
Paavilaninen and Astedt-Kurki ’ s qualitative research study of PHNs ’ work in Finland provides an analysis
of collaboration . They found that the initial step of trust development takes place over time during which
the client “ tests ” the PHN in a variety of ways . These tests begin with demonstrations of dependability and
reliability and move toward building confidence in each other ’ s trustworthiness . 
The extent to which the PHN communicates “ friendliness ” or true caring is critical to the development of 
 “ the experience of togetherness ,  ” or the mutual understanding that , together , they are “ engaged in a joint
mission to help the client better cope with his or her situation .  ” Once this stage is reached , movement
toward goal attainment proceeds . 
At the systems level of practice : 
Lindeke and Block found in their work with multiple disciplines that they first had to develop interpersonal
relationships with other health professionals before those health professionals could recognize the need for a
therapeutic relationship with clients . 
At the community level of practice : 
Henneman and others ’ concept analysis of collaboration , as found in nursing literature , provides several
principles : 
‚ collaboration depends on respect for and trust of self as well as others
‚ developing collaborative efforts requires extensive time and patience 
‚ collaboration really can occur only between people , not institutions ; in the end , it is the relationships
that develop between the people who happen to be representing those institutions that make
collaboration successful or not
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 191 Interventions
6 . ANTICIPATES AND INTERCEDES WITH PREDICTABLE GOVERNANCE PROBLEMS . 
Best Evidence : White and Wehlage ; Wood and Gray
Predictable governance problems include : 
‚ slippage between policy and action
‚ disagreement over policy
‚ disconnection between policy decisions and community conditions . 
Collaborative efforts require significant energy and resources to maintain , once they are developed . When they
run into difficulty or get “ off track ,  ” it is usually related to one or more of the factors listed above . This occurs
more often in large and / or longstanding collaboratives . Frequently , these slippages may be the result of : 
‚ the natural turnover inherent in collaboratives , as old members leave when the collaborative goal no
longer fits with their own organization
‚ job changes resulting in changes in representatives to the collaborative
‚ failure to adequately orient new members to the collaborative ’ s mission and goals
‚ failure to renew that commitment with current members to assure continuing agreement with the
mission and goals . 
Disagreement among members over problem definitions , causes , and remedies also creates rifts , especially in
collaboratives attempting to unite public and private agencies . White and Wehlage note ,  “ Though noble in
purpose , mixing public agencies and private sector organizations ( both for profit and nonprofit ) required a level of
organizational complexity that taxed the intellectual and political skill of the communities [ attempting to build a
collaborative ]  ”  ( p . 24 )  . Bad policy stemming from a disconnection between decision-makers and community
reality is most often related to collaborative boards which have too many administrators and too few “ front line ” 
workers in their membership mix . 
7 . ACCURATELY ASSESSES THE DEVELOPMENTAL PHASE OF THE COLLABORATIVE
AND ADJUSTS HIS / HER BEHAVIOR ACCORDINGLY . 
Best Evidence : Gray ; Paavilainen and Astedt-Kurki ; Polivka and others , 1997 ; Spradley and Allender ; Stanhope
and Lancaster
The developmental phases of a collaboration are : 
‚ Problem-solving : 
partners negotiate issues of legitimacy and come to appreciate the interdependence that exists
among them
‚ Direction-setting : 
partners articulate the values that guide their individual pursuits and begin to identify and
appreciate a sense of common purpose
‚ Structuring : 
partners create long-term structures to support and sustain their collective actions and problemsolving activities ; this includes establishing goals and assigning roles and tasks
The PHN must be flexible and able to alter behavior to match the collaborative ’ s developmental phase . 
However , in all phases , it is critical that the PHN have sufficient self-knowledge and confidence to articulate the
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 192 Interventions
role and contribution of public health nursing . Often , what appears to be lack of appreciation for what public
health nursing offers is related not so much to outright rejection or disregard but , rather , to a general
lack of knowledge about the discipline . 
This was the finding of Polivka , Kennedy , and Chaudry ( 1997 ) in their study of collaboration between PHNs and
mental health agencies in Ohio . They found that although mental health center directors indicated they were
satisfied with their center ’ s relationship with local public health nursing agencies , the PHN directors were strongly
dissatisfied , based on service utilization . Further analysis showed that the mental health center directors were
largely uninformed about the potential a collaborative could offer their clientele . The authors concluded that 
 “  .  .  . the more [ staff ] in other agencies know others in different agencies , the more clients are referred between the
agencies , the more funds and information are exchanged ,  [ and ] the greater satisfaction with interagency
relationships ”  ( p . 160 )  . In other words , to assure a place for public health nursing at the collaborative “ table ,  ” 
PHNs cannot afford to wait for an invitation or be shy . As the saying goes ,  “ The world belongs to those who
show up .  ” 
A Humorous Note from Abby
Collaboration is Like Teenage Sex Because .  .  . 
• Everyone is talking about it all the time . 
• Everyone thinks everyone else is doing it . 
• Those who are doing it are :  
< doing it poorly 
< sure it will be better next time 
< not practicing it safely
• Everyone is bragging about their successes all the time , although few have truly experienced
success . 
• Done right , it multiplies . 
Deb Wells
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 193 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Collaboration
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and
academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end
of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . 
It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Mattessich , P .  ,  & Monsey , B .  ( 1992 )  . Collaboration : What makes it work ; A review of research
literature on factors influencing successful collaboration . St . Paul : Amherst H . Wilder Foundation .  
[ Note : See also the companion document , Collaboration Handbook : Creating , Sustaining , and Enjoying the Journey ( 1994 ) 
by M . Winer & K . Ray ( St . Paul : Amherst H . Wilder Foundation )  .  ] 
Collaboration is defined as “ a mutually beneficial and well-defined relationship entered into by two or more
organizations to achieve common goals . The relationship includes a commitment to : a definition of mutual
relationships and goals ; a jointly developed structure and shared responsibility ; mutual authority and accountability
for success ; and sharing of resources and rewards ”  ( p . 7 )  . Based on an extensive literature review , the authors
identify six factors influencing a collaboration ’ s success : 
1 . Environment
a . History of collaboration or cooperation in the community
b . Collaborative group seen as already in the community
c . Political / social climate favorable
2 . Membership
a . Mutual respect , understanding , and trust exist
b . Appropriate cross-section of members
c . Members seeing collaboration as in their self-interest
d . Ability to compromise
3 . Process / Structure
a . Members share a stake in both process and outcome
b . Multiple layers of decision-making
c . Flexibility
d . Development of clear roles and policy guidelines
e . Adaptability
4 . Communication
a . Open and frequent communications
b . Established information and formal communication links
5 . Purpose
a . Concrete , attainable goals and objectives
b . Shared vision
c . Unique purpose
6 . Resources
a . Sufficient funds
b . Skilled convener . 
Review = 55%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 194 Interventions
Wood , D .  ,  & Gray , B .  ( 1991 , June )  . Toward a comprehensive theory of collaboration . J . of Applied
Behavioral Science , 27 ( 2 )  , 139-162 . 
Collaboration is defined broadly as “ an interorganizational phenomenon designed to achieve desired ends that no
single organization can achieve acting unilaterally ”  ( p . 140 )  . The authors then review a series of studies and
reviews on the topic to reach the following conclusions : 
Revised Definition : Collaboration occurs when a group of autonomous stakeholders of a problem domain engage
in interaction process , using shared rules , norms and structures . To act or decide on issued related to that
domain ”  ( p . 146 )  . 
1 . Convener role 
Pto influence the collaborative through legitimation , facilitation , mandate ( i . e .  , formal authority )  , and / or
persuasion
Pto develop alliances among the levels of collaboration within collaboratives , it is necessary to convene only
the necessary stakeholders , not all
2 . Reducing environmental complexity and enhancing control
Paccessing resources
Pusing resources efficiently
Pdeveloping rules governing resource use
Pshared versus individual control
Pusing complexity as a resource
3 . Sorting Interests
Poften , collaboratives work because the collective interest of the collaborative also meets the self-interests
of those in the collaborative
Pthere are three types of self-interests in this analysis : 
Sshared–those held in common by the stakeholders
Sdiffering–self-interests present which do not interfere with each other
Sopposing–self-interests present which do interfere
Pas long as the collective interest ( i . e .  , the belief in benefits to be gained by collaborative effort ) exceeds the
sum of the self-interests , the collaborative effort will not be lost
Review = 52 . 5%
Research Reports
Paavilainen , E .  ,  & Astedt-Kurki , P .  ( 1997 , July )  . The client-nurse relationship as experience by public
health nurses : Toward better collaboration . Public Health Nursing , 14 ( 3 )  , 137-138 . 
The authors report on a study of PHNs in Finland that explored the nature of the client-PHN relationship and
identified key elements of collaboration . Public health nurse practice in Finland is described as “ promoting the
client ’ s health , social well-being , security , and quality of life ; to strengthen and increase the client ’ s independent
control over his / her life ; to eliminate health risks and to assist in diagnosing and treating illnesses as early as
possible ; to help clients with rehabilitation ; to generate in the public a genuine interest in health promotion and
encourage efforts at active self-care ”  ( p . 137 )  . This is carried out in a model known in Finland as “ population
responsibility nursing ” which , as described , is similar to PHN-generalists assigned to geographic districts in the
U . S . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 195 Interventions
On the premise that achieving these goals required the establishment of relationships with both clients and
communities and that relationships that are collaborative in nature best promote progress to self-care in either
clients or communities , the authors designed a qualitative study of the practice of eleven experienced , respected
PHNs . The authors concluded that PHN-client collaboration was experienced as a sense of “ togetherness .  .  . of
being engaged in a joint mission to help the client better cope with his or her situation ” and that this condition had
to exist before change could occur ( p . 140 )  . 
To develop collaboration , the client and the PHN first had to establish trust , a friendly and confidential
relationship , common actions , experience of togetherness , client ’ s well-being , and the ability to cope . 
Qualitative = 65%
Polivka , B .  , Kennedy , C .  ,  & Chaudry , R .  ( 1997 )  . Collaboration between local public health and
community mental health agencies . Research in Nursing and Health , 20 , 153-160 . 
As part of a study of current and potential roles for PHNs in the care of individuals with severe mental disabilities
in Ohio , a sample of PHN directors in local public health agencies , and executive directors of community mental
health agencies were surveyed . The survey included nine items on interagency relationships , on the assumption
that interagency processes have a direct , positive effect on outcomes ( p . 154 )  . The items , in turn , were derived
from a conceptualization of community interagency collaborative model that included five factors : 
environmental context : relationships with the broader social environment
situational factors : organizational antecedents that contribute to the likelihood of the formation of
relationships
task factors : the nature of the technologies occurring in the system
interagency processes : structure and processes of relationships among the organizations
outcomes ( e . g .  , satisfaction among collaborators and programmatic successes ) 
In general , they found that mental health center directors perceived greater collaboration between the systems
than did directors of nursing and also greater satisfaction , although , in fact , very little evidence of collaborative
action was found . The simple act of being acquainted with the people in other agencies impacted the client
referral and decision-making process to the greatest extent and supports the imperative that PHNs get to know
staff from other agencies with whom they need to collaborate in the best interests of the clientele . 
Quantitative / non-experimental = 46%
Expert Opinion
Uphold , C .  ,  & Graham , M .  ( 1993 , September / October )  . Schools as centers for collaborative services
for families : A vision for change . Nursing Outlook , 41 ( 5 )  , 204-211 . 
The authors offer the challenge that if we , as a society , are truly committed to promoting and improving child and
family development , then schools should be reconceived as Family Service Centers . These would include
primary health care services . Since school nurses have traditionally been the linkages between the educational
and health care systems , the authors suggest the school nurse lead the development of such collaborative models . 
They provide a rationale supporting their premise and offer a case study of a Family Services Center prototype in
a Gainesville , Florida middle school in collaboration with that state ’ s health department . Although the article does
not speak to the interpersonal or interorganizational aspects of developing such collaboratives , it does provide
substantial discussion of need and reasoned response . 
Expert Opinion = 82 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 196 Interventions
Kang , R .  ( 1997 )  . Building community capacity for health promotion : A challenge for public health
nurses . In B . Spradley & J . Allender , Readings in Community Health Nursing ( pp . 221-232 )  . 
Philadelphia : Lippincott .  
[ Note : Kang also published this piece in 1995 in Public Health Nursing , 12 ( 5 )  , 312-318 .  ] 
Kang asserts that PHNs are “ vital for building the capacity of communities to create a responsive public health
system for health promotion and disease prevention [ in response to health reform ’ s focus on cost-containment ]  .  ” 
She goes on to suggest that PHNs ’ strength in developing community capacity is their familiarity with the internal
working of communities and the lives of people in them ”  ( p . 222 )  . She reviews PHNs long history in community
development and places it within the context of “ contemporary challenges ”  ( i . e .  , the IOM ’ s 1988 Future of
Public Health )  . 
Kang sees communities ’  “ mediating structures ”  ( i . e .  , entities which formally or informally structure a means of
inter-organizational or interpersonal communication , such as schools , churches , social groups , etc .  ) as potential
PHN partners for creating community health change . She goes on to describe how this partnering can be a critical
component of PHNs ’ developing communities ’ capacities for assessment , policy development , and assurance and
suggests that “ guiding principles of respect , distributive justice , and beneficence undergird partnerships between
public health nurses and communities ”  ( p . 231 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 76%
Henry , V .  , Schmitz , K .  , et al .  ( 1992 , December )  . Collaboration : Integrating practice and research in
nursing . Public Health Nursing , 9 ( 4 )  , 218-222 . 
A research collaboration between two rural PHN agencies and faculty in a small-college BSN program is
described and analyzed for key components of collaboration as proposed by Lancaster .  
[ See : Lancaster , J .  ( 1985 )  . The perils and joys of collaborative research . Nursing Outlook , 5 , 231-232 , 238 .  ]  : 
1 . Communication : openness and accessibility between the faculty serving as researchers / consultants and
the agency staff was deemed critical
2 . Commitment : both the BSN program and the agencies operated with limited resources , and , despite the
availability of a small amount of grant funding to support the collaborative research effort , time had to be
carefully negotiated
3 . Compatibility : pre-existing positive mutual regard assisted in the development of a negotiated
collaboration
4 . Consensus : compromise between the needs and demands of PHN practice versus those of the research
process had to be carefully balanced
5 . Credit : respectful attribution of credit is important
Benefits of collaboration to both practice and research are discussed in the conclusion . 
Expert Opinion = 71%
Polivka , B .  ( 1995 , Summer )  . A conceptual model for community interagency collaboration . IMAGE : J . 
of Nursing Scholarship , 27 ( 2 )  , 110-115 . 
Polivka describes the development of her model for community interagency collaboration based on an extensive
literature of the factors . She suggests ,  “ Traditionally , it has been assumed that organizations only reluctantly enter
into inter-organizational relationships because of the costs and potential loss of control . Yet because of limited
resources , collaborative relationships must often be formed ”  ( p . 110 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 197 Interventions
The model elements and their function are as follows : 
Environmental Context : the political , economic , demographic , and social factors affecting organizational
behavioral factors currently promote collaboration among organizations
Situational Factors : pre-existing organizational elements that contribute to the need or desire to enter into
relationships , such as 
Pawareness of other organizations ( i . e .  , knowledge of their resources , goals , capacities , and personnel ) 
increases collaboration
Presource dependence on external sources decreases collaboration
Pdomain similarity ( i . e .  , the amount of overlap of clients , funding sources , activities , etc .  )  ; the more
complementary the domains , the greater the motivation for collaboration
Pconsensus ( i . e .  , the degree to which organizations agree or disagree with each other ’ s goals , tasks , etc .  )  ; 
the greater the concordance , the greater the likelihood of collaboration
Task Characteristics : 
PScope : extent of collaboration required
PComplexity : time and duration of collaboration ; the greater the complexity , the more likely to collaborate
PUncertainty : unpredictability of the outcome
Transactional Factors : 
PIntensity : quality and quantity of inter-organizational information and resources exchanged ; the greater the
exchange , the more likely to collaborate
PJoint Decision-making Strategies : extent to which organizational management is carried out jointly
SMutual adjustment : few resource demands , few joint decisions , and power is decentralized ; few
common goals exist and collaboration is focused on specific cases
SCorporate collaboration : an umbrella or overarching authority is developed and relationships become
intense , formalized , and centralized
SAlliance collaboration : intermediate form of collaboration between mutual adjustment and corporate
strategies ; alliances can be either a 
* federation model ( a centralized administration exists )  , or 
* coalitions or councils ( no centralized administration ) 
Structure : 
Psize : number of participating organizations 
Pcentralization : extent to which resource and information flow are focused on one or more agencies 
Pconnectiveness : number of interagency linkages
Pinter-organizational pattern types : pairs , sets , networks
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 198 Interventions
The model suggests that the development of multi-agency coordinated community health efforts are a function of : 
Environmental Conditions + Pre-existing Organizational Situational Factors + 
Task Characteristics
Once alliances are formed , the structure and operation of collaborative effort are a function of inter-organizational 
Intensity + Formalization + Decision-Making Methods + 
Size + Centrality + Relationship Patterns
Outcome of these relationships include : 
Organizational Changes + Inter-organizational Relations 
9
Achievement of Mutually Set Goals Related to Clients and Communities
Expert Opinion = 67%
Himmelman , A .  ( 1993 , May )  . An introduction to community-based collaboration .  ( Arthur T . 
Himmelman Assoc .  , 1406 West Lake St .  , Suite 209 , Minneapolis , MN 55408 ) 
In this paper , the author describes four options for organizations to form inter-organizational linkages : 
Networking : exchanging information for mutual benefit
Pmost informal
Peasiest to form
Preflecting initial levels of trust and commitment among member organizations
Pstructurally good if the goal is only exchange of information
Coordination : exchanging information AND altering activities for mutual benefit and to achieve a common
purpose
Pstrategically good when organizations choosing to link are both internally and inter-organizationally
disorganized
Pbest when all parties affected share in decisions about their intended consequences , as well as in
consideration of the unintended ones . 
Cooperation : exchanging information , altering activities , AND sharing resources for mutual benefit and to achieve
a common purpose Prequires greater organizational commitments , even legal arrangements in some cases
Presults in shared resources encompassing a wide variety of human , financial , and technical contributions . 
Collaboration : exchanging information , altering activities , sharing resources , AND enhancing the capacity of
another for mutual benefit and to achieve a common purpose
Penhancing the capacity of another organization requires sharing risks , resources , responsibilities , and
rewards , all of which can increase the potential of collaboration beyond other ways of working together
Pinvolving members who see each other as partners , not competitors , and seek to enhance their 
partners ’ capacity to achieve their own definitions of excellence to help accomplish a common purpose
Pbest used only when other inter-organization strategies cannot achieve mutual goals
Poften challenges values of member organizations
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 199 Interventions
Pinvolves complex processes
Prequires considerable time
Prequires an understanding that sharing risks , responsibilities , resources , and rewards is central to effective
collaboration
Sall partners take the risk together and do not let one member “ go first to test the waters ” 
Seach partner must share resources to the best of their ability ( broadly defined to include such things
as community goodwill ) 
Srewards must also be shared . 
Two types of collaboratives exist : 
1 . Collaborative betterment
Pbegins outside the community within public , private , or nonprofit institutions and is brought into the
community
Pinvites community involvement
Pis good for short-term gains but tends not to produce long-term ownership in communities or significantly
to increase communities ’ control over their own destinies
Ptypical of most multisector collaboratives
Betterment principles : 
Plarge and influential institutions initiate the process primarily within institutional frameworks , assumptions , 
and value systems . 
Pstaff are responsible to institutions , and , although they seek advice from target communities , staff are not
directly accountable to them
Paction plans are usually designed with some direct community involvement , but normally emphasize the
ideas of institutionally related professionals and experts
Pimplementation processes include more community representation and require significant community
acceptance , but control of decision-making and resource allocation is not transferred to the community
during the implementation phase
Palthough advice from the community is considered , the decision to terminate the collaborative is made by
the institution that initiates it . 
2 . Collaborative Empowerment
Begins within the community and is brought to public , private , or nonprofit institutions . In this context
empowerment refers to the capacity to set priorities and control resources that are essential for increased
community self-determination . 
Pempowerment includes two basic activities : 
a . Organizing a community in support of a collaborative purpose determined by the community
b . Facilitating a process for integrating outside institutions in support of this community purpose
Pthese are likely to produce long-term ownership of the collaborative ’ s purpose , processes , and products
in communities and to enhance their capacity for self-determination
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 200 Interventions
Empowerment Principles : 
Process is initiated in a community and is assisted by community organization ; the early problem identification
process involves both data-based trend analysis and narrative examples from community residents ; equal
importance is ascribed to each
Pcommunity priorities are reflected in collaboratives ’ purposes
Pnegotiations with outside agencies and institutions produce agreements to proceed on a collaborative basis
under the purpose established by the community , and within a governance and administrative process in
which power is equally shared by the community and outside organizations
Pgovernance and management structure includes a policy board , an executive committee , action groups for
implementing plans , and staff agreeable to the community to assist the collaborative
Psubstantial attention is given to balancing administration goals and community participants ’ goals
Pgoals are implemented through action plans fully supported by community residents , as well as by
representatives from the public , private , and nonprofit institutions from outside the community
Pcommitments to assessment and evaluation in public settings provide community-based organizations with
opportunities for monitoring the progress of the collaborative
Pcommunity control of resources needs to continue efforts beyond the termination of the collaborative . 
General observations about effective collaboration : 
1 . Requires maturity beyond an ego-centered state of development . 
2 . Multisector collaboration ( i . e .  , among private , nonprofit , and governmental entities ) is part of a long tradition in
which the appropriate respective roles for each have been debated and changed over time ; previous history
regarding these debates needs to be kept in mind . 
3 . Multisector collaboration is complex and requires considerable time , which might make it inappropriate for
some settings . 
4 . Empowerment should begin in the community and be guided by community members who will share real
power with larger institutions . 
5 . Collaborations designed to better communities , but not to empower them , should not be discounted . They do
good things for communities , but do not necessarily build community capacity . 
6 . Collaboration requires a common vision , so that the direction and possible outcomes of the effort can be seen
from the outset . 
7 . The importance of trust and its role in encouraging the sharing of information and expertise among all
participants should be reinforced . 
8 . There is no “ they ” in collaboration ; shared responsibility and accountability should be at the core of all
problem-identification and problem-solving processes . 
9 . Consistent attendance at meetings is essential as is coming to meetings prepared . 
10 . Communication within participating organizations is as important as communication among participating
members . 
11 . When representatives of organizations are replaced , they should provide as much advance notice as possible
and fully orient the new person . 
12 . Clarity in the collaborative ’ s governance structure and lines of accountability is essential . 
13 . Communication among collaborative members should be continually fine-tuned so that the collaborative
knows what it is doing and can easily explain its activities to those not directly involved . 
14 . Time constraints should be considered realistically and early . 
15 . Collaborative membership should be diverse . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 201 Interventions
16 . Organizations participating in collaborative efforts would do well to “ walk the talk ” by reflecting collaborative
and supportive policies and practices in their own organization . There is a close relationship between how a
person feels as part of an organization and how that organization participates in community problem-solving
activities . 
17 . Community-based collaborations are well-suited to participation from a diverse array of institutions . 
18 . Those seeking to participate in collaboratives as leaders , organizers , facilitators , and members should discuss
and practice participatory democratic processes . 
19 . Common courtesy is one of the most essential characteristics of collaboration . 
In designing a collaborative , Himmelman suggests the following steps : 
1 . What is your vision ? 
2 . Who is involved ? 
3 . What expectations should you have for each ? 
4 . What is your mission ? 
5 . What are your goals and objectives ? 
6 . What can each partner contribute ? 
7 . Who will be responsible for getting the work done ? 
8 . How good is leadership , management , and staffing ? 
9 . How is your collaborative governed ? Who makes decisions and what authority do they have to make them ? 
10 . How will people find out about by your activities ? 
11 . How much money do you need , and how will you secure it ? 
12 . How will evaluate your processes and products ? 
Expert opinion = 54 . 5%
McCloskey , J .  ,  & Maas , M .  ( 1998 , July / August )  . Interdisciplinary team : The nursing perspective is
essential . Nursing Outlook , 46 ( 4 )  , 157-63 . 
The authors admonish nurses “ not to abandon the nursing perspective when they participate in an interdisciplinary
team ”  ( p . 157 )  . They believe the potential for loss of discipline identity through the “ melding , molding , and further
concealing of the professional identity of nursing ” promoted by some schools of thought on interdisciplinary
practice poses a “ real danger for the profession of nursing .  .  . and that patient care will suffer from the loss of the
nursing perspective and the accountability of nurses for their interventions ”  ( p . 157 )  . As evidence for this loss , 
they offer the fact that the word “ nurse ” has been deleted from many nurse executive positions in institutions , the
adoption of critical paths as the basis for nurse-provided case management of patient care in lieu of nursing care
plans , the implementation of clinical documentation systems which do not accommodate nursing language . They
suggest that rather than adopting features and aspects of other disciplines ’ practices , the real advantage of
interdisciplinary practice is the opportunity for partnership and enhanced practice as a team of members , each
representing different , but complementary , disciplines , who work in collaboration with each other . 
Principles of such practice should include : 
1 . Functioning in the true sense of a “ team ,  ” or , as “ a small group of people with complementary skills who are
committed to a common purpose , performance goals , and a common approach to which they hold themselves
mutually accountable .  ” 
2 . As a team , they must acknowledge the stages of group development described by Tackman ( i . e .  , forming , 
storming , norming , and performing )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 202 Interventions
3 . Team practice is expensive and should be reserved for situations where multiple perspectives on a given
problem are absolutely essential to problem-solving . 
4 . As with every discipline , nursing has its own knowledge , some of which may be shared with other disciplines , 
but applied within the unique framework of the nursing process . 
5 . In collaborative relationships , colleagues work together as partners with trust and mutual respect for each
other ’ s skills and in an environment of equal power . For nurses , the last aspect may mean practicing
assertiveness and confrontation in establishing an equalized power base . 
The authors complete the article by describing how the adoption of nursing-specific language in software
development for health care data systems is critical for the capacity to document the contributions to patient
outcomes attributable to nursing . They state ,  “ No clear-thinking nurse would deny the importance of
interdisciplinary care or that many patient outcomes are influenced 
by more than one discipline . Yet clear-thinking nurses all should recognize the necessity of showing how the
intervention of individual nurses and groups of nurses influence patient outcomes ”  ( p . 163 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 53%
Gray , B .  ( 1985 )  . Conditions facilitating interorganizational collaboration . Human Relations , 38 ( 10 )  , 
911-936 . 
The author synthesized research findings from organization theory , policy analysis , and organizational
development to arrive at conclusions regarding conditions essential to achieving collaboration . The conditions are
organized under the three phases of McCann ’ s model for collaborative development among organizations : 
problem setting , direction setting , and structuring . 
Conditions Facilitating Problem-Setting
1 . The stakeholders brought together need to reflect the complexity of the problem under consideration , if
collaboration is to occur . 
2 . Problem-setting efforts are enhanced when stakeholders expect that the benefits of collaborating will outweigh
its cost and when prevailing norms support collaboration . If positive expectations are not present , incentives to
induce participation will be necessary . 
3 . The greater the degree of recognized interdependence among stakeholders , the greater the likelihood of
initiating collaboration . 
4 . Shared perceptions of legitimacy are necessary to initiate problem-setting . Perception of legitimacy will be
adopted by hostile relations and by the existing power distribution among stakeholders . 
5 . Collaboration will be enhanced by conveners who possess legitimate authority and appreciative skills and who
understand the mission and potential with vision
Conditions Facilitating Direction-Setting
1 . Direction-setting is greatly facilitated by coincidence in values among stakeholders . Joint information search
by the stakeholders contributes to the emergence of coincident values and mutually agreeable direction of the
effort . 
2 . Collaboration will be enhanced when power is dispersed among several , rather than among just a few , 
stakeholders . An equal power distribution is not necessary and may prove undesirable , since it can provoke
stalemate and inaction . However , a sufficient distribution of power is necessary to insure that all stakeholders can
influence direction-setting . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 203 Interventions
Conditions Facilitating Structuring 
1 . Structuring will occur when stakeholders perceive that continued dependence upon each other is necessary to
implement their desired direction . 
2 . Mandate alone will not generate conditions conducive to collaboration . However , coupled with other
conditions ( e . g .  , recognition of interdependence and balance of power )  , mandate can provide a structural
framework for ongoing effort . 
3 . Effective structuring involves negotiation among all stakeholders about how to regulate the effort , holding
negotiations about the implementation of actions and the power distribution necessary to do so . One outcome of
structuring is an agreed-upon allocation of power within the effort . 
4 . Geographic proximity facilitates structure . Local level initiatives can best capture the advantages associated
with geography . 
5 . Successful implementation of collaborative agreements is contingent upon the stakeholders ’ collective ability to
manage changes positively in their own spheres . This involves building relationships with others outside of the
immediate effort to provide some level of accountability . 
Expert Opinion = 52%
Henneman , E .  , Lee , J .  ,  & Cohen , J .  ( 1995 )  . Collaboration : A concept analysis . J . Advanced Nursing , 
21 , 103-109 . 
The authors analyze various understandings of “ collaboration ” in an attempt to promote a common construct in its
use across nursing practice . In the process , they look for defining attributes , antecedents , consequences , and
empirical referents . Key findings include : 
1 . Respect and trust for self and others is key . 
2 . Building that respect and trust requires patience , nurturence , and time . 
3 . Collaboration is a “ process which occurs between individuals , not institutions , and only the persons
involved ultimately determine whether or not collaboration occurs ”  ( p . 108 )  . 
4 . Nursing ’ s “ obsession with the ‘ uniqueness ’ of nursing as a discipline ” presents a significant barrier to
developing collaborative action in nursing , since these “ philosophical approaches and socialization
processes .  .  . fail to recognize the contributions of other disciplines to health ”  ( p . 108 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 52%
White , J .  ,  & Wehlage , G .  ( 1995 , Spring )  . Community collaboration : If it is such a good idea , why is it so
hard to do ? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis ,  ( 17 ) 1 , 23-38 . 
The authors report on their evaluation of several city-wide collaborative efforts funded by the Annie E . Casey
Foundation in the late 1980s to “ build formal collaborative structures among public and private organizations to
address the problems of at-risk youth ”  ( p . 23 )  . The collaboratives were to reduce dropout rates , increase young
adult employment after highschool , and reduce rates of adolescent pregnancy and parenthood .  ” They employed
the case management intervention . The theory of action was that the case managers—in fulfilling their roles of
broker services for youth and their families ; being an advocate , mentor , and significant adult for youth at risk ; and
serving as “ eyes and ears ” in the community for the collaborative—would provide information which , on an
aggregated basis , would identify institutional problems among youth-serving organizations , which the collaborative
could then attempt to fix . While case managers were successful advocates for youth , they were less successful at
brokering services , and least successful in providing useful information back to the collaborative . In
addition , the collaborative themselves never acquired adequate power to hold member agencies accountable for
bringing about suggested policy changes . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 204 Interventions
Several lessons learned about collaborative governance through the evaluation have broad application for the
collaborative in general : 
1 . Slippage between policy and action
While some slippage is expected in any organization , the amount experienced by the collaborative is extensive
and related to
Pdisagreement about how best to implement the policy
Pdisagreement over attempts by professionals to protect their interests within an organization
Ppolicy-makers ’ general disregard for the validity of the information provided to them by their “ front line
workers ”  ( in this case , the case managers )  :  “ Collaborative found it very difficult to give voice to the
concerns of case managers , because inevitably that would result in challenges to professional expertise and
prerogatives of mainstream human service institutions ”  ( p . 27 )  . 
2 . Discord over policy , related to fundamental disagreements among collaborative members over the definitions , 
causes , and remedies of problems . The evaluators found that the difficulty in building consensus in communities
was almost always underestimated ( p . 28 )  . 
3 . Disjuncture between policy and community conditions , resulting in bad policy . This was related to the
collaborative boards , which tended to be top-heavy with agency heads and other high-level bureaucrats who
were necessarily isolated and operating at some distance from those being served by their agency . 
In general , they concluded that , where the collaborative failed , it was mainly due to
P “ The commitment to reform institutions [ through collaborative ] appears to have resulted in too much
attention to the problems of co-ordinating organizations and agencies and not enough attention to
understand and addressing the problems of the people who were to be served ” 
P “ Though noble in purpose , mixing public agencies and private sector organizations ( both for profit and
nonprofit ) required a level of organizational complexity that taxed the intellectual and political skill of the
communities [ attempting to build collaborative ]  ”  ( p . 24 )  . 
They recommended that the focus should shift from trying to find more efficient ways to deliver services to
autonomous individuals and , instead , to using collaborative action to implement a strategy to build social capital or
revitalize neighborhoods “ from the inside out ”  ( p . 35 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 52%
Hoffman , S .  ( 1998 , July-August )  . The three new C ’ s for nursing–Collaboration , cooperation , and
coalition [ Editorial ]  . J . Professional Nursing , 14 ( 4 )  , 194 . 
While written to urge schools of nursing to follow service settings into partnering in order to maximize resources
and potentially reduce costs , the descriptions offered by Hoffman are applicable across settings : 
Collaboration : highest level of partnering , because it initiates new shared structures
Pcommitment to a common mission and vision
Pnew decision-making authority
Ppooled resources
Ptask specialization and division of effort
Pinterdependence
Cooperation : lowest level of partnering
Porganizations retain their own decision-making authority and control of resources
Pinformal relationships
Pusually task or function specific
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 205 Interventions
Prelationship ends after accomplishment of task or function
Coalition : union of organizations that maintain their own identity but work together to influence a particular
outcome
Poften come together to influence policy or community norms
Pconserves resources and provides a forum for sharing information 
Pexpands the scope of accomplishment beyond what one partner could accomplish . 
Hoffman concludes by saying utilization of the “ 3 C ’ s ” is no longer optional for the advancement of nursing , but 
 “ foundational .  ” 
Expert Opinion = 49%
Wimpfheimer , R .  , Bloom , M .  ,  & Kramer , M .  ( 1990 )  . Inter-agency collaboration : Some working
Principles ” Administration in Social Work 14 ( 4 ) 1990 89-102 . 
The authors assert that “ inter-agency collaboration is a creative process of melding organizational and personal
attributes ( strengths and limitations ) within a common situation so as to achieve mutually shared objectives at
some level of parity ”  ( pp . 90-91 )  . Eight conditions promoting development of effective collaboratives are
described as aids negotiating collaborative efforts : 
Preconditions 
1 . Mutuality : recognition of a common problem and the acceptance of cooperation as a potential resolution ; a 
 “ shared vision of a common reality sets the ground for future discussions ”  ( p . 91 )  . 
2 . Timing : problem must be high enough on each agency ’ s agenda for it to be recognized as needing resources to
be assigned toward its resolution . 
3 . Authority and Influence : authority must exist within an agency to commit resources to the resolution of the
problem . 
4 . Creativity : desirability of solving problems beyond the customary processes must be agreed upon . 
Conditions
1 . Everyone Is a Winner : every party in the collaborative effort must perceive itself as having something to gain
by involvement . 
2 . Acknowledgement of Responsibility for the Problem : sufficient openness in communication must exist for all
parties to acknowledge their part in the problem and , with it , the commitment to resolution . 
3 . Common Risk : all parties must perceive themselves at some level of risk , should the problem not be resolved
4 . Acceptance of Limits : each agency should establish the limits of what they can contribute or commit early in
the process . 
Expert Opinion = 49%
Flynn , B .  ( 1997 , July )  . Are we ready to collaborate for community-based health services . Public Health
Nursing ( editorial )  , 14 ( 3 )  , 135-136 . 
Flynn suggests that health care is in the middle of an unparalleled paradigm shift which , for nursing , will mean
work shifted from institutional to community foci . This will require nurses learn to work in partnership with others , 
contributing and getting information and other resources in the process . Some PHN contributions in this endeavor
include : 
Phelping to bring the right people to the table at the right time
Phelping partners understand the multiple determinants of health
Precognizing that conflict is okay
Plistening to and involving those to be affected in the decision process
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 206 Interventions
Ppromoting consensus development
Punderstanding volunteerism and its inherent turnover
Pproviding information and analysis
Pplanning , developing , implementing , and evaluating community-based health services
Padvocating for health promoting policy . 
Expert Opinion = 48%
Lindeke , L .  ,  & Block , D .  ( 1998 , September / October )  . Maintaining professional integrity in the midst of
interdisciplinary collaboration . Nursing Outlook , 46 ( 5 )  , 213-8 . 
The authors participated as nursing faculty in a teaching collaborative consisting of nine health care-related
disciplines to demonstrate and test the belief that “ better care results from interdisciplinary collaboration ”  ( p . 
213 )  . They speak to often disparate underlying professional values experienced within multidisciplinary team
functioning , which places different emphases on ethical principles related to patient care and creates competition
among values . They also describe how this is exacerbated by the collision of differing professional paradigms . A
large investment of time and energy was required to achieve collaboration within the team , with each member
reaching an “ understanding across disciplinary chasms [ which finally resulted in ] productive discourse , mutual
respect , and creative thinking ”  ( p . 214 )  . 
The authors identify four main sources of constraints working against achievement of true collaboration : 
1 . Communication Constraints : the language of interdisciplinary collaboration must reflect shared values , goals , 
processes , and outcomes , such as the use of “ we ” rather than “ I ,  ” and “ health care ” rather than “ medical care .  ” 
2 . Power and Authority Constraints : In order to achieve the equalization of power within the team required for
interdisciplinary collaboration , members had to work assertively to keep power negotiable . 
3 . Professional Constraints : Boundaries between disciplines are inherent due to differences in education , 
socialization , and the use of jargon . In addition , other disciplines find nursing ’ s multiple educational pathways , 
specialties , and credentials difficult to comprehend . 
4 . Structural Constraints : Differences in salaries and access to reimbursement for services work against the
development of interdisciplinary collaboration . 
The resolution of these constraints lies in all disciplines , remaining focused on what the client needs , rather than
what the discipline has to offer , while at the same time modeling the discipline ’ s core values and principles . 
For nursing , this means promoting the principle of client self-determination and choice in health care decisionmaking ; demonstrating respect for human beings ; the imperative of caring ; advocacy ( especially for
disenfranchised and at-risk populations )  ; an obligation toward person , family , and community ; and promotion of
personal and community empowerment . The authors end by acknowledging the potential interdisciplinary
collaboration has for improving health care outcomes , but also recognizing the requirement for involvement of 
 “ mature professions with strong identities , self-confidence , and integrity ”  ( p . 217 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 42%
Himmelman , A . T .  ( 1998 , July / August )  . Inside / out change agents and community partnerships . 
Healthcare Forum Journal , 40-42 . 
This time writing from the perspective of hospitals participating in collaborative work , Himmelman offers the 
 “ Nine Principles for Community Partnerships ”  : 
1 . Going against the grain involves personal risks . 
2 . You can ’ t build bridges without a support based outside the institution . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 207 Interventions
3 . Institutional commitment can be illusory . 
4 . Understand and effectively use or alter institutional rewards and sanctions about change . 
5 . Weeding out new ideas helps nurture those that will actually succeed . 
6 . Without broad and deep membership , the fabric of change is likely to unravel . 
7 . Languishing in a problem doesn ’ t get it solved . 
8 . Expertise can be found almost anywhere . 
9 . Large societal issues cast a big shadow ; ignore them at your peril . 
Expert Opinion = 38%
Bailey , D .  ,  & Koney , K .  ( 1996 , November )  . Interorganizational community-based collaboratives : A
strategic response to shape the social work agenda . Social Work , 41 ( 6 )  , 602-610 . 
The authors propose that developing community-based collaboratives is essential to maximizing the capture of
declining resources ( i . e .  ,  “ devolution ”  ) available to support human services , rather than competing for the same
limited funding . The authors pose the term “ interorganizational collaboratives ” as the blanket term for all 
 “ interactive structures that emphasize the creation of a partnership among parties in which joint participation
ideally leads to the achievement of a common goal ”  ( p . 605 )  . Thus ,  “ collaboratives ” in this case include
consortia , coalitions , alliances , networks , or federations . Based on previous research , they offer eight core
components of collaboration and describe related paradoxes : 
Leadership
Leadership in collaboratives must be simultaneously assertive and responsive . Leaders must be pathfinders in the
sense of seeing problems as possibilities and conflicts within the collaborative membership as complementary
strengths :  “ Attending to the paradoxical nature of a collaborative ’ s leadership by working with a sense of
selflessness actually evokes a greater power of self ”  ( p . 606 )  . 
Membership
Members of collaboratives must work with the collaborative leadership and be leaders themselves in their own
organizations . The powerful vision of the collaborative effort serves as a powerful motivator to tolerate this
paradox . 
Environmental Linkages
Linkages with other organizations become critical in collaborative efforts , rather than ancillary , as they would be
to a single organization . Evolution and change of linkages is collaboratives ’ lifeblood . 
Strategy , Purpose , Task
The function of a collaborative effort is not to create an new organization , but to capitalize on the strengths of
individual member organizations . 
Structure and Systems
Effective interorganizational structures must be simultaneously rigid and loose , open and closed , in order to keep
the shifting of power among the collaborating members balanced . Collaboratives must have a high tolerance for
ambiguity , relative to their single-organization counterparts . 
Expert Opinion = 30%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 208 Interventions
Texts and Monographs
Public Health Practice Program Office .  ( 1998 )  . Principles of community engagement . Atlanta , GA : 
USDDHS / Centers for Disease Control and Promotion .  
[ Note : The entire document may be downloaded from CDC ’ s Website at www . cdc . gov / phppo / dphs .  ] 
The principles presented in this document are extracted from a broad literature review carried out by CDC in the
mid-1990s in response to a growing recognition on the part of public health professionals that affecting or
changing health-related behaviors of communities and their members requires the involvement . Literature
reviewed focuses on the following key concepts : social ecology , cultural influences , community participation , 
community empowerment , capacity building , coalitions , social exchange theory , community organization , and
stages of innovation diffusion . 
Community engagement is defined as “ the process of working collaboratively with groups of people who are
affiliated by geographic proximity , special interest , or similar situations with respect to issues affecting their wellbeing ”  ( p . 1 / Executive Summary )  . The process of community engagement can take many forms , ranging from
cooperation , where relationships are informal and where there may not necessarily be a commonly defined
structure , to collaboration , or partnerships , where previously separate groups are brought together with full
commitment to a common mission . Coalitions are viewed as “ useful vehicles for mobilizing and using community
assets for health decision-making and action ”  ( p . 10 / Part 1 )  . 
Principles of Engagement
1 . Be clear about the purposes or goals of the engagement effort , and the populations and / or communities to be
engaged . 
2 . Become knowledgeable about the community in terms of its economic conditions , political structures , norms
and values , demographic trends , history , and experience with engagement efforts . Learn about the community ’ s
perceptions of those initiating the engagement activities . 
3 . Go into the community , establish relationships , build trust , work with the formal and informal leadership , and
seek commitment from community organizations and leaders to create processes for community mobilization . 
4 . Remember and accept that community self-determination is the responsibility and right of all people it
comprises . No external entity should assume it can bestow on a community the power to act in its own selfinterest . 
5 . Partnering with the community is necessary to create change and improve health . 
6 . All aspects of community engagement must recognize and respect community diversity . Awareness of the
various cultures of a community and other factors of diversity must be paramount in designing and implementing
community engagement approaches . 
7 . Community engagement can only be sustained by identifying and mobilizing community assets , and by
developing capacities and resources for community health decisions and action . 
8 . An engaging organization or individual change agent must be prepared to release control of actions or
interventions to the community , and be flexible enough to meet the community ’ s changing needs . 
9 . Community collaboration requires long-term commitment by the engaging organization and its partners .  
[ Note : The last 22 pages of the document describe eight successful community engagement case studies .  ] 
Monograph = 76%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 209 Interventions
Spradley , B .  ,  & Allender , J .  ( 1996 )  . Communication and collaboration in community health . In
Community health nursing : Concepts and practice ( 4th ed )  .  ( pp . 291-299 )  . Lippincott . 
Collaboration is defined as a “ purposeful interaction between nurses , clients , community members , and other
professionals based on mutual articulation and joint effort ”  ( p . 297 )  . It is described through five key
characteristics : 
1 . Shared goals : PHN partners with others to accomplish a joint task or achieve a common goal
2 . Mutual participation : all partners ( and especially the “ client ”  ) contribute , resulting in a mutual exchange of
resources
3 . Maximized use of resources : effective collaboration requires the involvement of those with the most expertise , 
the most authority , the greatest access to funding , etc . 
4 . Clear responsibilities : each partner has a stated and understood set of tasks or activities for which he / she is
responsible
5 . Set boundaries : each partner is aware of time or task completion excitations , as well as the expected life cycle
of the collaborative . 
Phases of collaborative relationships : 
1 . Establishing and defining relationships among collaborating partners ; includes establishing trust and developing
communication patterns
2 . Working toward achievement of shared goals
3 . Terminating collaborative efforts when the task is completed or the goal achieved
At the individual / family level of practice , collaboration between the PHN and the “ client ” is most effective when a
contract or negotiated work agreement is established . These are flexible and change , based on mutual
understanding and trust . Characteristics of contracting include : 
1 . Partnership is articulated . 
2 . Commitment is implied . 
3 . Time and tasks or goals are stated or formatted . 
4 . It is always negotiated . 
Sloan and Schommer ’ s eight phases of contracting are provided as steps : 
1 . Explore needs ; assess . 
2 . Establish goals . 
3 . Explore resources . 
4 . Develop plan . 
5 . Divide responsibilities . 
6 . Agree on a timeframe . 
7 . Evaluate ( periodically and at end )  . 
8 . Renegotiate or terminate ( p . 295 )  .  
[ For further reading see : Sloan , M .  ,  & Schommer , B .  ( 1991 )  . The process of contracting in community nursing . In B . Spradley 
( Ed .  )  . Readings in Community Health Nursing ( 4th ed .  )  . Boston : Little , Brown .  ] 
Text = 76%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 210 Interventions
Stanhope , M .  ,  & Lancaster , J .  ( 1984 )  . Community health nursing : Process and practice for promoting
health . St . Louis : Mosby , 357-358 . 
The authors conceive of collaboration as teamwork , either with other professionals or other organizations . They
suggest collaboration requires the following knowledge base and attributes : 
Knowledge Attributes
group process professional confidence
conflict resolution respect for own ability
problem solving flexibility
evaluation trust in others ’ abilities
sensitivity to different approaches 
to problem solving
sensitivity to others ’ need for self-esteem acceptance of
professional conflicts
Text = 53%
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Coalition Building
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 211 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : COALITION BUILDING
Definition
Coalition building promotes and develops alliances among organizations or constituencies for a
common purpose . It builds linkages , solves problems , and / or enhances local leadership to address
health concerns . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All adolescents and their parents
Problem : Early onset of sexual activity and unintended teen-age pregnancy
Community Example : 
During a high school class on sexual health , several students who were “ mentors ” in a mentor
program for younger students indicated an interest in talking more about the role of “ males ” in teen
pregnancy . They were fascinated with the concept of “ male responsibility .  ” This interest was
largely due to several widely known incidences of males in the community fathering children with
more than one girl . The PHN teaching the class facilitated a meeting of teachers and teens who had
this interest . They formed a coalition to work with the teens who were mentors to middle-school
students and incorporate messages of “ male responsibility ” into their mentoring activities . 
Systems Example : 
In partnership with the social worker who coordinates the “ birth to teens program ,  ” the PHN
brings together adolescents , parents of adolescents , organizations that work with teens , school
personnel , and representatives of the faith community . They meet and discuss reasons for the
community ’ s increasing number of teen births . The group decides to meet again and identifies
additional community members who might have an interest in teen pregnancy . They invite them to
the next meeting . Several new community members join the original group for the second meeting . 
At its end , the group decides to form an ongoing coalition that eventually determines the
community ’ s response to the problem . 
Individual / Family Example : This intervention does not apply at this level . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 212 Interventions
Relationships to Other Interventions
Collective action is the generic term for interventions characterized by groups of people or organizations that
come together to address jointly issues that matter to them . Community organizing , coalition building , and
collaboration are all examples of collective action and have many common features–especially at the community
level of practice . 
Like community organizing and collaboration , coalition building is one method of building collective action . 
•Similarities 
< Empowerment is an enabling process through which individuals or communities take control of their
lives and their environment . It is a basic concept of collective action , although it is not always called 
 “ empowerment .  ”  
< Emphasis is placed on “ beginning where the people are .  ”  
< Reliance on the process of community engagement at the level of community-focused practice ; all
reflect the principles of collective action [ see next Note from Abby , p . 3 ]  . 
•Differences 
< Unlike community organizing , coalition building may be brought about by outside organizations or
influences rather than the community itself .  
< Unlike collaboration , coalition building does not require enhancing the capacity of other organizations or
constituencies within the coalition .  
< It is primarily a systems level of practice . 
Coalition building also relates to other interventions . Frequently , coalition building is used in conjunction with
policy development to change the way systems in a community operate or community-held norms or beliefs . 
Coalition building is similar to advocacy at the systems or community level ; coalitions often exist to implement
advocacy at the systems or community level around a single issue . Coalitions may also use outreach
interventions at the systems and community level to connect with their target populations ; social marketing is
often paired with outreach in these situations . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 213 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Collective action , or groups of people or organizations coming together for mutual gain or problem solving , is part
of the American democratic tradition . Alexis de Tocqueville , writing in Democracy in America in 1840 , noted :  
 “  .  .  . Americans are a peculiar people .  .  .  . If , in a local community , a citizen becomes aware of a human need that is
not met , he thereupon discusses the situation with his neighbors . Suddenly a committee comes into existence . 
The committee thereupon begins to operate on behalf of the need , and a new common function is established . It
is like watching a miracle .  ” 
Effective collective action generally incorporates the following principles , or tenets , as described by Leavitt and
Herbert-Davis : 
• The whole is greater than the sum of its parts . 
This assumption underlies all collective action . It acknowledges that the group process will increase the
power of the collective , reflect the broadest perspective , and create a process that results in an outcome
likely to be more innovative and comprehensive than if an individual acts alone . 
• While the goals and outcomes of collective action may vary , the process of coming together for joint
action is the same . 
The requirements of working together demand expertise in communication , negotiation , and conflict
management . 
• All politics is local : organizing a collective at the local level has an impact on the national level more
than the other way around . 
Those closest to the problem or issue are most affected and , therefore , more likely to be committed to
action . 
• All collective action involves a challenge to the existing power structure . 
The resulting conflict is inevitable , and , since it can be anticipated , efforts should be made to
depersonalize it . This is true whether the collective is between two individuals or two hundred . The most
effective collective action finds ways to share power . 
• The goals of any collective action should include not only a change in a particular problem or issue but
the empowerment of large numbers of people to be active participants in the process . 
The ultimate goal of acting collectively is to empower those involved . 
Source :  “ Collective Strategies for Action ”  ( 1993 )  . by J . K . Leavitt and M . Herbert-Davis . In Mason , Talbott , and Leavitt ( Eds )  . 
Policy and politics for nurses : Action and change in the workplace , government , organizations and community ( 2nd ed .  )  , WB
Saunders . 
50 Adapted from Cohen L .  , Baer N .  ,  & Satterwhite P .  ( 1994 , Spring )  . Developing effective coalitions : An eight-step
guide , written for the Contra Costa County Health Services Department Prevention Program , Pleasant Hill , CA ; also , the same
source serves as the basis for Carl Helvie ’ s chapter on community interventions in his text , Advanced Practice Nursing in the
Community ( 1998 )  . See also From the ground up : A workbook on coalition building and community development .  ( 1997 )  . 
Amhurst , MA : AHEC / Community Partners . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 214 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Coalition Building 50
Systems and Community Practice Levels
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Decide whether or not to coalesce , that is , to come together . 
This decision is based on : 
• recognition of a community ’ s need to respond to a perceived health issue
• recognition that a coalition would help fulfill an organization ’ s goals
• estimation of resource requirements
• determination that dedicating resources to coalition building is the best use of those resources . 
2 . Recruit the right members . 
Consider the following points : 
• the goal of the coalition should determine the type of membership
• members should have authority to commit resources of the organization they represent
• size should be kept workable ( for example , 12-18 )  .  
< A group larger than 20 people requires considerably more resources and will often take
longer to develop group identity and common purpose 
< At times it may be preferable to bring together a narrow group with more closely defined
interests to accomplish objectives quickly and then broaden membership at a later time . 
3 . Devise a set of preliminary objectives and activities . 
This step is critical to coming together around a common interest . The following points will guide you : 
• all members should have a stake in the outcomes
• short-term reachable goals should be planned
• the realities of working with groups of individuals should be considered :  
< It is not always possible to avoid “ turf ” struggles . However , coalitions should try to avoid
exacerbating them . Formal and informal opportunities to understand differences in
agency history , mandates , and funding may reduce turf struggles 
< Select activities that coalition members will experience as successful–activities to which
they can make unique contributions 
< Make objectives compelling 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 215 Interventions 
< Be sensitive to the fact that coalition work is not the main job of coalition members , and
keep assignments simple and achievable .  
< Keep reminding people that it is okay to say “ no ” or to set limits . 
It may be helpful for staff of member agencies to communicate on a regular basis , clarify objectives , and
assist one another with strategies . 
4 . Convene the coalition . 
The convening group should present a strong proposal for the coalition ’ s structure , mission , and
membership at the initial meeting . Encouraging member response to a prepared proposal is usually more
productive than expecting the group to create the proposal . 
5 . Anticipate human , material , and financial resources required to accomplish the goal . 
Effective coalitions generally require minimal financial outlay for materials and supplies but require
substantial time commitments from people . It is important to : 
• Estimate how much of the work will be the responsibility of the lead agency and how much of the
work to realistically expect of others . Anticipate that members will not always fulfill their
commitments 
• Be appreciative of what is done , rather than “ moralistic ” when people cannot accomplish
everything they planned
• In calculating needed resources , estimate the hours needed per month for the following categories
and then double that number :  
< clerical 
< meeting support 
< membership support 
< research and fact gathering 
< public relations and public information 
< coordination of activities 
< fund-raising . 
6 . Select an appropriate structure . 
The technical details of a coalition structure are vital to achieving success . Consider the following
elements in designing the structure : 
life expectancy of the coalition
• shorter term , single-purpose coalitions that intend to disband usually require less formal
structures
location , frequency , and length of meetings
• poll members to see which times and locations present the least conflict in terms of both
personal and work commitments 
• avoid meeting times that cause members to face traffic jams and sites with difficult parking
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 216 Interventions
membership criteria
• add vitality with new members
• provide an orientation session for new members to reduce their need to interrupt coalition
meetings to catch up with the topics 
decision-making process 
• minimize complaints , maximize relevance , and encourage participation
agenda setting
• never lose track of the true purpose of the coalition ; coalitions sometimes turn inward and
begin discussing their own internal processes rather than resolving the community issue
they came together to address 
rules for participation
• State that the coalition ’ s position represents the “ opinion of the majority of participating
groups ”  ; in other words , sometimes the positions of the coalition need to be distanced
from that of an individual member . 
7 . Maintain the vitality of the coalition . 
Warning signs of coalition problems are not always easy to spot , since every coalition has ebbs and
flows . Possible problems include : 
• poor group dynamics
• membership or participation concerns
• focus on too many long-term goals without enough short-term “ wins ” to add energy to the group
• poor planning or inadequate resources that make goal attainment difficult
• external changes affecting the coalition ’ s mission . 
The following activities are important in avoiding problems : 
• sharing power and leadership
it is ironic that the characteristics that indicate a strong coalition–a heightened sense of
collective identity and a high degree of commitment to collaborative work–can also
exacerbate tension in defining the direction of the coalition
• anticipating and dealing with conflict
• recruiting and involving new members
every member will bring to the coalition his or her own perspective ; therefore , a broad
framework , a common vocabulary , and a set of principles for participation must be
presented early in the coalition ’ s formation
• providing training and challenging work
anticipate that coalition work is frustrating and exhausting at times ; therefore , renewal
opportunities need to be provided
• celebrating successes
successes need to be celebrated and shared to maintain morale . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 217 Interventions
8 . Make improvements through evaluation . 
Evaluation should be an ongoing process throughout the life of a coalition . 
Process evaluation considers the coalition ’ s process of goal achievement ( that is , formative evaluation )  . It
includes such methods as : 
• member surveys regarding satisfaction with participation 
• content analysis of meeting agendas , minutes , and attendance lists . 
Outcome evaluation asks whether the goals were achieved ( that is , summative evaluation )  . 
Outcome evaluation focuses on what the coalition set out to do , as well as considers the need for
continuation . 
Notes from Abby
Stephen Fawcett and others at the University of Kansas have developed a handbook for evaluating and
supporting community initiatives . It includes a monitoring system ; constituent surveys of coalition goals , 
processes , and outcomes ; goal attainment reports ; behavioral change surveys ; interviews with key participants ; 
and community level indicators . Much of this handbook can be downloaded from their website 
<  >  . For further information , contact Workgroup on Health Promotion and Community
Development . Phone : 785 / 864-0533 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 218 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Coalition Building
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practice expertise to develop them . These best practices are not presented in any
ranking or particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . PROMOTES THE SELECTION OF THE TYPE OF COALITION THAT BEST FITS THE
MISSION AND PURPOSE . 
Best Evidence : Butterfoss , Goodman , Wandersman ; Roberts-DeGennaro , 1986b
PHNs considering coalition building should be clear about their expected outcomes from coalition participation . 
Butterfoss and others suggest that coalitions form because members believe that working together collectively will
have a greater impact than working alone . They also suggest that the type of coalition formed needs to “ fit ” its
mission and purpose . Five types are described : 
‚ Membership-based : 
grassroots , professional , or a combination
‚ Composition-based : 
organizations , citizens groups , or other coalitions
‚ Patterns of formation : 
in response to an opportunity or a threat
‚ Functions-based :  
( see the following paragraph on Roberts-DeGennaro ) 
‚ Structure-based : 
groups of networks of organizations , cooperating organizations , coordinating , and / or
collaborating
Roberts-DeGennaro offers a somewhat different list of coalition categories based on functions : 
‚ Information and resource sharing
following a clearinghouse model , assisting in the referral process
‚ Technical assistance provision
arranging workshops , proving training , conducting needs assessment and evaluation
‚ Self-regulating
setting standards within the coalition for member organizations
‚ Planning and coordinating 
acting similar to the referral and follow-up intervention at the systems level
‚ Advocacy coalitions 
monitoring legislation , lobbying , etc . 
51 Minkler , M .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1997 )  . Appendix 3 : Coalition checklist . In Community organizing and community building for
health ( pp . 359-365 )  . Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 219 Interventions
2 . CLARIFIES HOW LEADERSHIP WILL BE PROVIDED . 
Best Evidence : Bailey ; Leavitt ; Roberts-DeGennaro , 1997 ; Wandersman et al .  , 1996
The importance of clearly identified , effective coalition leadership cannot be overstated . A leader with 
charismatic style or someone who can otherwise clearly state a coalition ’ s mission in a way that easily recruits
others is critical . This leader must emerge early in the development of a coalition . Since many times organizations
or constituencies come together spontaneously in response to an issue or problem , leadership must often be
prompted or negotiated . This is a critical function and should not be left to a default process in which
leadership falls to the person who resists the least . 
Leavitt and Herbert-Davis provide a list of qualities a leader should possess , including : 
‚ Is able to motivate others
‚ Is capable of assuming numerous roles ( such as recruiter , supporter , strategist , agitator , teacher , or
spokesperson ) as needed 
‚ Possesses excellent communication skills ( especially listening ) 
‚ Maintains the coalition ’ s forward momentum by creating an atmosphere of trust , acceptance of diversity , 
and tolerance of criticism , conflict , and confusion
‚ Knows when to step down as leader
The authors note that in a coalition leader role flexibility is more critical than familiarity with the issue . 
Cherie Brown provides a useful “ checklist ” for coalition leadership : 51
‚ Has each person been approached by the leader in order to build a one-to-one relationship ? 
‚ Has support been built for the leader by :  
< encouraging members ’ personal responsibility ?  
< arranging time for feedback ?  
< arranging time for appreciation ? 
‚ Is the leader able to elicit each member ’ s thoughts and then to draw those thoughts into a concrete
program ? 
‚ Does the leader acknowledge and correct mistakes ? 
‚ Can the leader help the coalition move forward after defeats and in times of discouragement , recognizing
the success it has achieved ? 
‚ Have one or more replacements been selected for leadership training ? 
‚ Does the leader understand the reason behind attacks from members and effectively respond to criticism ? 
‚ Is the leader willing to disband the coalition when it has outlived its usefulness ? 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 220 Interventions
3 . ADVOCATES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF FORMALIZED RULES , ROLES , AND
PROCEDURES . 
Best Evidence : Wandersman and others , 1997
Coalitions are more likely to be successful in reaching their goals if the “ ways of doing the business ” of the
coalition are mutually understood , agreed upon , and stated . Wandersman and others ’ analysis of coalitions
clearly linked the existence of rules , roles , and procedures with sustaining coalitions over time . 
4 . PROMOTES RECRUITMENT OF THE RIGHT POOL OF MEMBERS . 
Best Evidence : Bailey ; McFarlane et al .  ; Parker
Coalitions are only as good as their members and commitment . Recruitment needs to be ongoing , as membership
is usually fluid . In other words , members will join and leave over time , as they believe the coalition continues to
meet or no longer meet their own interests . 
McFarlane and others , for instance , found that their coalition to improve prenatal care to pregnant Hispanic
women in a Texas community required membership representation from diverse organizations outside , as well as
within , the Hispanic community . 
Likewise , Parker and others reviewed four North Carolina prevention coalitions and found factors , including
critical to coalition-building success . These findings include : 
‚ the most effective coalitions recruited and retained members from business , clergy , various citizen
groups , police , volunteer organizations , and the university and medical sectors
‚ representatives of one minority group cannot be expected to represent the interests of others 
‚ members ’ continuation in a coalition is dependent on their perception that the benefits to their
organization outweigh the cost of staying involved
‚ ongoing participation is related to a high level of trust among coalition members
‚ members representing their organizations must also keep interest in a coalition alive within their own
organizations ( p . 29-32 )  . 
5 . COMPARES THE BENEFITS OF COALITION MEMBERSHIP TO ITS FORMAL AND
INFORMAL COSTS . 
Best Evidence : Bailey ; Checkoway ; Roberts-DeGennaro , 1986a ; Roberts-DeGennaro , 1986b ; Parker 
Trade-offs between benefits and costs of involvement determine the value of a coalition to its members . This is
clearly a key characteristic of coalitions . Organizations and constituencies will join and maintain involvement to
the extent that their own goals are met in the process . 
What is considered of “ value ,  ” however , is not always clear . Leavitt and Herbert-Davis , for instance , point out
that organizations and constituencies do not always join coalitions for altruistic reasons . 
52 See Minkler , M .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1997 )  . Community organization and community building for health ( pp . 372-
373 )  . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 221 Interventions
Therefore , coalition leadership should be vigilant for signs of : 
‚ hidden agendas
‚ differences in preferences for styles of action
‚ polarization around issues of racism , elitism , insensitivity to member limitations , or general intolerance
of differences
‚ members forwarding their own personal views rather than that of the organization or interest they
represent . 

6 . RELATES MEMBER COMMITMENT TO MEMBER SATISFACTION . 
Best Evidence : Butterfoss , Goodman , Wandersman , Parker
Commitment to a coalition is clearly related to member satisfaction , which , in turn , is related to factors in the
organizational climate , such as : 
‚ positive relationships among members
‚ provision of adequate orientation to the coalition and the way it works
‚ clear understanding of role and function differences between staff and members
‚ open communication patterns
‚ clear and effective methods for decision-making , problem-solving , and conflict resolution
In Community Organizing and Community Building for Health , 
52 Gillian Kaye proposes the “ Six R ’ s of
Participation ” that lead to coalition member satisfaction : 
‚ Recognition 
both formal ( for example , dinners , plaques ) and informal ( for example , praising contributions in a
public meeting ) methods are effective
‚ Respect 
respect is often shown in small ways , like scheduling meetings when members can attend , 
providing child care , etc . 
‚ Role
coalitions and their members must have real power and substance , not just represent “ tokenism ” 
‚ Relationship
coalitions should provide real opportunities for networking with other institutions and leaders
‚ Reward
coalitions need to identify both the public and private reasons individuals have for joining and
respond to those interests
‚ Results
coalitions that cannot deliver on their goals and purposes will find dissatisfaction among their
members . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 222 Interventions
7 . FACILITATES LINKAGES BETWEEN THE COALITION AND THE BROADER
COMMUNITY . 
Best Evidence : Butterfoss et al ; Leavitt and Herbert-Davis
Effective coalitions maintain linkages with resources beyond those of their members ’ direct contributions , such as
access to elected officials or government agencies , ties with religious or civic groups , and memberships in other
neighborhood and community organizations . These linkages are essential to coalition survival , as they supply
materials and expertise a coalition might not otherwise be able to afford . These include “ loaned ” expertise , free
meeting space , mailing lists , loaned equipment , sponsorship of speakers for meetings , etc . Coalition members
who provide these links to other resources are called “ linking pins ” and are as valuable to coalitions as gifts of
money . The PHN can serve as a linking pin to the rest of the health care system . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 223 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Coalition Building
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and
academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end
of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . 
It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Wandersman , A .  , Goodman , R .  ,  & Butterfoss , F .  ( 1997 )  . Understanding coalitions and how they
operate : An ‘ open systems ’ organizational framework . In M . Minkler ( Ed .  )  , Community organizing
and community building for health ( pp . 261-277 )  . New York : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
The authors suggest it is useful to think of coalitions ( and partnerships and consortia ) as organizations and apply
Katz and Kahn ’ s open-systems framework to advance the understanding of them . Coalitions are defined as 
 “ interorganizational , cooperative , and synergistic working alliances ”  ( p . 263 ) which serve several purposes .  
[ Note : Katz D and Kahn R The Social Psychology of Organizations 2nd Ed ( New York : Wiley ) 1978 ] 
Coalitions as organizations are seen as having four components or requirements : 
1 . Resource Acquisition
a . Member resources ( a coalition ’ s main asset )  ; should be considered in terms of size , depth of members ’ 
commitment to the coalition ’ s mission , and members ’ personal and political skills and abilities
b . External resources ’ can be examined in four classes : degree of formalization of the relationship with the
external resource , the degree to which the procedure for linking with the external resources is standardized , 
the intensity of the relationship , and the degree of reciprocity ( i . e .  , the degree of mutual exchange of
resources )  . 
2 . Maintenance Subsystem
a . Strong central leadership
b . Formalized rules , roles , and procedures
c . Defined decision-making and problem-resolution processes ( conflict is inherent in coalitions due to the
mixed loyalties of the members , i . e .  , to both their own organizations and the coalition ; the autonomy
required by a coalition at the same time accountable to its member organizations ; the lack of clarity
regarding the coalition ’ s purpose ; and the diversity of members ’ interests ) 
d . Volunteer-staff relationships ( this requires the ability to balance staff provision of technical assistance to
the membership with the members ’ ability to make informed decisions ) 
e . Open communications patterns ( frequently implemented via meetings with members ) and welldeveloped internal communication methods
f . Membership commitment and mobilization ( the benefits to the member organizations for participation in
the coalition must be perceived as outweighing the costs of involvement . 
3 . Production Subsystem
a . Target activities ( i . e .  , those that work directly toward the coalition ’ s intended goals and products ) 
b . Maintenance activities ( i . e .  , recruitment and orientation of new members , leadership training , conflict
resolution , public relations , celebration of accomplishments , fundraising ) 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 224 Interventions
c . Resolution of the inherent tension between target and maintenance activities
4 . External Goal Attainment
a . Short- and long-term change measurement
b . Addressing evaluation challenges presented by the complexity of coalition work
c . Addressing the challenge repeating the successful activities and programs which results in
institutionalization of the program or community organizing effort . 
The authors conclude that “  .  .  . there is enough research and experience to suggest that if a coalition is to be
successful , there has to be an organization of roles and people . The resources of a coalition ( its greatest
potential ) must be organized in a structure that clarifies roles and relationships and produces activities that work
toward the goals of the coalition and sustain and renew the organization . A successful coalition yields perceivable
accomplishments an impacts ”  ( p . 274 )  . 
Review = 34%
Research Reports
Parker , E .  , Eng , E .  , Laraia , B . et al .  ( 1998 )  . Coalition building for prevention : Lessons learned from the
North Carolina community-based public health initiative . J Public Health Management Practice 4 ( 2 )  , 
25-36 . 
The authors identify six factors important to coalition functioning and success , based on findings of a four-year
observation of four separate North Carolina county coalitions funded by the Kellogg Foundation ’ s CommunityBased Public Health Initiative . Rather than focusing on prevention of a specific disease category , this study
looked at aspects of coalition development itself . The authors applied Alter and Hage ’ s framework to
conceptualize how stages and levels of collaboration are operationalized in coalition functioning , and they found
six factors which affected it : 
1 . Participation 
a . more effective coalitions ( for health promotion ) were able to recruit and retain members from
business , clergy , senior citizen groups , police , volunteer groups , parent groups , other groups , and the
university and medical sectors
b . representatives of minority groups cannot be expected to represent the interests of other minorities
in a coalition
c . members ’ continuation in a coalition is dependent on their perception of the benefits to their
organization versus the costs to them of staying involved
d . ongoing participation is related to a high level of trust among coalition members ; sufficient time
must be allowed for this to develop
e . members representing their organizations must also keep the interest in the coalition alive within
their own organizations
2 . Communication
a . more effective coalitions develop good formal communication methods
b . effective informal communication is also important and facilitated by the presence of a conducive
environment ( i . e .  , minimum use of professional jargon , solicitation of ideas and comments from
community members ) 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 225 Interventions
3 . Governance System
a . This system clarifies roles of the organizational partners and that of staff and establishes
accountability
b . It designs operating procedures and identifies the need for and procures technical assistance and
leadership training
4 . Staff-coalition member relationships must balance staff autonomy with coalition oversight
5 . Technical assistance and leadership training must be provided
6 . The capacity to recognize and deal with conflict must exist . 
Qualitative = 68 . 5%
Roberts-DeGennaro , M .  ( 1986 )  . Factors contributing to coalition maintenance . J Sociology and Social
Welfare , 13 , 248-264 . 
The author looked at factors related to perpetuation of coalitions over time . Through a case-study analysis of the
Community Congress of San Diego , a longstanding coalition , the author concluded that survival of a coalition
depends on the extent to which member organizations are convinced of the payoffs of committing resources to it . 
Qualitative = 40%
Expert Opinion
Roberts-DeGennaro , M .  ( 1997 )  . Conceptual framework for coalitions in an organizational context . In
M . Weil & M . Newsome ( Eds )  , Community practice–Models in action ( pp . 91-107 )  . Birminghamton , 
NY : Haworth Press .  [ Note : This same article was also published in ( 1997 )  . J . of Community Practice , 4 ( 1 )  , 
9-107 ] 
Coalition is defined as an “ interacting group of organizational actors who a ) agree to pursue a common goal , b ) 
coordinate their resources in attempting to achieve this goal , and c ) adopt a common strategy in pursuing this
goal ”  ( p . 92 )  . Coalitions form to realize three major advantages : 
1 . Coalitions can exert more power and influence and mobilize more resources than a single organization . 
2 . Participation exposes members to alternative strategies applicable in future situations . 
3 . Provides access to information either more quickly and / or otherwise not accessible . 
The author presents five coalition models adapted from the work of Croan and Lee . Coalitions may exist to
perform many of these models ’ functions simultaneously .  [ Note : see Croan G and Lees J Building Effective
Coalitions : Some Planning Considerations ( Arlington , VA : Westinghouse National Issues Center ) 1979 ]  : 
1 . Information and Resource-Sharing Coalitions
These act as a clearinghouse to gather and disseminate information , arrange forums , develop systems to
share resources , and assist in the referral process . 
2 . Technical Assistance Coalitions
These deliver technical services such as arranging workshops , providing grantsmanship and training , and / or
conducting needs assessment and evaluation
3 . Self-Regulating Coalitions
These set standards for member organizations by designing evaluation systems , monitoring members , 
providing certification , recommending systems for allocating funds , etc . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 226 Interventions
4 . Planning and Coordinating Services Coalitions
These act as service coordinators and carry out such activities as conducting service inventories in
communities , establishing master calendars , providing liaison with other groups , and developing information
and referral systems
5 . Advocacy Coalitions
These act as change agents and function to monitor legislation and policy-making bodies , organize public
education campaigns , conduct lobbying efforts , etc . 
Based on her review of these works , the author offers their practice considerations : 
1 . The author notes that if decisions become too controversial within a coalition , or go beyond broad
issues of value and strategies , the coalition may need to change its structure , including its purpose and
functions . Turnover among members often precipitates this redefinition
2 . As turnover naturally occurs , an “ organizing ideology needs to promote the spirit of connected ness and
solidarity among members ”  ( p . 104 ) in order to promote the stability necessary for the coalition ’ s strategic
effectiveness
3 . Stable leadership is essential for a coalition ’ s long-term effectiveness , and , therefore , transition of
leadership needs to be planned whenever possible . 
Expert Opinion = 86%
McFarlane , J .  , Kelly , E .  , et al .  ( 1994 )  . De madres a madres : Women building community coalitions for
health . Health Care for Women International , 15 , 465-476 . 
The authors present a compelling case study of the development of De Madres a Madres , a project of the Texas
Woman ’ s University College of Nursing . Its intent was to develop outreach coalitions or networks enabling
pregnant women to obtain early prenatal care . The coalition consisted of members from businesses , health and
social service agencies , schools , and churches and relied on community health nurses training and supervising
Latina women , mothers themselves , to work with other women in their communities . They found that the training
and support provided to the community workers increased their sense of self-worth which , in turn , empowered
them to reach out to other groups and organizations within the community to advance the cause of improved
prenatal care . 
Expert Opinion = 77%
Butterfoss , F .  , Goodman , R .  ,  & Wandersman , A .  ( 1993 )  . Community coalitions for prevention and
health promotion . Health Education Research Theory and Practice , 8 ( 3 )  , 315-330 . 
The authors review the literature as published in an attempt to provide a “ systematized ” understanding of
coalitions ” and pinpoint areas of needed research . They define coalitions as inter-organizational , cooperative , 
synergistic working alliances that unite individuals and groups in shared purpose over a sustained period of time . 
The authors consider coalition outcomes . Ultimate indicators of effectiveness reflect a coalition ’ s attainment of its
mission , goals , and objectives . Success as a “ quick-fix ” can often buy time to do a more thorough investigation , 
as through the application of evaluation methods . They also examine the importance of coalitions , types of
coalitions , and contributing factors : 
Importance of Coalitions
1 . enable organizations to become more broadly involved without having sole responsibility
2 . demonstrate and develop widespread public support for issues
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 227 Interventions
3 . maximize the power of individuals and groups through joint action
4 . minimize duplication of effort and services
5 . mobilize more talent , resources , and approaches to influence
6 . provide an avenue for recruiting participants from diverse constituencies
7 . permit exploitation of new resources in changing situations , due to their flexibility . 
Types of Coalitions
1 . Coalitions based on membership
a . grassroots 
b . professional
c . community-based ( i . e .  , grassroots and professional ) 
2 . Coalitions based on composition
a . numbers of members
b . types ( i . e .  , other coalitions , organizations , individuals , combinations ) 
c . degree of participation ( i . e .  , core versus peripheral ) 
3 . Coalitions based on patterns of formation ( i . e .  , response to an opportunity or perceived adversity ) 
4 . Coalitions based on the functions they fulfill for members
a . information and resource sharing
b . technical assistance
c . self-regulation
d . planning and coordination of services
e . advocacy
f . multiple functions
5 . Coalitions based on organizational structure
a . organizational-set ( i . e .  , groups of cooperating organizations that provide resources or services under an
umbrella organization ) 
b . network coalitions ( i . e .  , subgroups of organizations within an organizational system ) 
c . action-set ( i . e .  , accomplish a single purpose or common identity ) 
Contributing Factors
1 . the current literature is predominantly “ wisdom literature ,  ” meaning it is largely anecdotal and tends to be
based on experiences and impressions of what seems to work
2 . coalition development progresses in stages ; at each stage of development , different sets of factors may be
important in enhancing coalition functioning
a . formation : stimulated by existing positive attitudes , recognition of mutual need , resource scarcity , failure
of existing efforts , inspirational leadership , previous history of compatibility and ability to maintain linkages ; 
facilitated by clear articulation of guiding mission or purpose
b . implementation and maintenance : enhanced by the presence of formalized rules , roles , and procedures ; 
strong central leadership ; members whose combined talents and assets are equal to the coalition
requirements ; members ’ perception that the benefits of involvement outweigh the costs ; satisfied and
committed members ; members ’ skills and training
3 . organizational climate , or the relationship among coalition members , depends on several factors . 
a . positive relationships exist among members
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 228 Interventions
b . clear understanding of the role differences between staff and members
c . open communication patterns 
d . decision-making , problem-solving , and conflict-resolution processes are effective and working
4 . external supports and community linkages affect
a . formalization ( i . e .  , official recognition ?  ) 
b . standardization ( i . e .  , linking procedures proscribed ?  ) 
c . intensity ( i . e .  , frequency and flow ) 
d . reciprocity
e . effective linkages with and access to communities . 
Expert Opinion = 54%
Wandersman , A .  , Valois , R .  , et al .  ( 1996 )  . Toward a social ecology of community coalitions . Am . J . 
Health Promotion , 10 ( 4 )  , 299-307 . 
The authors suggest that a key tenet of current health promotion thought is that “ targeting the behavior of
individual without also intervening at thee other social levels that shape behavior will produce less of an impact on
health status ”  ( p . 300 )  . They call this the “ social ecological perspective ” on health promotion for which coalitions
serve as a key vehicle . Coalitions work across multiple domains to effect change , depend on a community
context , and recognize capturing the support of key community leaders as leaders as essential . The authors
provide reasons for coalition development as gleaned from current literature : 
1 . enables organizations to become involved with broader issues without having to take on the sole
responsibility
2 . develops widespread support
3 . maximize the power and influence of any one person or group
4 . minimizes duplication of effort
5 . mobilizes more talents , resources , and approaches than any one organization could achieve
6 . facilitates recruitment from diverse constituencies
7 . exploits newly available resources because of its flexibility . 
Contextual variables necessary to consider in developing coalitions : 
1 . Sociopolitical Context : 
•density of population
•diversity
•racial conflict and tension
•community stability
•patterns and history of power distribution
•stage of community development
•extension of public resources
•external community forces
2 . Socioeconomic Context
•unemployment / jobs / job base
•poverty level / income distribution
•age / gender distribution
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 229 Interventions
•tax base
•education attainment
•citizenship
•community exploitation / neglect
•maturation of business base
•availability of housing units
•community transiency
•housing density
•family structure
3 . Community Health Concern Context
•measures of abuse , duration , and prevalence of controlled substances
•extent of community awareness / denial
•measures of community mental health ( i . e .  , domestic abuse rates , suicide , sexual abuse , gambling ) 
•community violence
•sexual norms
•extent of lawlessness / civility
4 . Community Infrastructure
•churches / houses of worship
•physical infrastructure
•recreational services
•educational services
•criminal justices services
•fire
•distance to neighboring community
•transportation needs . 
Expert Opinion = 46%
Hoffman , S .  ( 1998 , July / Aug )  . The three new C ’ s for nursing–Collaboration , cooperation , and coalition 
( editorial )  . J . of Professional Nursing , 1494 , 194 . 
Although speaking to nursing education , Hoffman asserts that to thrive during this time of “ constant change with
concomitant chaos ” in health care , nursing must do more collaboration ( the “ highest form of partnering because
it initiates new shared structures ”  )  , cooperative ventures ( where each cooperator retains organizational authority
and separate resources )  , and / or coalition development ( that is , a “ union of organizations that maintain their own
identify by working together to influence a particular outcome ”  )  . Hoffman states that increased use of these three
partnering methods indicates a “ maturation of the profession of nursing ” which will be “ foundational to our efforts
to increase our influence .  .  .  .  ” 
Expert Opinion = 44 . 5%
Roberts-DeGennaro , M .  ( 1986 , July / August )  . Building coalitions for political advocacy . Social Work , 
308-311 . 
The author proposes that human service organizations could realize increased political influence by joining efforts
as a coalition to increase the power base . She refers to these as “ advocacy coalitions ”  ( p . 308 )  . She suggests
they are particularly needed as “ the users of community-based services are generally unrepresented or under-
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 230 Interventions
represented in the political process .  .  .  .  ”  ( p . 308 )  . The author offers the following tips : 
1 . Coalitions work best when the scope of the forming issue is specific and time-bound , making it easier
for organizations with potentially conflicting interests to set aside that potential for the greater good to be
achieved through collective action . The longer the coalition must be maintained in order to achieve the
common goal , the more prepared its leadership must be to deal with internal conflict
2 . Establishing clarity of the central purpose of coming together must be equal in each member
organization ’ s perspective , meaning each is aware of what they will gain in the process and what they might
have to give up
3 . The coalition must be able to translate their concerns into specific suggestions for policy direction that
are acceptable to the majority of coalition members . 
Expert Opinion = 33%
Bailey , D .  ,  & Koney , K .  ( 1995 )  . Community-based consortia : One model for creation and development . 
J . Community Practice , 2 ( 1 )  , 21-42 . 
The authors adopt Mizrahi and Rosenthal ’ s distinction between a consortium and a coalition : consortia include
residents from the community who do not represent any particular organization , whereas coalitions are almost
always made up of organizational representatives ; a consortium ’ s agenda is shaped by input from the
community ’ s residents , not the organizations within the community . However , they also acknowledge that most
authors use consortium and coalition interchangeably and that , in terms of development , the processes for each
are similar . The four phases of consortium development are : 
1 . Assembling : a leader is either designated by the members or emerges . The leader ’ s first task is to
recruit members , which requires a clear understanding of the consortium ’ s purpose and goals . The leader
must also be aware of areas of perceived agreement and disagreement among the assembled stakeholders
and anticipate how these will affect decision-making activities
2 . Ordering : the group establishes operational mechanisms for conflict resolution , task assignments , flow of
information , task evaluation , etc . Intense communication among stakeholders is expected during this phase , 
as well as turnover of members , and recruitment and integration of new members into the stakeholder group
3 . Performing : the group first assures stakeholders understand the costs and benefits of membership , their
expected roles , and the way they fit into the larger context of contributing to a greater good ; compromise , 
collaboration , and creativity are required
4 . Ending : evaluation findings are used to decide whether the consortium ’ s work is complete or requires
further action ; if so , the cycle is begun again from the beginning .  
[ Note : The authors also published a background paper on how the framework was developed and an article
evaluating community-based consortia . For further reading , see respectively :  “ Developing Community-based
Consortia : An Interactive Framework ”  ( Cleveland , OH : Case Western Reserve
University / Mandel School of Applied Social Science ) August 1992 and “ An Integrative Framework for the
Evaluation of Community-Based Consortia ” in Evaluation and Program Planning 18 ( 3 ) 1995 ; 245-252 ] 
Expert Opinion = 31%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 231 Interventions
Texts and Monographs
Helvie , C .  ( 1998 )  . Community interventions . In Advanced practice nursing in the community ( pp . 327-
357 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Helvie offers coalition building as one of three discussions on community level interventions . He defines coalitions
as “ composed of individuals and organizations working on a specific problem and having goals and plans to
influence an outcome ”  ( p . 336 )  . Helvie suggests that Nelson ’ s resource mobilization theory is appropriate for
understanding coalitions : a coalition ’ s outcomes are a result of its activities and processes , both of which are
dependent on two factors , support from other organizations and the political climate in which the coalition exists . 
Helvie offers Cohen et al .  ’ s eight steps for building effective coalitions [ Cohen , Baer , O ’ Keefe Developing
Effective Coalitions : An Eight Step Guide ( Contra Costa , CA : Contra Costa Co . Health Services Dept .  ) 
1991 ]  . They are : 
1 . The decision is made to form or join a coalition . 
a . recognizing that a community need exists for which a coalition would be an appropriate response
•to influence policy or legislation
•to change the practices of an organization
•to foster coalitions and networks
•to educate providers
•to promote education of the community
•to strengthen the knowledge and skills of individuals
b . recognizing that a coalition will facilitate goal fulfillment
c . meeting a grant requirement or initiating a conference outcome project
2 . Recruiting the right members ( i . e .  , members of groups with similar goals and interests , including representatives
of influential or supportive organizations , as well as those who might be considered obstacles ) and the right
number of members is key ( i . e .  , while membership size should be influenced by the tasks involved ; beyond 15
members , greater resources will be required ) 
3 . Establishing preliminary objectives and activities that meet the needs of the participating organizations is
accomplished
4 . The lead agency convenes a meeting for potential coalition members
5 . Resource needs and potential sources are identified
6 . Structural issues are considered and determined
7 . Processes to promote coalition vitality are initiated ( e . g .  , conflict resolution methods , determination of how
power and leadership will be shared , recruitment and involvement of new members , provision of training and idea
infusion , etc .  ) 
8 . Effectiveness is improved through evaluation . 
Text = 70 . 5%
Leavitt , J .  & Herbert-Davis , M .  ( 1993 )  . Collective strategies for action . In Mason , Talbott ,  & Leavitt 
( Eds .  )  , Policy and Politics for Nurses : Action and Change in the Workplace , Government , 
Organizations and Community ( 2nd ed )  ( pp . 166-178 )  . WB Saunders . 
The authors differentiate between a collective (  “ a group that is brought together to pursue an agreed-upon goals , 
action , or set of actions ”  ) and a coalition (  “ a collective that is characterized as a temporary alliance of diverse
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 232 Interventions
members who come together for joint action in support of a defined goal ”  )  ( p . 166 )  . 
They propose five “ basic tenets ” or “ principles ” of acting collectively : 
1 . The whole is greater than the sum of its parts .  .  .  . Group process strengthens the collectives , reflects the
broader perspective , and creates a process resulting in an outcome more likely to be innovated and
comprehensive than would an individual acting alone . This makes collectives consisting of diverse
communities often the most effective–but also the most difficult to form . 
2 . While the goals and strategies may differ , the process of forming and using them is the same . 
3 . All politics is local : organizing a collective at the local level can have more impact at the national level
than the other way around . If those most impacted cannot be mobilized , engaging others at more removed
levels is impossible . 
4 . All collective action involves a challenge to existing power structures and results in an effort to take or
share power . Therefore , conflict is inevitable . Those participating in collective action most be prepared to
effectively manage conflict by finding ways to share rather than take power away . 
5 . The goals of any collective action should include not only a change in a situation , but also the
empowerment of large numbers of people . The result is continuing capacity for participating in social policy
decisions . 
Elements of an Effective Coalition : 
1 . Possesses a clear understanding of why it is needed
a . to acquire a power base which exceeds that of one person attempting to act alone ? 
b . to build a base of support ? 
c . to prevent another group from challenging a plan ? 
d . a combination of the above ? 
2 . Possesses a clear understanding of what is to be accomplished through collective action , reflecting the
values and ideas of the membership
3 . Consists of groups that share an interest in the outcome because they view their own group ’ s needs will
be met in the process
4 . Formed through networking or the process of developing connections with friends , colleagues , and
strangers who are committed to a mutual goal more than to any sense of personal relationships with others
in the group . 
5 . Has a critical sense of timing
a . knows when to recruit for the issue and when to time the action
b . knows how to frame the issue to have meaning and be of immediate concern for those being invited
to join the coalition
c . plans the action to be proactive rather than reactive 
d . times the action to enhance public awareness and support
6 . A single leader must emerge or be designated who can keep the long-term perspective for the coalition
and provide an unifying voice . The leader must : 
a . motivate others
b . be capable of assuming numerous roles as needed ( i . e .  , recruiter , supporter , strategist , agitator , 
teacher , spokesperson )  [ Note : In a coalition , leaders ’ role flexibility is seen as more important than
familiarity with the issues or facts about the plan .  ] 
c . excel in communication skills ( especially listening ) and group process
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 233 Interventions
d . maintain a forward momentum for the coalition by creating an atmosphere of trust and acceptance
of diversity , toleration of criticism , conflict , and confusion
e . know when to step down as leader . 
Coalition Strategies : 
1 . Shaping the message , such as developing a slogan , which motivates the membership and identifies the
coalition ’ s purpose
2 . Keeping the goal in view while developing the specific activities
a . requires thorough research of the issue , the implications , and the impact 
b . accommodates the interests of each member of the coalition
c . utilizes a process that involves constituent members so they better “ own ” the final plan
d . establishes a process of giving approval for the coalition ’ s actions
e . analyzes resources available 
f . states the goal and plan as specifically as possible , knowing that the narrower the goal , the more
likely the success
g . creates “ fall back ” plans for each action 
h . encourages members to take responsibility for a given step
i . establishes realistic timetables
j . develops effective methods for ongoing communication within the coalition
k . builds in sufficient time to allow board action from participating groups and organizations
l . deals with interpersonal conflicts openly and promptly
m . keeps detained records 
3 . Being prepared to deal with internal opposition through consensus development ( preferred ) or conflict
resolution methods ( last resort )  . Sources of opposition : 
a . hidden agendas
b . differences among member organizations ’ styles of action
c . polarization among members around racism , elitism , insensitivity to limitations of members , and / or
intolerance
d . presentation of members ’ personal views rather than those of the organization or interest they
represent ( i . e .  , new members need orientation ) 
e . reluctance to disband the coalition when its goal is achieved . 
Text = 21 . 5%
Checkoway .  ( 1987 )  . Political strategy for social planning . In F . Cox ( Ed .  )  , Strategies of community
organization ( 4th ed .  )  ( p . 335 )  . Itasca IL : Peacock Publishers . 
Coalitions are defined as “ working relationships which unite individuals or groups around a common purpose . 
They may be short-term or relatively permanent , voluntary and occasional , or professionalized and staffed . They
are important for individuals seeking to share resources and generate power beyond reach of what each could
accomplish alone .  .  .  . Coalitions face obstacles and have costs , but the costs should be weighed against benefits
during turbulent times .  ” 
Text = ratings not available
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 234 Interventions
Lewis , J .  , Lewis , M . et al .  ( 1998 )  . Community counseling : Empowerment strategies for a diverse
society ( 2nd ed .  )  ( pp . 194-198 )  . Brooks / Cole Publishing . 
Coalition is defined as a “ group of organizations working together for a common purpose . The combined
resources of these groups can have a greater impact than can the same constituency groups working by
themselves ”  ( p . 194 )  . The authors suggest three stages of coalition building exist : 
1 . Planning , where constituency groups with a common interest and stake are identified
2 . Consultation , where representatives from the various organizations must discuss the ways in which
joining into a coalition with others will benefit each constituency
3 . Planning and Implementation , where the level of interest and commitment to the coalition ’ s goals are
determined . Coalition success depends on all members owning the work they agree to do which , in turn , 
depends on they extent to which the member organizations feel they have received the opportunity to
express their views and feel their views have been heard and respected by the other members . 
Text = not available
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Community Organizing 
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
53 Minkler , M .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1997 )  . Community organizing and community building for health . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers
Univ . Press , p . 30 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 235 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : COMMUNITY ORGANIZING
Definition
Community organizing helps community groups identify common problems or goals , mobilize resources , 
and develop and implement strategies for reaching the goals they collectively have set . 53
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All adolescents and their parents 
Problem : Potential for or use of alcohol
Community Example : 
Parents of teens in the community were outraged when two teens were seriously injured after
attending a party at a teen ’ s home where the parents had supplied alcohol . The parents intended to 
 “ collect car keys ” from everyone at the party , but obviously failed to do so . The PHN approached a
parent committee from the school to see if they would be willing to help organize a parent-led
community effort to address the alcohol issue parent to parent . The PHN suggested they frame the
issue as ,  “ Why do adults , especially parents , supply minors with alcohol ?  ”  ( instead of the more
typical “ Why do teens drink ?  ”  )  . He also helped the group identify ways to reach parents who were
not typically involved in school projects , and helped them identify strategies that had worked in
other places . The group ’ s goal was to convince parents of adolescents that it was not okay for them
to supply teens with alcohol , and to challenge the idea that “ teens were going to drink anyway , so
they would be safer drinking at home .  ” A community survey indicated that the percentage of
parents who thought it was “ okay ” for teens to drink in their own homes went from 75 percent to
60 percent over a two-year period . The parent-led group continues , with the PHN functioning as an
advisor . The group ’ s next project targets the issue of adult use of alcohol in the community and its
influence on adolescent alcohol use . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 236 Interventions
Systems Example : 
A local newspaper reported that a statewide student health survey revealed their school district had
one of the highest teen alcohol-use rates in the whole state . Numerous letters to the editors
questioned why the community was not doing anything about the problem . Some viewed the report
as an affront to the community ’ s reputation ( in the words of their city welcome sign ) as a “ great
place to raise children .  ” A demand was put out for community action . A PHN from the public
health agency partnered with other community groups and organizations to develop a plan to
address alcohol use in the community . The plan included recommendations for enforcing existing
laws ( such as tightening sales of alcohol and enforcing “ not a drop ” laws with minors )  , as well as
developing acceptable ( that is ,  “ cool ”  ) alcohol-free activities for adolescents . The group ’ s other
major thrust was a decision to study assets and protective factors in adolescents to see if the
community could find ways to develop assets in addition to preventing risk-taking behaviors . The
representatives of each organization ( including the PHN ) were asked to take back this idea and get
a commitment from their respective boards for the plan . 
Individual / Family Example : This intervention does not apply at this practice level . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Collective action is the generic term for interventions characterized by groups of people or organizations that
come together jointly to address issues that matter to them . Community organizing , coalition building , and
collaboration are all examples of collective action . Because of this , they share many common features–especially
at the community level of practice . 
Like coalition building and collaboration , community organizing is one method of building collective action . 
•Similarities 
< Empowerment is an enabling process through which individuals or communities take control of their
lives and their environment . It is a basic concept of collective action , although it is not always called 
 “ empowerment ”  
< Emphasis is placed on “ beginning where the people are ”  
< The process of community engagement is relied upon at the level of community-focused practice ; all
reflect the principles of collective action [ see next note from Abby ]  . 

•Differences 
< The impetus for community organizing must be identified by the community itself and not by an outside
organization or change agent 
< Unlike collaboration , community organizing does not intend to provide opportunities for organizational
or personal transformation 
< Unlike collaboration , community organizing does not occur at the individual / family-focus level of
practice 
< It is primarily a community level of practice . 

Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 237 Interventions
Community organizing also relates to other interventions . Successful methods for implementing the outreach
intervention at the systems and community practice levels–such as identifying and specifying the issue of concern , 
describing the target population , and considering demographic implications , are similar to the initial steps in
community organizing . Community organizing often uses social marketing as a companion intervention when the
community organizing intent is to change a population ’ s health behavior . Community organizing is also
implemented in conjunction with the policy development intervention , especially when the organizing intent is to
change policy at the systems level . 
Notes from Abby
Collective action , or groups of people or organizations coming together for mutual gain or problem solving , is part
of the American democratic tradition . Alexis de Tocqueville , writing in Democracy in America ( 1840 )  , noted :  
 “  .  .  . Americans are a peculiar people .  .  .  . If , in a local community , a citizen becomes aware of a human need that is
not met , he thereupon discusses the situation with his neighbors . Suddenly a committee comes into existence . 
The committee thereupon begins to operate on behalf of the need , and a new common function is established . It
is like watching a miracle .  ” 
Effective collective action generally incorporates the following principles , or tenets , described by Leavitt and
Herbert-Davis : 
• The whole is greater than the sum of its parts . 
This is the underlying assumption of all collective action . It acknowledges that the group process will
increase the power of the collective , reflect the broadest perspective , and create a process that results in
an outcome that is likely to be more innovative and comprehensive than an individual acting alone . 
• While the goals and outcomes of collective action may vary , the process of coming together for joint
action is the same . 
The requirements of working together demand expertise in communication , negotiation , and conflict
management . 
• All politics is local : organizing a collective at the local level has an impact on the national level more
than the other way around . 
Those closest to the problem or issue are most affected and , therefore , more likely to be committed to
action . 
• All collective action involves a challenge to the existing power structure . 
The resulting conflict is inevitable , and , since it can be anticipated , efforts should be made to
depersonalize it . This is true whether the collective is between two individuals or two hundred . The most
effective collective action finds ways to share power . 
• The goals of any collective action should include not only a change in a particular problem or issue , but
the empowerment of large numbers of people to be active participants in the process . 
The ultimate goal of acting collectively is to empower those involved . 
Source : Leavitt , J . K .  ,  & Herbert-Davis , M .  ( 1993 )  . Collective strategies for action . In Mason , Talbott ,  & Leavitt . Policy and politics for
nurses : Action and change in the workplace , government , organizations and community ( 2nd ed .  )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
54 Bracht , N .  ,  & Kingsbury , L .  ( 1990 )  . Community organization principles in health promotion : A five-stage model . In
N . Bracht ( Ed .  )  , Health promotion at the community level ( pp . 66-88 )  . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 238 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Community Organizing54
Systems and Community Practice Levels
Working with others , PHNs .  .  . 
The Five-Stage Model for Community Organizing
Stage 1 : Community Analysis
A . Defines the community
Is the “ community ” geo-political ? geographic ? a targeted population ? 
B . Collects and analyzes a variety of data to produce a profile of that community . 
The profile includes : 
• community perception of needs and their solutions 
• identification of who can get things done in the community and who is ready to provide resources 
• identification of who needs to be involved in decision making
• identification of who may be opposed to addressing the issue . 
C . Assesses the community ’ s capacity to support the desired change . 
D . Assesses the potential barriers to change within the community . 
Frequent sources of barriers to change include : 
• community does not clearly understand the change 
• community has no part in bringing about the change
• community ’ s interests and security are threatened by the change 
• change is advocated by those who are not trusted or liked
• changes are a mismatch for the cultural values of the community . 
E . Assesses the community ’ s readiness for change . 
Consider such factors such as : 
• interest intensity
• urgency
• general level of community awareness
• attitudes of community opinion leaders
• community ’ s previous history and response to change . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 239 Interventions
F . Synthesizes data gathered in the steps above and establishes priorities using community input . 
Stage 2 : Design and Initiation
A . Establishes a core planning group and selects a local organizer / coordinator who is energetic , with
good listening and conflict-resolution skills
B . Selects an organizational structure ( for example , advisory board , council , panels , coalition , lead
agency , informal network , and grass-roots or advocacy movements )  ; successful models are likely
to use part of several models , adapted to fit the situation
C . Identifies , selects , and recruits organization members who represent a cross-section of all groups
potentially affected by the changes ; it is best if these individuals have the authority to speak and
act on behalf of the group they are to represent
D . Defines the organization ’ s mission and goals ; these should concisely and briefly communicate
what is to be achieved or changed
E . Provides training and recognition . 
Stage 3 : Implementation
A . Generates ongoing broad citizen participation
B . Provides adequate staff and other support
C . Develops a sequential work plan 
A plan should include the following steps : 
• selects priority activities
• plans activities , including establishing required knowledge , attitude , behaviors or skills , and a realistic
timetable
• obtains resources and support
• designs the evaluation , including data collection protocols
• determines how feedback will be provided . 
D . Uses comprehensive integrated strategies and does not assume that “ one size fits all ” 
E . Integrates the community ’ s values into the intervention , so it “ speaks the community ’ s
language .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 240 Interventions
Stage 4 : Maintenance-Consolidation
A . Integrates intervention activities into established community structures
B . Establishes a positive organizational culture which fosters cooperation , retains staff and
volunteers , and sets the stage for development of community ownership
C . Establishes an ongoing member recruitment plan
D . Disseminates results to the members . 
Stage 5 : Dissemination / Reassessment
A . Updates community analysis , looking for changes in leadership , resources , and organizational
relationships within the community
B . Assesses the effectiveness of completed activities
C . Charts future directions and modifications , especially strategies for continued collaboration and
networking among members
D . Summarizes and disseminates results to the community . 
Notes from Abby
Catherine Lexau and others provide a case study applying the Five-Step Model for Community Organizing to
promote farming health and safety . They found the model worked well to change the community norm from
accepting farm-related injury as just “ part of the job ” to seeing it as preventable and unnecessary . They also
found that “ overlapping of the stages of the model is common , and the process occurs differently in different
communities depending on available resources and individual needs and skills .  ” 
Lexau , C .  ,  & Kingsbury , L . et al .  ( 1993 , September )  . Building coalitions : A community wide approach for promoting farming
health and safety . AAOHN Journal , 41 ( 9 )  , 440-449 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 241 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Over the past two decades , separate literature has emerged around several similar , yet distinct , variations of
community organization . Minkler and Wallerstein provide a useful list ( p . 38 )  : 
Community Empowerment 
Community empowerment is a “ social-action process that promotes participation of people , organizations , 
and communities toward the goals of increased individual community control , political efficacy , improved
qualify of community life , and social justice .  ” Community empowerment is a central goal of all community
organizing . 
Community Development
Community organizing efforts that result in improved community competence ( that is , problem-solving
capacity ) are often referred to as community development . The central goal of these types of community
organizing is usually focused on economic development as the main mechanism for competency
development . 
Community Building
Community organizing efforts that emphasize participation in decision-making and planning by those in the
community affected by the change are called community building . Community building places greater
emphasis on enabling communities to play the lead role in their own development , so that “ community
empowerment occurs rather than just community embetterment .  ” 
Community Regeneration
Community building models which focus on promoting community strengths and assets are yet another
variation of community organizing ( called “ community regeneration ” by its major advocate , John
McKnight )  .  
* Minkler , M .  ,  & Wallerstein , N .  ( 1997 )  . Improving health through community organization and community building : A health
education perspective . In M . Minkler ( Ed .  )  , Community organizing and community building for health ( pp . 34-38 )  . New
Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
For additional information on the concepts , see : Kretzmann ,  & McKnight .  ( 1993 )  . Building communities from the inside out . 
Chicago : ACTA Publications ; Anderson ,  & McFarlane ( 2000 )  . Community as partner ( 3rd ed .  )  . Philadelphia : Lippincott . 
55 The American Heritage College Dictionary ( 3rd ed .  )  .  ( 1993 )  . New York : Houghton Mifflin , pp . 1072 , 450 , 
respectively . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 242 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Community Organizing
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention .  
. 
1 . UNDERSTANDS THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN POWER AND EMPOWERMENT AND IS
COMFORTABLE IN USING PERSONAL POWER . 
Best Evidence : Rothman ; Minkler and Wallerstein ; Speer and Hughey
Minkler and Wallerstein note that many are justified in criticizing “ empowerment ” as the “ catch-all phrase of the
social sciences ”  ( p . 40 )  . We define these terms to assure a consistent understanding of these terms . 
‚ The dictionary defines power as “ the ability or capacity to perform , or act effectively ; a specific capacity , 
faculty or aptitude .  ” Empowerment means to “ invest someone or something with power .  ” 55
‚ Power in and of itself is merely a capacity and inherently neither good nor bad . Power can be used for
both good or bad ends . The understanding of power is heavily dependent on social , cultural , and situational
contexts . 
‚ While every person possesses the potential for power , each person must learn self-empowerment . Others
may assist in the process of learning to engage one ’ s own power , but in the end what you do with what
you have is up to you . Empowerment , then , is the process of helping others ( persons , families , groups , 
systems , or communities ) in recognizing and utilizing their own power . 
At the conclusion to their review of historical and current usages of empowerment , Minkler and Wallerstein
suggest that empowerment is “ a social action process by which individuals , communities , and organizations gain
mastery over their lives in the context of changing their social and political environment to improve equity and
quality of life ”  ( p . 40 )  . 
Other insights are provided in the literature , including : 
‚ Rothman , Erlich , Topman , and Cox propose the exercise of power ( both personal and
organizational ) as just as important , if not more important , to community organizing as to developing
and implementing a plan ( pp . 15-17 ) 
‚ Speer and Hughey suggest that community organizing promotes development of both :  
< personal empowerment ( empowering to the individual involved ) and 
< community empowerment ( empowered individuals are more likely and able to change
communities using their personal power )  . 
56 Miller and Staples ( as referenced by Minkler and Wallerstein )  ( 1998 )  . In Minkler ( Ed .  )  . Community
organizing and community building for health . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers University Press , p . 45 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 243 Interventions
This empowerment contributes to the capacity of a community to create its own destiny , which some refer
to as community competence . 
‚ Rothman and others present a power continuum that may be applied to community organizing :  
< incentive-based : 
providing rewards for positive behavior 
< appealing to rational thinking : 
imparting information with the hope that this will point those making the decision “ in the
right direction ”  
< persuading : 
supplying information and reasoning in a proactive fashion 
< normative : 
shaping perceptions and beliefs of others to become compatible with those of the majority 
< coercive influence : 
using threat , force , or actual material loss or disadvantage as a consequence for resisting
the change . 
2 . USES A STRENGTHS-BASED FRAMEWORK TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY CAPACITY
DEVELOPMENT AND EMPOWERMENT . 
Best Evidence : Helvie ; Minkler and Wallerstein ; Ross ; Rothman ; Speer and Hughey ; Swanson and Nies 
The authors reviewed suggest community empowerment as the intended outcome of community– organizing
efforts . Helvie , quoting Rappaport , defines empowerment as the “ process by which individuals , communities , and
organizations gain mastery over their lives ”  ( p . 246 )  . Empowerment builds on existing assets or capacities and is , 
therefore , essentially a “ strengths-based ” perspective . 
When selecting issues to address through community organizing , 56 the PHN should choose an issue that : 
‚ can be won
‚ possesses potential for uniting a community and involving people in meaningful ways
‚ affects many people 
‚ functions as part of a larger strategy , meaning that success is more likely when community organizing
is combined with other interventions . 
57 For the seminal article on community competence , see : Cottrell , L .  ( 1957 )  . The competent community . In
Kaplan , Wilson , Leighten ( Eds .  )  , Further explorations in social psychiatry .  ( pp . 195-209 )  . New York : Basic Books . 
58 Adapted from Eng and Parker as presented in Helvie , pp . 329-339 . 
59 For further readings by Goeppinger , see : Community as client : Using the nursing process to promote
health .  ( 1984 )  . In M . Stanhope & J . Lancaster ( Eds .  )  . Community health nursing : Process and practice for
promoting health ( pp . 379-404 )  . St . Louis : Mosby . See , also : Goeppinger , with Baglioni , A . J .  ( 1985 )  . Community
competence : A positive approach to needs assessment . American Journal of Community Psychology , 13 ( 5 )  , 507-
523 . 
60 Fawcett , S .  ( 1999 )  . Some lessons on community organization and change . In J . Rothman ( Ed .  )  , Reflections
on community organization : Enduring themes and critical issues . Itasca , IL : FE Peacock Publishers , 314-334 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 244 Interventions
3 . FOCUSES ON DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNITY COMPETENCE . 57
Best Evidence : Helvie ; Minkler and Wallerstein ; Swanson and Nies
A competent community exhibits the following characteristics : 58
‚ participation in community goal and norm setting is common and expected
‚ commitment to the community is strong , reflected by caring and involvement , and by the extent to
which the community itself is thought to influence change in one ’ s own life
‚ community awareness , or how well each part of the community understands its own contribution and
that of contributions made by other community members
‚ a sense of community , or the collective views , attitudes , needs , and intentions of the community can
be described by those involved
‚ methods to accommodate open conflict and continued interaction between different parts of the
community
‚ ability to manage relations within a wider society
‚ mechanisms for facilitating participation , interaction , and decision making
‚ existence of social support , or the capacity and willingness to help others , either formally ( such as
bank loans ) or informally ( such as neighbors helping neighbors ) 
Jean Goeppinger , 59 current chair of the Department of Community , Family , Mental and Women ’ s , Health at the
University of North Carolina School of Nursing , has written extensively about development of community
competence as one of the goals of public health nursing practice . 
4 . UTILIZES THE WISDOM LEARNED FROM PAST COMMUNITY ORGANIZING EFFORTS . 
Best Evidence : Fawcett
In a recent article , Stephen Fawcett60 provides an overview of changes in community–organizing practices
observed over the past 50 years . He calls these observations “ accumulated wisdom .  ” They are organized in
categories for quick review : 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 245 Interventions
Lessons in Community Context
‚ High-profile commissions and reports create conditions for experimentation and optimism about public
problem solving
‚ Multiple models of community organization practice may be necessary to fit the variety of contexts in which
community work is done
‚ Crosscutting issues are good context for community–organizing practice
‚ Community organization cannot be completely divorced from politics , or from controversy
‚ Poor people can make substantial gains ( or losses ) during periods of tumultuous change and related
realignment of political parties
‚ Strategies used in community organizations should match the times
‚ Mass protest and grassroots community organization can work together
‚ Community organizations form when ( and not before ) people are ready to be organized
‚ Those institutions that seek to avoid conflict and controversy make a difficult base from which to do
community organization work . 
Lessons on Community Planning
‚ Societal and community problems are evidence that institutions are not functioning for people
‚ We must set realistic goals for community organization
‚ We will likely achieve less if we set only modest goals
‚ Social planning can engage experts in helping address societal problems , particularly when there is
consensus on the issue
‚ Local people have the experiential knowledge to come together to define local issues
‚ Local control can hinder collaboration at broader levels of planning . 
Lessons on Community Action and Mobilization
‚ Each individual has the capacity for self-determination , self-help , and self-improvement
‚ No one can do it alone
‚ Strong leaders are present in even the most economically deprived communities
‚ Community practitioners should never get used to the terrible conditions they see in their community work
‚ People ’ s beliefs and values enable them to stay committed
‚ Religious institutions help shape beliefs about what is right and good , such as the responsibility to care for
others
‚ Community practitioners have few opportunities to reflect on their work
‚ Responding to events and opportunities to build community often takes us beyond what we know . 
Lessons on Opposition and Resistance
‚ Societal problems sometimes serve the interests of those in power
‚ Racial and ethnic tension and controversies have disrupted and destroyed many community organization
efforts
‚ Social action tactics , such as disruptive protest , often face many opponents
‚ Less “ in-your-face ” social action approaches can produce a strong political base from which to make
change
‚ Opposition and resistance may come in a variety of ways
‚ Community organizations may respond to opposition with appropriate counteraction
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 246 Interventions
‚ Opposition to change may be like peeling an onion ; workers should expect multiple layers of opposition
and resistance . 
Lessons on Intervention and Maintenance of Efforts
‚ The strategy of community organization should fit the situation
‚ Using multiple strategies usually has the advantage over any single strategy
‚ Being in two cultures promotes creativity
‚ The work of community organization takes time , and follow-though
‚ External support may be both a necessity and a trap for community organizations
‚ Community organizations often fade away when the issues they were formed to address fade
‚ Organizations needs small “ wins ,  ” or “ shorter-term , controllable opportunities to make a tangible
difference .  ” 
Lessons on Community Change
‚ The central idea of community organization practice is public benefits , not creation of new professions
‚ Community organization must go beyond the process of bringing people together
‚ The primary need is not for individuals to adjust to their work , but for the environment to enable people to
attain their goals
‚ Community organizations can function as catalysts for change . 
Lessons on Systems Change
‚ Interventions should include systems changes that reflect the “ root ” causes of the problem
‚ Systems change does not necessarily occur simply by reporting needs to appointed or elected officials
‚ The great power of social movements is in communicating a different vision of the world
‚ Community organizations should seek changes commensurate with their power
‚ Community ( and broader systems ) change can be effected through collective action–involving alliances
among groups that share risks , resources , and responsibility to achieve common interests . 
Lessons on Community-Level Outcomes
‚ Societal problems often recur
‚ Most community efforts “ chip ” away at the problem
‚ Real change is rare
‚ Development of community leadership may be a positive by-product of even “ failed ” community efforts
‚ Optimal health and development for all people may be beyond the capacity of many communities to
achieve , but it is not beyond what we should seek . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 247 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Archer and others * provide a list of skills characteristic of effective community organizers : 
• knowledge of community organization and theory
• good planning and assessment skills
• knowledge of the community in which the change is to occur
• awareness of the power structure and the way power is shared in the community
• credibility within the community
• dedication to an idea or goal
• trust in others and their abilities
• ability to share responsibility
• good communication skills
• leadership qualities *  * 
• belief in a democratic process
• flexibility to be able to react to the situation and respond appropriately
• time-management skills
• action from the perspective of the “ community as the client ” 
• research skills
• sense of humor
• patience ( p . 57 )  .  
* Archer , Kelly ,  & Bisch .  ( 1984 )  . Implementing change in communities : A collaborative process . St . Louis : Mosby .  
*  * John Tropman , a co-author with Rothman and others on community organizing , has also written a “ skills guide ” 
on successful community leadership . For further reading , see his book ( 1997 ) by that same title published by the NASW Press 
( Washington , DC )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 248 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Community Organizing
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and
academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage is included at the end
of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . 
It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
none
Expert Opinion
Fisher , R .  ( 1997 )  . Social action community organization : Proliferation , persistence , roots , and
prospects . In M . Minkler ( Ed .  )  . Community organizing and community building for health ( pp . 53-
67 )  . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
Fisher expands on Rothman ’ s “ Model C ”  ( see p . 23 )  , Social Action , providing a review of its evolution since its
1960s heyday . He stresses it continues to perform community organizing by “ focusing on power , pursuit of
conflict strategies , and challenges to the structures that oppress and disempower constituents ”  ( p . 53 )  . However , 
rather than being confined to a specific location for a short period , social action is now practiced globally and
over a long period of time . The following characteristics are shared by contemporary social action community
organizing : 
1 . Efforts are community-based , meaning is it organized around communities of interest or geography , not
focused on a particular “ enemy ” 
2 . Social action actors are “ transclass groups ” of constituencies and cultural identities , rather than
organized around a single group
3 . The “ ideological glue ” is a neopopulist view of democracy . They reject authoritarianism at all levels , 
rather than a few dominant levels
4 . Conflicts more often are over communities ’ cultural and social identity than over workplace- related
issues , as they were in the past
5 . Social action is more likely to overlap with locality development elements of self-help development and
empowerment , also known as “ community capacity building .  ” 
Fisher ends with a comprehensive review of the “ historical antecedents ” of social action , ranging from Saul
Alinsky ’ s work pre-WWII to “ new ” worldwide movements focusing on “ democracy as the essence of
new .  .  . insurgent consciousness and the source of its potential ”  ( p . 62 )  . He warns , however , that “ the pursuit of
democracy , without sufficient concern for equality , has resulted in the failure of the new social movements to
address the material needs of the most disadvantaged . Moreover , the new social movement origins in culturally
oriented , identity-based efforts tend to fragment social change efforts in general ”  ( p . 63 )  . 
Expert Opinion ( academic )  = 54%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 249 Interventions
Speer , P .  ,  & Hughey , J .  ( 1995 )  . Community organizing : An ecological route to empowerment and
power . J . of Community Psychology , 23 ( 5 )  , 729-748 . 
The authors studied examples of community organizing ( CO ) associated with the Pacific Institute for Community
Organizations over seven years to examine if and how empowerment ( usually thought of only in terms of an
individual phenomenon ) may be understood as the manifestation of social power but at three levels of analysis : 
individual , organizational , and community , all realized through the process of community organizing . In this
study , power is thought of in terms of social power , or power to change things in a community . Social power
accomplishes this in one of three ways : 1 ) possession of superior bargaining positions , such as having more wealth
or other resources that can be used to reward or punish various targets in the community ; 2 ) ability to construct
or eliminate barriers to participation in community decision-making , such as controlling meeting agendas ; 3 ) 
perpetuation of myths and community ideology or control of information within a community to influence a shared
community consciousness . Community organizing , then , results in community empowerment to the extent those
carrying out the organizing can reward or punish community targets , control what gets talked about in public
debate , and shape how residents and public officials think about their community . 
They test their hypothesis by observing several community–organizing efforts , each of which cycles through the
organizing phases . The organizing cycle consists of the assessment phase of clarifying and defining
issues / problems ; the research phase of examining the causes and correlates of the identified issues / problems ; the
action phase of attempting both strategy development and organizational mobilization for collective action ; and
the reflection phase of exploring the effectiveness of the implemented strategies . Individuals are empowered by
participating in an organization which itself is gaining social power ; for the individual , it becomes a “ learning by
doing ” process . Organizations can be both empowering for the individuals participating in them and empowered , 
in the sense of an organization wielding social power . 
At the community level , empowerment occurs through multisector relational development , institutional linkages
across sectors , and collective attention to community issues . The ultimate level of community empowerment is
multiple multisectoral organizations working together in a federation to create change . At this level they are
interdependent , have power to redistribute resources , share and / or rotate organizing roles ( such as public
relations , organizing events jointly , etc .  )  , and disband or refocus . 
Expert Opinion = ratings not available
Texts and Monographs
Helvie , C .  ( 1998 )  . Advanced Practice Nursing in the Community ( pp . 242-255 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : 
Sage . 
Helvie suggests three models for effecting community change .  ( These resemble Rothman ’ s work , although he is
not cited .  ) He then reviews Bracht and others ’ comparisons and contrasts of them . Based on these analyses , 
Helvie concludes that the locality development model ( also known as the community development model )  “ has
been found to be the most effective way to bring about community change ”  ( p . 245 )  . He then describes concepts
underlying the model : 
1 . Empowerment , or the “ process by which individuals , communities , and organizations gain mastery over
their lives .  ” Helvie suggests this process occurs simultaneously at two levels in community organizing : 
individuals experience increased social support , which increases their sense of control , and communities
gain community competence . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 250 Interventions
Community competence , in turn , is the community ’ s ability to engage in effective problem solving . Helvie
turns to Cottrell ’ s earlier work in identifying eight conditions essential for community competence : 
PCommitment
PSelf-other awareness and clarity of situational definitions
PArticulateness
PCommunication
PConflict containment and accommodation
PParticipation
PManagement of relations with the larger society
PMachinery to facilitate participation in interaction and decision making ( p . 246 )  . 
2 . Participation , or the necessity for community members to be active , rather than passive , in the learning
process . 
3 . Relevance , or the people must experience a need for change , if change or learning is to occur . 
4 . Issue selection , or organization around issues that are important to the community and also winnable , 
understandable , and specific in scope . Arriving at the selection requires extensive dialogue with community
members . 
Helvie references Bracht et al .  ( 1990 ) for community–organizing steps .  ( See Bracht and Kingsbury abstract , p . 
7 .  )  . 
Text = 73 . 5%
Swanson , J .  ,  & Nies , M .  ( 1997 )  . Community participation . Community health nursing–Promoting the
health of aggregates ( pp . 140-148 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
Community organization is defined as “ the process whereby the nurse empowers individuals , aggregates , and
communities to solve priority community health problems and to achieve community heath-related goals ”  ( p . 
142 )  . 
The authors suggest that “ community organization and community health nursing share common roots in theories
and concepts of social change and social interaction ”  ( p . 139 )  . These “ common roots ” include : 
1 . Social Systems Theories ( p . 139 ) which basically posit that a change in any part of a system will create change
in the rest of the system : 
a . communities are “ systems that have wholeness , boundaries , organization , openness and feedback ” 
b . each community has interrelated subsystems
PAggregates , or groups within the community that share common characteristics such as age , gender , 
race , SES , culture , etc . 
PSectors , functional divisions of the community such as health , welfare , education , economics , 
religion , government , etc . 
c . each community is also part of larger suprasystems
Community health is brought about by the cooperative effort of all sectors of the community . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 251 Interventions
2 . Community Participation
Significant levels of community participation are one of the indicators of healthy communities . Forms of
participation include
a . coalitions or partnerships , where groups of diverse agencies , organizations , and individuals work
together to address a common interest or concern
b . community empowerment is the most active level of community participation ; empowerment is a process
whereby individuals , organizations and communities gain mastery over their lives ( p . 141 )  . 
Community organizing is simultaneously a process , a social structure , and a goal referencing a “ series of activities
related to developing competent community action systems and to the technical tasks associated with them ”  ( p . 
141 )  ; an operational definition for public health nursing is : community organizing is “ the process whereby the
nurse empowers individuals , aggregates , and communities to solve priority community health problems
and to achieve community-related goals . The process implies upstream thinking .  .  .  ”  ( p . 143 )  . 
1 . Process : suggests Bracht et al .  ’ s five-step process for community organization , as it parallels the nursing
process ( p . 141 )  .  ( See Bracht and Kingsbury abstract , p . 19 ) 
2 . Structure : focuses on the relationships among subsystems
3 . Goal : develop “ competent communities ”  ( from Contrell and Goeppinger )  , that is , communities having 
a . commitment
b . active participation
c . articulateness
d . effective communication
e . self-awareness
f . clarity of situational definitions
g . conflict containment and accommodation
h . management of relations with larger systems
Review of Rothman ’ s three models for community organizing ( see Rothman abstract )  ; the selection of a particular
model depends on the community ’ s social and cultural context , the nature of the issues or problems and the
cultural and ethical values of the PHN serving as community organizer . 
Swanson and Nies suggest that Rothman ’ s community development model be combined with community health
concepts so that “ Health-related needs are identified , and health goals are established , met , and evaluated through
community-professional partnerships ”  ( p . 144 )  . In this application , the primary role of PHN is that of partner to
the community . However , all three models are deemed appropriate for PHN action , contingent on the situation at
hand . 
Text = 71%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 252 Interventions
Archer , S .  , Kelly , C .  ,  & Bisch , S .  ( 1984 )  . Community organization . Implementing change in
communities : A collaborative process ( pp . 51-67 )  . St . Louis : Mosby . 
Archer and colleagues provide a review of community organizing theory and practices to support their assertion
that public health nurses ( and health educators ) have long done this work but rarely named it as such ( p . 51 )  . 
They review several definitions of community organization and list their common components ( as opposed to
offering their own definitions )  . These components are : 
1 . The process used to carry out community organizing is a “ planned movement to achieve a specified outcome ” 
2 . There is the expectation of change
3 . It operates on a “ democratic precept ,  ” meaning that the process is collaborative effort with others to bring
about change ( p . 52 )  . 
Ross ’ three models for community change are discussed and briefly contrasted with Rothman ’ s models of
community organization practice .  ( See Ross and Rothman abstracts .  ) 
1 . Community Development
a . External Agency Approach : Individuals are assigned to help improve conditions for others by providing
expertise and technical assistance ; This is usually initiated by an agency and not necessarily in response to a
request for assistance from the people themselves ; Archer et al . recommend reserving use of this model
only for circumstances where there is no time for , or no commitment on the part of , the target community to
develop a collaborative relationship
b . Multiple Approach : teams of experts provide a variety of services to assist a community in adjusting to
technological changes ; this is not recommended unless the community itself has been involved in the
identification of problems and selects the team approach as the preferred method of addressing their needs
c . Inner Resources Approach : community members are encouraged to carry out the community
assessment and problem determination themselves , resulting in cooperation and mutual goal setting , the
recommended community development approach
2 . Community Organization
a . Specific Content Objective Approach : organizations , groups , and agencies come together to implement
a variety of means to eliminate a particular problem
b . General Content Objective Approach : a collaborative and coordinated system is developed that
allows representatives of community organizations , groups , etc .  , to work cohesively toward a specific area
of interest ; this is an ongoing process with continued development as a goal , rather than goal attainment
c . Process Objective Approach : reliance on networks of community groups to provide opportunities to
share responsibilities and initiate action ; the focus is on the shared process , not on the outcome itself
3 . Community Relations
a . Public Relations : methods used to project an agency to the public
b . Community Service : provision of benefits to the community to improve or solidify an agency ’ s
credibility with that community
c . Community Participation : representation from community businesses and agencies serve on
committees or task forces
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 253 Interventions
Also from Ross , four roles played by community organizers ( p . 57 )  : 
1 . Guide , assisting communities to attain their goals
2 . Enabler , acting as a facilitator or catalyst , encouraging the community to define common goals and to develop
a cooperative atmosphere
3 . Expert , providing data analysis and technical assistance , a resource person
4 . Social therapist , assisting in community diagnosis and generation of solutions
Community Organizer Skills ( p . 57 )  : 
1 . knowledge of community organization and theory
2 . good planning and assessment skills
3 . knowledge of the community in which the change is to occur
4 . awareness of the power structure and the transfer of power in the community
5 . credibility within the community
6 . dedication to an idea or goal
7 . trust in others and in their abilities
8 . ability to share responsibility
9 . good communication skills
10 . leadership qualities
11 . belief in a democratic process
12 . flexibility to be able to react to the situation and respond appropriately
13 . time-management skills
14 . operates from the perspective of the community as the client ( vs . the individual / family ) 
15 . research skills
16 . sense of humor
17 . patience . 
Text = 62%
Bracht , N .  ,  & Kingsbury , L .  ( 1990 )  . Community organization principles in health promotion : A fivestage model . In N . Bracht ( Ed .  )  . Health promotion at the community level ( pp . 66-88 )  . Newbury Park , 
CA : Sage . 
The authors define community organizing ( CO ) as “ a planned process to activate a community to use its own
social structures and any available resources ( internal or external ) to accomplish community goals , decided
primarily by community representatives and consistent with local values . Purposive social change interventions
are organized by individuals , groups , or organizations from within the community to attain and then sustain
community improvements and / or new opportunities ”  ( p . 67 )  . A key component is member choice in
participation ; a key outcome of CO is community ownership . To provide a context for CO , they review
Rothman ’ s models ( see Rothman abstract ) and principles for community activation ( p . 72 )  : 
1 . Planning must be based on a historical understanding of the community . Conditions that inhibit or
facilitate interventions must be assessed
2 . A comprehensive effort using multiple interventions is required , because the issue or problem is usually
one of multiple ( rather than single ) causality . 
3 . It is important to focus on community context and work primarily through existing structures and values
4 . Activate community participation , not mere token representatives , is desired
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 254 Interventions
5 . Intersectoral components of the community must work together to address the problem in a
comprehensive effort for the project to be effective
6 . The focus must be on both long- and short-term problem solving , if the longevity of the change is to
endure beyond the project ’ s demonstration period
7 . Finally , and most importantly , the community must share responsibility for the problem and for its
solution . 
The five-stage model for community organizing : 
Stage 1 : Community Analysis
A . Define the community-of-interest : geographic only ? population only ? targeted population only ? 
B . Collect and analyze a variety of data to produce a profile of the community-of-interest . The profile
includes community perception of needs and their solutions , as well as identification of who can get things
done in the community , who is read to provide resources , who needs to be involved in decision making , 
and who may be opposed to the goals
C . Assess the community-of-interest ’ s capacity to support the change desired
D . Assess the potential barriers within the community-of-interest . Frequent sources of barriers include
Pchanges not clearly understood
Pchanges they had no part in bringing about
Pchanges that threaten their vested interest and security
Pchanges advocated by those untrusted or unliked
Pchanges that are a mismatch for the community ’ s cultural values
E . Assess the community ’ s readiness for change by considering indicators such as interest intensity , 
urgency , general level of community awareness , attitudes of community opinion leaders , community ’ s
previous history , and response to change
F . Synthesize data gathered in A-E , and establish priorities using community input . 
Stage 2 : Design and Initiation
A . Establish a core planning group , and select a local organizer / coordinator who is energetic , with good
listening and conflict-resolution skills . 
B . Select an organizational structure ( e . g .  , advisory board , council , panels , coalition , lead agency , informal
network , and grass-roots or advocacy movements )  ; successful models are likely to use parts of several
models , honed to fit the situation
C . Identify , select , and recruit organization members who , in total , comprise a cross-section of all groups
or discrete sub-populations needing to be impacted ; it is best if these individuals have the authority to speak
and act on behalf of the sub-population or group they are to represent
D . Define the organization ’ s mission and goals which should concisely and briefly communicate what is to
be achieved or changed
E . Provide training and recognition . 
Stage 3 : Implementation
A . Generate broad ongoing citizen participation , and staff their work appropriately
B . Develop a sequential work plan using the following steps : 
Pdetermine the priority among intervention activities
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 255 Interventions
Pplan them , including establishing specific knowledge , attitude and behavior or skills required , and a
realistic timetable
Pobtain resources and support
Pdesign the evaluation , including data collection protocols
Pdetermine the feedback loop
C . Use comprehensive integrated strategies , and do not assume that “ one size fits all ” in prompting change
D . Integrate the community-of-interest ’ s values into the intervention , so it “ speaks the community ’ s
language ” 
Stage 4 : Intervention Maintenance-Consolidation
A . Integrate the intervention activities into established community structures
B . Establish a positive organizational culture that fosters cooperation , improves retention of staff and
volunteers , and sets the stage for development of community ownership
C . Establish an ongoing member recruitment plan
D . Disseminate results . 
Stage 5 : Dissemination / Reassessment
A . Update the community analysis , looking for changes in leadership , resources , and organizational
relationships withing the community
B . Assess the effectiveness of completed interventions or programs
C . Chart future directions and modifications , especially strategies for continued collaboration and
networking among members
D . Summarize and disseminate results . 
Text = 61%
Minkler , M .  ,  & Wallerstein , N .  ( 1997 )  . Improving health through community organization and
community building : A health education perspective . In M . Minkler ( Ed .  )  , Community organizing and
community building for health ( pp . 31-52 )  . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers Univ . Press . 
Community organizing is defined as “ the process by which community groups are helped to identify common
problems or goals , mobilize resources , and in other ways develop and implement strategies for reaching the goals
they collectively have set ”  ( p . 31 )  . 
The authors believe the concept of empowerment ( i . e .  , an enabling process through which individuals or
communities take control of their lives and their environment ) is implicit in the definition . The authors review the
history of community organizing and concur that the single distinguishing feature separating it from other means of
collective action is the assumption of the involvement of an outside organizer . However , they also suggest that the
current trend of pairing community organizing with community building needs to be included and predict it will
have increasing importance in community change efforts . Community building is defined as a process that
people in a community engage in themselves ( p . 32 )  . 
Current Models of Community Organizing
1 . Rothman ’ s three models are discussed .  ( See p . 23 .  ) However , the authors propose community building as
the “ new ”  “ descendant ” of Rothman ’ s community / locality development model . Both emphasize self-help and
collaboration . However , community building , which emphasizes the development of community strengths in
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 256 Interventions
shared values and goals , de-emphasizes the external organizer and encourages , instead , the “ professional as
partner ” model . 
2 . Several models of culturally relevant community building practices are reviewed . 
3 . Coalitions are posed as both a model of community organization practice and as a method used across
models in that they span the continuum from locality development to social action models , from community
organizing to community building , and can be either needs- or strengths-based . 
Key Concepts ( in lieu of a single , unified model of community organization or community building ) 
1 . Power is central to community organizing . It occurs at different levels : 
Pindividual–power to make decisions of personal choice
Porganizational–ability to define when elites and powerful organizations determine what issues become the
focus
Psystems–ways in which the structure of the economic and political systems favor certain interests and
disadvantage others
2 . Empowerment is a central tenet of community organizing and community building and is defined as “ a
social action process by which individuals , communities , and organizations gain mastery over their lives in
the context of changing their social and political environment to improve equity and quality of life ”  ( p . 40 )  . 
3 . Community competence , or the capacity to solve problems , depends on the development of leadership
4 . Participation in collective action is important and must engage the community and its members in ways
that are important to them
5 . Involvement in collective action must be seen as relevant to participants ’ goals and issues
6 . Issue selection should be done carefully to assure selection of an issue or problem for which the
community has deep concerns
7 . Measures of success and evaluation principles should be included . 
Text = 57%
Smith , C .  ,  & Maurer , F .  ( 1995 )  . Planning for community change . In C . Smith & F . Maurer ( Eds .  )  . 
Community health nursing : Theory and practice ( pp . 342-345 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
The authors use Rothman ’ s three models as their framework to discuss community organization .  ( See Rothman
abstract .  ) In comparing / contrasting the models , the authors conclude that locality development has the best
potential for the longest lasting effect , but is very time consuming to implement . Social planning can be effective if
the community is extensively involved in the gathering and analysis of the data ; however , it is sure to fail when
experts plan for communities , rather than involving communities in the planning . Social action ’ s reliance on direct , 
confrontational methods is usually implemented when an oppressed or disadvantaged group seeks retribution
from another . The authors provide little application of models to PHN practice , however . 
Text = 56%
Rothman , Erlich , Tropman ,  & Cox .  ( 1995 )  . Strategies of community intervention : Macro practice ( 5th
ed .  )  .  ( pp . 3-25 , 26-63 )  . Itasca , IL : FE Peacock . 
Introduction and Background
The authors provide a historical overview of community organizing as having been a “ constant element in
community intervention but to varying degrees and in varying forms over time ”  ( p . 6 )  . They suggest that the
grassroots / social action form of community organizing probably reached its peak in the late 1960s but describe
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 257 Interventions
how the legacy continues with “ vitality and prevalence ” in such ways as the mandate for citizen involvement in
many governmental programs and the fact that groups quickly learn how to influence and bypass traditional
political and administrative channels in order to be heard . 
Key elements of community organizing described are : 
1 . Arenas of intervention , or the social contexts in which community organizing takes place
A . Community : the “ territorial organization of people , goods , services , and commitments .  [ Community ] is
an important subsystem of the society , and one in which many [ community organizing ] functions are carried
on ”  ( p . 10 )  . The “ community and its various elements both limit possible actions and present opportunities
for action . The practitioner ’ s task is to acknowledge the former and seize upon the latter ”  ( p . 11 ) 
B . Organizations : An understanding of formal organizations is essential for practitioners intervening at the
community level since “ complex organizations are essential tools and mediating instrumentalities for
achieving collective purposes . They can contribute in significant ways to realize the kinds of lives people
want .  .  .  [ but they can also be ] neither positive nor benign in their impact .  .  .  ”  ( p . 12 )  . Practitioners need to
know how to change the way organizations operate , as well as how to make carry out their mission . 
Change efforts can be targeted at four main areas of organizational operation : 
Pconstitutional change , or impacting on the procedures or boundaries of an organization
Pconstituency- or resource-based change , or impacting on an organization ’ s boards , financial
contributors , grantors , etc . 
Ptarget entities , or influencing the populations to be aided , enlisted , or coerced
Pinterorganizational relationships , or impacting on other organizations with whom the organization-ofconcern is linked
C . Small groups : the smallest and most intimate arena for community intervention . Groups are small
enough so that each member can communicate with every other member . All small groups fulfill two main
functions : task fulfillment ( i . e .  , solving specific problems that the group was formed to tackle )  , and
expressive functions ( i . e .  , keeping the members together and working in relative harmony on external
tasks )  . 
2 . Core elements of practice
A . Systematic problem-solving process
Pidentification or specification of a problem or need
Pproblem / need delineation and clarification
Psystematic data collection about the problem / need
Pdelineation of alternative courses of action
Pdevelopment of implementation actions / plan
Pevaluation
B . Use of influence ( interpersonal and organized collective pressure ) 
Pcoercive ( i . e .  , use of threat , force , fiat , or otherwise being made to experience real , material loss or
disadvantage for resisting the influence attempt ) 
Pincentive-based ( i . e .  , providing rewards for positive behavior ) 
Pappealing to rational thinking ( i . e .  , imparting information with the hope that this will point those
making the decision “ in the right direction ”  ) 
Ppersuading ( i . e .  , supplying information and argumentation in a proactive fashion ) 
Pnormative ( i . e .  , shaping perceptions and beliefs of others to become compatible with those of the
majority ) 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 258 Interventions
The authors end these introductory remarks by suggesting professionals working at the level of community
interventions be considered as “ macro ” practitioners , whereas those working with individuals , families , and
groups are considered “ micro ” practitioners . Generalist practitioners are those who work at both levels . All work
to create change ; all contribute to change in the same direction . Over time , one or some may be emphasized or
preferred over others , but , in reality , all are useful and needed to create and maintain the desired change . 
Approaches to Community Intervention ( Rothman ) 
Rothman initially presented his three models of intervention in the first ( 1968 ) edition of this text and then included
them in the four successive editions ( each edition contains further elaboration , but retains the basic models )  . Each
of the three models can be used singly or in combination with the others as frameworks to develop plans of action
to change community values , beliefs , behaviors , or actions . Rothman notes that “ planning has been defined as the
art of deciding what to do about some community affair while , meanwhile , life is bringing it around to a firm
conclusion ”  ( p . 27 )  . 
Model A : Locality Development
Key characteristics : a community-building endeavor with a strong emphasis on promoting process goals of
Pcommunity competency ( i . e .  , the ability to solve problems on a self-help basis ) 
Psocial integration ( i . e .  , harmonious inter-relationships among different racial , ethnic , and class
groups ) 
Pleadership is drawn from within
Pdirection and control remain in the hands of the people
Strengths : when effective , it results in a competent , socially integrated community capable of solving future
problems it may face on its own
Weaknesses : its emphasis on process requires numerous meetings and a slower pace for change ; one critic 
 “ admires locality development for playing a gentleman ’ s game in the often sordid arena of community affairs
but [ questions ] whether it can win ”  ( p . 30 )  . 
Practice variables : 
Pgoals : process goals heavily emphasized
Passumptions about problems : local community overshadowed by the larger society
Pchange strategy : local initiative and shared decision making
Ptactics : consensus development across a wide range of different factions
Ppractitioner role : enabler or encourager , working through small task-oriented groups
Ppower orientation : inclusive orientation within the model
Pbeneficiaries : total community–all groups
Passumptions about subsystems : varied group interests are ultimately viewed as reconcilable and
responsive to influence and desire for mutual goodwill
Prole of beneficiaries : viewed as active participants in the process
Pempowerment : goal of model implementation
Model B : Social Planning / Policy
Key characteristics : emphasizes a technical process of problem solving relying on data , social science
thinking , and empirical objectivity
Ppresupposes that community change is so complex a technical expert is required to manage the
problem-solving process
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 259 Interventions
Passumes community participation is not a core ingredient
Prelies heavily on needs assessment , decision analysis , research evaluation , and other statistical tools
Pis concerned with task goals : conceptualizing , selecting , establishing , arranging , and delivering goods
and services to people who need them
Pstresses fostering coordination among agencies , avoiding duplication , and filling gaps in services
Strengths : rational and intellectual approach make the model appealing for rational and intellectual
decision-makers
Weaknesses : rational and intellectual approach make the model appealing for rational and intellectual
decision-makers ( and overlook the inherent political , interactive , emotional components of communities ) 
Practice variables : 
Pgoals : stress on task goals that focus on the solution of substantive social problems
Passumptions about problems : community viewed as burdened with social problems it did not
necessarily create
Pchange strategy : data points the direction 
Ptactics : fact finding and data analysis 
Ppower : whoever employs or hires the technician / expert
Pbeneficiaries : entire geographical or functional community
Passumptions about subsystems : no assumptions ; approach is pragmatic
Prole of beneficiaries : clients , consumers , or recipients of services
Pempowerment : assumption that information = empowerment
Model C : Social Action
Key characteristics : aims at making fundamental changes in the community , including the redistribution of
power and resources and gaining access to decision making for marginal groups
Ppresupposes the existence of an aggrieved or disadvantaged segment of the population that needs to
be organized
Paims to empower and benefit the poor , the disenfranchised , the oppressed
Passumes significant fragmentation exists among social action groups ; tends to be single-focused
Phas a highly adversarial “ classical ” style , with social justice as the dominant ideal
Phas a “ new wave ” style , which is more focused on political and electoral maneuvers
Strengths : conducive to joint action , especially coalition development , to gain stature and acquire a voice
which will be heard
Weaknesses : current public tolerance of disruptive methods is low ; coalitions are difficult to maintain when
need for single-identity groups is high
Practice Variables : 
PGoals : either process or task
PAssumptions about Problems : excessive power or resources among elites
PStrategy Change : identifying a common “ enemy ” 
PTactics : conflict , militant advocacy
PPractitioner Role : organizer of mass mobilization
PPower : external power structure is the target
PBeneficiaries : oppressed community subpart
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 260 Interventions
PAssumptions about Subsystems : interests of community subparts make them inherently at odds with
one another
PBeneficiaries Role : employer of the change agent / practitioner
PEmpowerment : becoming an equal party in decision making processes and boards
Text = 50 . 5%
Ross , M .  ( 1967 )  . Community organization : Theory , principles and practice ( 2nd ed .  )  ( pp . 40-72 )  . 
Harper and Row . 
Many authors on community organizing regard Ross as its “ father .  ” He defines community organizing as :  
 “  .  .  . a process by which a community identities its needs or objective , orders ( or ranks ) these needs or
objectives , develops the confidence and will to work at the needs or objectives , finds the resources 
( internal and / or external ) to deal with these needs or objectives , takes action in response to them , and in so
doing extends and develops cooperative and collaborative attitudes and practices in the community ”  ( p . 
40 )  . 
Related comments include : 
1 . The task of the professional worker in community organizing is to “ help initiate , nourish , and develop this
process .  .  .  [ through methods ] which make the process conscious , deliberative , and understood ”  ( p . 41 )  . Ross
clarifies , however , that community organizing can also develop in a community without the presence of a
professional worker
2 . Communities are defined as either 1 ) all people in a specific geographic area , or 2 ) groups of people who
share some common interest or function , i . e .  , functional communities . Regarding functional communities , Ross
notes that frequently the first task of the professional worker is to assist a group of people to become aware of
their commonalities and develop a sense of community . In either focus , Ross suggests it is impossible to work
with all the people , and , therefore , it is essential to identify major subgroups or subcultures in the community in
which one is working ( p . 44 ) 
3 . For community organizing to be successful , it must result not only in the achievement of the established
objectives but also in an increased capacity to undertake other cooperative projects ( p . 49 )  . This requires the
ability to use the inevitable tension and conflict associated with community change for constructive ends
4 . The community organizing process has two tasks : planning and community integration . 
Planning includes working with community representatives to identify problems , explore their nature and
scope , consider various solutions , select those that appear feasible , and take action . 
Community integration is a process in which the exercise of cooperative and collaborative attitudes and
practices leads to 
Pgreater identification with the community 
Pincreased interest and rational action in the affairs of the community
Psharing of common values and the means for expressing them . 
5 . Ross relates community organizing as a natural extension of the social work process and assumptions used for
case and group work , but applied at the community level : 
Pthe intent in all cases is to remove blocks to growth , release potentialities , make full use of inner resources , 
and develop the capacity to manage one ’ s own affairs ( p . 62 ) 
Prespect the inherent dignity and worth of the individual , the resources possessed by each to deal with
personal problems , the inherent capacity for growth , and the ability of the individual ( or group or
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 261 Interventions
community ) to choose wisely in managing personal affairs
Pthe need to accept the “ client ” where he is
Pthe need to develop a professional relationship 
Pat the community level , the professional worker is interested in “ the social forces playing in a community
which facilitate or block community integration , and which help or prevent individuals from identifying
themselves with the community as a whole , which facilitates or handicaps cooperative work which create or
ease social tension ”  ( p . 67 ) 
6 . Critical individual characteristics required of the professional worker to be effective in community organizing
include : 
Punderstanding that the objectives of all community organizing interventions include the development of
community attitudes and practices in support of social responsibility and cooperative work
Pbeing in sympathy with the community development objectives of community organizing
Pbeing able to regard behaviors in the community setting , especially group process , objectively 
Phaving skill in association with the community organizing process : having the ability to help define and
clarify goals ; encourage priority setting among goals ; encourage frank exchange of views and full
participation of all involved ; understand other cultures and their perspectives ; help the inarticulate or
insecure to express their opinion ; and to help the articulate and secure achieve consensus 
Punderstanding the difference between being a lecturer to a group versus being a participant offering useful
information . 
Text = 48%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 262 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Advocacy 
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 263 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : ADVOCACY
Definition
Advocacy pleads someone ’ s cause or acts on someone ’ s behalf , with a focus on developing the
community , system , individual , or family ’ s capacity to plead their own cause or act on their own behalf . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : All persons 
Problem : Lack of access to affordable health care
Community Example : 
A PHN who provides directly observed therapy for tuberculosis prevention to persons living in a
homeless shelter observes the lack of primary medical care for this population . Some of the
homeless refuse to seek medical care even when they need it ; some want care , but cannot figure out
how to access it ; still others have been treated so badly when they sought care that they refuse to try
again . The PHN also gathers data , including diabetes , heart disease , tuberculosis , and mental
illness , on the numerous conditions that the homeless population experiences . She approaches her
agency director and advocates for an onsite clinic at the shelter ; together , they advocate the cause
to the county board and the executive board of the United Way . After some time and a lot of work , 
an on-site clinic is established at the homeless shelter , staffed by nurse practitioners and operated by
the public health nurses . 
Systems Example : 
A PHN agency is very aware of the general lack of available dental care in a rural community , 
particularly for low-income residents whose insurance source is Medical Assistance . A staff PHN is
asked to contact a school of dentistry at the state university about possibly treating some people
without access . The school of dentistry responds , and a provider agreement is established between
the public health agency , the university , and the state department of human services . A portable
dental clinic is set up , utilizing dental faculty and students . The clinic provides dental services , 
including transportation and interpretive services for non-English-speaking clients . The
community response is overwhelming , and plans are made to make the dental clinic a permanent
service option in the community . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 264 Interventions
Individual / Family Example : 
A PHN meets several times with a group of Somali women who recently immigrated to America . 
They have little understanding of the American health care system . The PHN explains how the
health care system works , emphasizing what is meant by “ insurance ” and “ appointments .  “ The
PHN helps them complete insurance applications , and then has them role play making an
appointment , requesting an interpreter , and talking to a health care provider . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Advocacy is often discussed in relation to case management and rightfully so ; selection of case management
as an appropriate intervention assumes that the PHN assessed a client ’ s need for someone to “ plead their cause
or act on their behalf .  ” However , the discussion here is broader than that typically presented in conjunction with
case management
Advocacy is frequently used with other interventions , such as referral and follow-up , community organizing , 
and policy development and enforcement . In fact , policy development is often not successful unless carried
out in conjunction with advocacy . 
For a discussion of media advocacy , see the social marketing intervention . 
61 Adapted from : Weil , M .  ( 1985 )  . Key components in providing efficient and effective services . In M . Weil 
& J . Karls ( Eds .  )  , Case management in human service practice : A systematic approach to mobilizing resources for
clients ( pp . 29-43 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Boss . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 265 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Advocacy 61
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Assess the nature and source of the issue to be addressed . 
You must listen carefully to the client ’ s perception of what is needed and why . The first assessment
probably will not reveal everything there is to know . The client ’ s willingness to disclose and explore issues
will depend on the nature and longevity of the PHN-client relationship . 
2 . Determine the appropriate “ target ” for the advocacy intervention . 
The advocacy target may be individuals , service agencies , other parts of your own agency , bureaucracies , 
billing systems , dog pounds .  .  . the list is endless ! Find out as much as you can about the organization or
person with whom you will advocate . Then find out which person or what entity ( for example , a board ) has
the authority to override your first contact ’ s decision . You need to know whom to go to if you do not get
the answer you want . 
3 . Establish the objectives with the client . 
Agreeing with your client on reasonable , attainable objectives is critical . 
4 . Negotiate the action plan with the client ( individual , family , group , system , or community )  . The
plan must consider the client ’ s capacity to speak or act on their own behalf and the assistance
they desire from the PHN . 
Advocacy is a partnership between the PHN and client in which the client also has responsibility for taking
some action . Establishing a clear mutual understanding of “ who is going to do what by when ” is important . 
Before agreeing to the action plan , the PHN should first consider whether the requests are : 
• within the scope and practice of the PHN ’ s state ’ s nurse practice act 
• within the limits of the PHN agency ’ s policies and job description
• within the limits of the PHN ’ s competencies . 
When working at the individual / family level of practice , advocacy with other health care or human services
systems on behalf of clients is often required . The PHN must watch for patterns of issues occurring
regularly within certain systems , as well as for recurring systems ’ issues
noted by agency coworkers . Together , these observations may point to a larger system ’ s issues , which
may need addressing at a higher level . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 266 Interventions
5 . Determine resource availability . 
If other resources already provide advocacy for the identified concern , referral and follow-up is
appropriate . For instance , many social action-oriented voluntary groups have persons trained to serve as 
 “ advocates ” or “ ombudsmen ” who may be in a better position than the PHN to speak or act on a client ’ s
behalf . Examples include battered women ’ s advocates , mental health ombudsmen , and ombudsmen for
seniors . 
If other resources are unavailable , the PHN provides the advocacy within the available resources . 
6 . Assess to what extent the advocacy “ target ” may be receptive , and adjust the action plan
accordingly . 
As with any other action requiring communication between people , the quality of any pre-existing
relationship plays a large part in how organizations , providers , services , or other advocacy targets respond
to your advocacy . Before approaching them , anticipate their possible responses , and prepare alternative
ways of “ pleading your cause ” with them . 
7 . Implement . 
Developing competencies in more than one style of communication is an asset for the PHN–including
comfort with confrontation . Be prepared with alternative ways of presenting issues to the same person or
entity . 
8 . Evaluate . 
Notes from Abby
Spradley and Allender offer four actions characteristics of advocacy that are relevant : 
•being assertive : do not take “ no ” for an answer until you absolutely must 
•taking risks : know the difference between rule-bending and rule-breaking 
•communicating and negotiating well : identify “ win-win ” circumstances whenever possible
•identifying resources and obtaining results : see referral and follow-up . 
Adapted from : Spradley ,  & Allender .  ( 1996 )  . Community health nursing : Concepts and practice ( 4th ed .  )  . Philadelphia : 
Lippincott , pp . 105-106 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 267 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Advocating for the client can , at times , place the PHN in a dilemma , caught between the policies of the employing
agency and the client ’ s physician or community norms and unwritten standards . This is not a new event for PHNs
in practice for a period of time . Eventually all PHNs encounter those circumstances . What guides PHNs in their
decision making at those times ? Does advocacy translate into bending or breaking rules , or , rather , into
questioning and changing them ? Sally Hutchinson wrote a provocative article on this subject based on her
research looking at nurses in hospitals who reported “ bending the rules for the sake of the client .  ” 
For further reading , see : Hutchinson , S .  ( 1990 )  . Responsible subversion : A study of rule-bending among nurses . Scholarly
Inquiry for Nursing Practice : An International Journal , 4 ( 1 )  , 3-16 ; see , also : Munhall , P .  ( 1990 )  . Response to responsible
subversion .  .  .  . Scholarly Inquiry for Nursing Practice : An International Journal , 4 ( 1 )  , 19-22 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 268 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Advocacy
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . FOSTERS THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CLIENT ’ S CAPACITY TO ADVOCATE ON
THEIR OWN BEHALF . 
Best Evidence : Gadow and Schroeder ; Bernal ; Labonte ; Lassiter ; Mallik ; Millette ; Peternelj-Taylor 
The concept of the nurse as advocate for client self-determination is relatively new to the nursing profession . 
Both Bramlett ( p . 157 ) and Millik ( 1995 , p . 28 ) note the fact that it was not until 1973 that the International
Council for Nurses code for nursing ethics dropped the language that a nurse ’ s first loyalty was to the physician . 
Bramlett describes nursing ’ s current concept as “ consumer-centric advocacy ,  ” which combines an emphasis on
the client ’ s rights in decision making with the nurse ’ s role in supporting those rights . It has three major aspects : 
‚ maximum transfer of knowledge to the client , which requires the nurse to assure that the client has all
the information needed to make an informed decision , and that such information is presented in an
understandable form
‚ prominent client participation in decision making , which requires the nurse to support the client ’ s
decision , regardless of the extent to which it may or may not be in agreement with the perspective of the
health care system or that of the nurse
‚ the client ’ s freedom to implement decisions , which requires the nurse to assist the client , as necessary , 
in accomplishing the necessary actions . 
Millette suggested three advocacy models found in nursing based on her review of the literature : 
‚ bureaucratic advocacy , in which the nurse owes primary allegiance to the institution , with secondary
allegiance to the patient and herself / himself
‚ physician advocacy , in which the doctor is given the chief consideration , and all other factors are
subordinate
‚ client advocacy , in which the client is the primary focus , with all providers acting together to attain the selfdirected goal . 
Millette proposes that all models are appropriate at times , but that the client advocacy model requires a high level
of moral development on the part of the nurse . In her research , Millette found that while the client advocacy
model was strongly favored by practicing nurses , it rarely happened , in reality , due to negative consequences
anticipated from supervisors . 
Chafey and others also found evidence of the general movement of nursing thought toward client-centeredness
rather than physician- or institution-oriented advocacy . The nurse decides to implement advocacy based on : 
62 Minnesota Department of Health / Section of Public Health Nursing .  ( 1999 , June )  . The Cornerstones of
Public Health Nursing . St . Paul , MN . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 269 Interventions
‚ whether or not the client is personally unable to mediate the situation satisfactorily
‚ whether or not the nurse possesses the traits necessary to carry out advocacy ( such as self-confidence and
strength of conviction ) 
‚ whether or not countering factors exist in the environment ( such as rude physicians , challenges to clients ’ 
rights , or the potential for economic repercussions for actions )  . 
Gadow and Schroeder advance the notion of advocacy yet one step further . They suggest that the concept of the
nurse as a “ client advocate ” still holds too much connotation of the “ client with deficits needing to be fixed ” model
and promote instead an “ advocacy approach ” in which community health nursing is seen as “ facilitating 
.  .  . development of the capacity ” of the partner ( that is , individual / family , systems or community )  . 
In this model , a PHN “ commits to enhance client autonomy and to assist clients in voicing their values ”  ( p . 128 )  . 
In doing so , the PHN becomes a partner with the “ client ”  ( at whatever level )  . This concept reflects the
incorporation , at least to some extent , of the empowerment school of thought .  [ See Abby Note .  ] 
2 . USES MASS MEDIA IN CONJUNCTION WITH ADVOCACY . 
Best Evidence : Flora and others ; Jernigan
The PHN-client relationship , considered one of the cornerstones of public health nursing , 62 requires competency
in interpersonal communication . At the systems or community practice levels , use of media advocacy is also
often appropriate . Although discussed more thoroughly in the social marketing intervention , the main points are
repeated here : 
Flora establishes major roles played by the media in advocacy interventions : 
‚ media as educator
‚ media as supporter
‚ media as promoter
‚ media as supplement . 
Jernigan and Wright reviewed case studies focusing on the “ 4 P ’ s ” of marketing–that is product , promotion , 
place , and price–in conjunction with media advocacy , and came to the following selected conclusions : 
‚ media advocacy is most successful when linked to a strong community organizing base and a long-term
strategic vision ; broader coalitions open the way to bigger policy gains
‚ attracting media attention is rarely sufficient to achieve permanent change
‚ permanent change requires changing policy
‚ clarity about long-term goals , plus the development and communication of a media strategy “ frame ” which
focuses on policy rather than individuals and uses “ symbols ”  ( that is , famous persons serving as
spokespersons ) reflecting those goals , are crucial to success
‚ media advocacy is cumulative–successful campaigns set up further efforts
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 270 Interventions
‚ training and designating spokespersons keeps campaigns ’ messages clear
‚ understanding the different audiences served by different media outlets enables campaigns to reach target
groups better ; no media outlet or contact should be overlooked
‚ the media have their own agenda–advocates need to understand what motivates them , and how their
motivation differ from those of advocates
‚ media advocacy is often controversial and as such , is not for everyone or every situation
‚ controversy over the accuracy of advocates ’ facts should be avoided
‚ sensational tactics can attract media attention , but sensation alone seldom achieves policy change . 
3 . ASSUMES THE ADVERSARIAL ROLE WHEN APPROPRIATE . 
Best Evidence : Chafey and others ; Jernigan ; Millette ; Rubin
An adversarial role is often part of the advocacy intervention , but certainly is not the only , nor even the preferred
role . Weil suggests a range of approaches to consider , each successively more adversarial in nature : 
‚ education
‚ persuasion
‚ bargaining
‚ campaigning
‚ directly contesting ( p . 41 )  . 
She also notes that the “ directly contesting ” approach is reserved for those occasions when every other level has
failed . Still , PHNs need to be competent ( if not comfortable ) in these conflict situations . 
4 . EXHIBITS SELF-CONFIDENCE , STRENGTH OF CONVICTION AND A COMMITMENT
TO SOCIAL JUSTICE . 
Best Evidence : Stevens ; Williams
Although none of the authors reviewed spoke specifically to these attributes , the panel of experts determined it
would be difficult to envision public health nurses capable of carrying out the advocacy functions as depicted
without self-confidence , strength of conviction , and a commitment to social justice . Certainly this would be the
case in meeting Stevens and Hall ’ s call for PHNs to “ Take a stand .  .  .  ;  [ join ] in consciousness-raising dialogue with
communities by asking tough questions , listening to the communities we serve , forming coalitions , and acting
collectively .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 271 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Advocacy and Empowerment : Are they the same thing ? 
The literature on advocacy significantly overlaps with the literature on empowerment . Both focus on enabling
others , including systems and communities , to “ do for themselves .  ” However , empowerment : 
• adds the additional connotation of not only doing for oneself , but also controlling one ’ s life
• is not something that can be done to , or given to , another
• assists that other ( individual , families , groups , systems , or communities ) to discover and use the power
inherent within 
At the systems and community levels of practice , empowerment literature also overlaps with that of community
organizing ( especially the community development variation ) and coalition building . 
The full discussion of the similarities and difference among these overlaps is beyond the scope of this document . 
Advocacy , as it is used here , may or may not also result in empowerment . While empowerment is an admirable
goal , it is possible that some individuals , families , groups , systems , or communities may never be able to attain full
empowerment and , therefore , continue to require someone to speak or act on their behalf . However , never
assume inability ; always offer the opportunity . 
The advocacy literature ( and , in particular , the empowerment literature ) also overlaps with the literature on
personal , interpersonal , and organizational power , none of which is addressed here .  ( See community
organizing .  ) 
For those interested in further reading on public health nursing and empowerment , see : Smith ,  & Maurer .  ( 1995 )  . 
Community health nursing : Theory and practice , Philadelphia : WB Saunders , pp . 7-8 ; Swanson ,  & Nies .  
( 1997 )  . Community health nursing : Promoting the health of aggregates ( 2nd ed .  )  . Philadelphia : WB
Saunders , pp . 165-168 ; Spradley ,  & Allender .  ( 1996 )  . Community health nursing : Concepts and practice ( 4th
ed .  )  . Philadelphia : Lippincott , pp . 587-588 ; Gibson , C .  ( 1991 )  . A concept analysis of empowerment . J . of
Advanced Nursing , 16 , 354-361 . For further reading on empowerment in the context of health promotion , see : 
Labonte , R . Health promotion and empowerment : Reflections on professional practice .  ( 1994 , Summer )  . Health
Education Quarterly , 21 ( 2 )  , 253-268 . For the origins of empowerment education , see : Freire , P .  ( 1970 )  . 
Pedagogy of the oppressed . New York : Herder and Herder . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 272 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Advocacy
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice
and academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at
the end of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who
reviewed it . It reflects their opinions of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Mallik , M .  ( 1997 )  . Advocacy in nursing–A review of the literature . J . Advanced Nursing , 25 , 130-138 . 
Development of the Advocacy Role in Nursing
Mallik concludes from her review that the core condition which demanded advocacy action was the vulnerability
of the client , both in terms of personal vulnerability from illness , but also of vulnerability to risks inherent in the
institutional processes to which the client is exposed in the health care system . The construction of this as a
potential issue of patient rights violation comes from the American movement to assure rights in health care
decision making . Mallik claims this may be a peculiarity of American culture . 
Advocacy Models
Mallik provides an overview of model derivation from fields outside of nursing ( citizen , consumer , voluntary
political activist ) and within . Relying on the work of Leah Curtin and Gadow , she describes advocacy in nursing
as “ creating an atmosphere which is open to and supportive of the individual patient ’ s decision-making .  .  .  . The
professional must not define what is in the ‘ best interest ’ of the patient ; only the patient can do this ”  ( p . 132 )  . 
Mallik offers Kohnke ’ s definition as the preference with its emphasis on the central belief that individuals have a
right to self-determination ; it involves informing the patient with the information they need in order to make
informed choices and supporting decisions made , assuring patients that they have the right and the responsibility
to make their own decisions .  “ Interpreted positively it implies encouragement empowerment and ‘ self-advocacy ’  ”  
( p . 133 )  . 
Justification for a Career in Patient Advocacy
Mallik continues by providing common themes found in the advocacy literature : 
1 . Patient advocacy is a traditional role for the nurse
2 . Nurses are in the best position within the health care team to act as the patient ’ s advocate
3 . Nurses and patients can be partners in advocacy
The major limitation placed on fulfilling the advocacy role with clients is the lack of nurse autonomy :  “ While the
moral pressure on the nurse to advocate is strong ( the commitments to patients are grounded in nurses ’ status as
moral agents ) the authority to do so is weak ”  ( p . 136 )  . 
Review = 47 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 273 Interventions
Research Reports
Jernigan , D .  ,  & Wright , P . Media advocacy : Lessons learned from community experiences . J . Public
Health Policy , 17 ( 3 )  , 306-330 .  
[ Note : This article was also reviewed as Social Marketing ]  
 “ Media advocacy is the strategic use of mass media and community organizing as a resource for advancing a
social or public policy initiative ”  ( p . 330 )  . Media advocacy is derived from the following : 
1 . Media relations provides the basic principles of how to identify and approach media
2 . Social marketing provides insight into defining and targeting audiences and messages
3 .  “ Guerrilla media ” is the use of small amounts of hard-hitting advertising to bring attention to an issue and / or
exert pressure on individual decision-makers
4 . Community organizing is used as a means of influencing media by showing widespread public support
5 . Political campaign media is important for controlling what media covers and shaping how it covers it 
Through case studies focusing on the “ 4 P ’ s ” of marketing ( i . e .  , product , promotion , place , and price )  , the
authors exemplify the following about media advocacy : 
1 . Media advocacy is most successful when linked to a strong community-organizing base and a long-term
strategic vision . Broader coalitions open the way to bigger policy gains
2 . Attracting media attention is rarely sufficient to achieve permanent change
3 . Permanent change requires changing policy
4 . Clarity about long-term goals , and development and communication of a media strategy , frame , and symbols
that reflect those goals , are crucial to success
5 . Media advocacy is cumulative–successful campaigns set up further efforts
6 . Who speaks for the campaign defines the campaign in the public eye . In particular , young people and 
 “ authentic voices ” often frame and add power to the story being told
7 . Training and designating spokespersons keeps the campaign ’ s message clear
8 . Making news–holding events , releasing research , or in some other way doing something “ newsworthy ” –will
generally draw media attention
9 . Advocates have power in relation to the media , in particular , the power to offer or withhold story ideas and
information
10 . Television requires visuals that tell the story in and of themselves
11 . Understanding the different audiences served by different media outlets enables campaigns to target key
constituencies . No media outlet or media contact should be overlooked
12 . Advocates need to practice good media relations , including maintaining relationships , being accurate , using
every contact , and always having a spokesperson available
13 . The media have their own agenda–advocates need to understand what motivates them , and how their
motivation differs from those of advocates
14 . Controversy draws media attention
15 . Media advocacy is often controversial , and as such , is not for everyone or every situation
16 . Controversy over the accuracy of advocates ’ facts should be avoided
17 . Sensational tactics can attract media attention , but alone seldom achieve policy change
18 . Opponents of policy change may try to encourage controversy , in order to divide–or sow the appearance of
division–among coalitions for better health policies
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 274 Interventions
19 . Computer-based electronic communications systems and other emerging technologies can help in planning
and sharing information
20 . Different groups or individuals can play different roles in media advocacy , depending on the personal or
institutional abilities and constraints
21 . Research , both scientific studies and community-based data collection and documentation , is needed and
helpful
22 . Funding for ongoing organizing is critical and often scarce :  
 “ Media advocacy is about media , but more fundamentally , about advocacy , working to change public policies ”  
( p . 327 )  . 
Qualitative = 74%
Sullivan , C .  , Campbell , R .  , et al .  ( 1994 )  . An advocacy intervention program for women with abusive
partners : Six-month follow-up . American J . Community Psychology , 22 ( 1 )  , 101-122 . 
The study utilized community advocates , a group of paraprofessional workers with special training in domestic
abuse . The advocates were female undergrads who had 10 weeks of training and received college credit for their
involvement . The women subjects were recruited from shelters . They determined that use of advocates was a
helpful and inexpensive way to assist individual battered women , if the services are available on an ongoing , asneeded basis and if they are offered while systems-level change is simultaneously being addressed . 
Quantitative / Experimental = 58%
Chafey , K .  , et al .  ( 1998 , Jan-Feb )  . Characterization of advocacy by practicing nurses . J . Professional
Nursing , 14 ( 1 )  , 43-52 . 
A qualitative study based on in-depth interviews with 17 practicing hospital and community nurses was conducted
to determine understanding of advocacy . The authors suggest that in the years since the 1976 Tuma case , which
prompted the profession ’ s move away from a model of obedience and organizational loyalty to a more patientcentered model , not much has happened to clarify the concept and its practice application other than an illdefined sense of the nurse as guardian against shoddy practice . 
Their findings : 
1 . A given nurse ’ s decision whether or not to advocate depended on the weighing of interdependent
variables : 
PClient : is unable to mediate satisfaction of his or her own needs
PNurse : possesses traits supportive of carrying out advocacy ( self-confidence and strength of conviction ) 
PEnvironment : has the presence of rude physicians , challenges to clients ’ rights , economic reasons
2 . Interpersonal relatedness remains the cornerstone of nursing advocacy which included teaching , 
information , and supporting activities
3 . Present but less strong : issues of accountability and ethics
Qualitative = 54%
Millette , B .  ( 1993 )  . Client advocacy and the moral orientation of nurses . Western Journal of Nursing
Research , 15 ( 5 )  , 607-618 . 
Millette ’ s article is a synopsis of her doctoral dissertation , completed in 1989 and titled “ An Exploration of
Advocacy Models and the moral Orientation of Nurses .  ” She explores the context or orientation of nurses ’ 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 275 Interventions
moral choices , using three models of advocacy from the literature : 
1 . Bureaucratic advocacy , in which the nurse owes allegiance primarily to the institution with needs of both
the patient and the nurse
2 . Physician advocacy , in which the doctor is given the chief consideration , and all other factors are
subordinate
3 . Client advocacy , in which the client is the primary focus , with all providers acting together to attain the
self-directed goal . 
All models are seen as appropriate at various times , but the client advocate is present as the preferred model for
the professional nurse ( p . 608 )  . It is also assumed that to act in this role , a high level of moral development would
be necessary . However , Millette notes that previous exploration of nurses ’ moral development employed
Kohlberg ’ s model , which was developed with research on men . Millette also attempts to measure nurses ’ moral
development using Gilligan ’ s model , which include women in its development . Gilligan asserts that people
approach moral dilemmas from a particular orientation , either caring or justice or a combination .  “ Caring ” is
marked by reference to relationship and connections whereas the voice of justice points to right and rules and the
impartial land of competing claims . 
Based on her findings , Millette made the following conclusions : 
1 . The concept of client advocacy has great appeal to the practicing nurse . However , its actual
implementation is seen as highly problematic
2 . Nurse managers tended to prefer the bureaucratic advocacy model
3 . Nurses selecting the caring orientation of moral development were likelier to be inactive in nursing , hold a
staff position , and have a broader educational background 
4 . Nurses preferring the justice orientation were more likely to be active in nursing , be a manager , and be a
diploma graduate . 
Quantitative / Experimental = 53%
Expert Opinion
Stevens , P .  ,  & Hall , J .  ( 1992 , March )  . Applying critical theories to nursing in communities . Public
Health Nursing , 9 ( 1 )  , 2-9 . 
The authors propose that public health nursing adopt critical theory as the approach to defining public health
nursing practice in the future . They admonish ,  “ We can no longer be satisfied with the exclusive focus on
individuals and their immediate milieus that characterizes traditional nursing theories . The future of community
health nursing depends on two things : 1 ) our ability to recognize social , economic , and political aspects of the
environment as they affect health and 2 ) our willingness to intervene at the community level for structural change . 
Critical theories offer a process that can empower us as nurses and empower the communities we serve to gain
more control over the action conditions ”  ( p . 3 )  . 
Critical theory development is a form of listening carefully to the community and working with them to find
solutions . It is “ a living process created in the everyday struggles of a group of people . It is “ grounded in
concrete oppressive conditions experienced by a particular group ”  ( p . 30 )  . Critical theory is a the process of a
type of social action usually referred to as “ liberation movements ” stemming from the teaching and writing of
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 276 Interventions
Paulo Freire . The authors suggest that “ community health nurses can use critical theories by explaining the
political aspects of oppressing , health-damaging conditions ; by joining in consciousness-raising dialogue with
communities ; and by acting with them for liberating change . 
This means taking a stand , asking tough questions , listening to the communities we serve , forming coalitions , and
acting collectively ”  ( p . 5 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 92 . 5%
Labonte , R .  ( 1994 , Summer )  . Health promotion and empowerment : Reflections on professional
practice . Health Education Quarterly , 21 ( 2 )  , 253-268 . 
Labonte , a Canadian community health consultant , reflects on observations made during six years ’ worth of
workshops ( ending in 1992 ) in which he posed the question ,  “ How could professionals , under the rubric of health
promotion , engage in new practice styles that reduce or ameliorate inequitable social conditions ?  ” In the
discourse that followed , he identified an “ Empowerment Holosphere ,  ” which depicts the professional practice of
empowerment as a range of overlapping strategies used to reduce or ameliorate inequitable social conditions . He
notes the strategies are not the responsibility of any one health worker or discipline , but , rather , are an
organizational and interorganizational mandate . The individual professional ’ s responsibility is to see that the whole
process is engaged , and to find a place in this engagement ”  ( p . 258 )  . 
Each sphere represents a different level of social organization and relationship : 
1 . Individual Level : Interpersonal Empowerment
2 . Intragroup : small group development
3 . Intergroup : community organization
4 . Interorganizational : coalition building and advocacy ; political action
Labonte notes that coalition building and advocacy are linked , because coalitions usually engage in advocacy as
their method of enacting social change . Coalitions are defined as groups of groups with a shared goal and some
awareness that “ united we stand , divided we fall ;  ” Advocacy is defined as “ taking a stand on an issue , and
initiating actions in a deliberate attempt to influence private and public policy choice ”  ( p . 263 )  . He goes on to
discuss three facets of advocacy in professional practice : 
1 . Professionals can aid community groups in their own advocacy by offering knowledge , analytical skills , 
information on how the political and bureaucratic structure functions , etc . Their support for advocacy is
usually associated with their support for community organization . 
2 . Health organizations can also support advocacy by creating policy documents and analyses that form the
policy and , thereby , legitimize the advocacy concerns of community groups with which they work 
3 . Professionals can increase the strength of their own political voices , taking positions on policy issues :  “ An
organized political voice of caring professionals may be crucial in moving us towards more just and
sustainable forms of social organization : it is processionals who see the human cost of current economic and
political practice , who have access to knowledge and information on how the governing systems work , and
who have a degree of professional credibility in their statements ”  ( p . 263 )  . 
He notes that coalition building is often used with advocacy to overcome the political limitations of community
organizing ( p . 263 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 82 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 277 Interventions
Ekstrand , C .  , Spear , L .  ,  & Thornley , S .  ( 1992 , April )  . Using public health nursing data for program
advocacy . JONA , 22 ( 4 )  , 32-36 . 
Authors describe how a revised , more complex PHN daily was able to supply data necessary to support their
recommendations to policy-makers in 1990 . In particular , they were able to capture time spent in indirect
services related to caseload or community activities . The costs per unit of service were reduced from $200 per
unit to $26 . 95 , after factoring in this additional data . 
Expert Opinion = 70%
Lassiter , P .  ( 1992 , January )  . A community development perspective for rural nursing . Fam Community
Health , 14 ( 4 )  , 29-39 . 
The author describes experiences of graduate students in community health nursing applying a community
development model for rural practice . Five tenets of community development are highlighted as especially
important to rural nursing : 
1 . Citizen participation and partnership are essential for community improvement and growth
2 . The focus of the work must be on local concerns
3 . Established citizen groups are utilized in community development
4 . Implementation is suitable to the locality
5 . Process outcomes for the community are as important as task undertakings . 
Although Lassiter never labels her work here as advocacy , nor is it listed either by name or by function in her list
of “ nursing actions in community development ”  ( p . 32 )  , her description of the actions and their intent carried out
in partnership with citizens from the rural areas meet the criteria for the advocacy approach discussed by Gadow
and Schroeder . 
Expert Opinion = 65%
Williams , A .  ( 1993 , October )  . Community health learning experiences and political activism : A model
for baccalaureate curriculum revolution content . J . Nursing Education , 32 ( 8 )  , 352-356 . 
Williams describes a change in their program ’ s curriculum to a central focus on nursing as “ caring client
advocacy ,  ” which teaches students caring linked with critical thinking and including providing student experience
in community activism and sociopolitical concepts . Williams documents the strong legacy of political activism in
nursing and proposes that the “ community-health nursing content and practice are the logical areas of the
baccalaureate curriculum for political activism education ”  ( p . 353 )  . Students are provided experiences in
collecting data about problems in the community which affect health through “ mini-community assessment events ,  ” 
such as screening programs and health fairs . They then consider this data in light of other data sets regarding their
experience and begin extracting possible policy implications and alternatives . The author concludes by
suggesting , that “ Advocacy for the community integrates political activism .  .  . As nursing education moves rapidly
into the curriculum revolution , student nurses need political activism as part of their nursing education ”  ( p . 355 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 63 % 
Flora , J .  , Maibach , E .  ,  & Maccoby , N .  ( 1989 )  . The role of media across four levels of health promotion
intervention . Annu . Rev . Public Health , 10 , 181-201 . 
On the assumption that media can be influential at all levels of audience organization , the authors propose a
framework to support such discussions . As background information , they discuss : 
1 . Mass media ( i . e .  , television , radio , and print ) which are only effective if designed specifically for particular
target audiences
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 278 Interventions
2 . Targeted media ( i . e .  , newsletters , booklets , self-help kits , and videos ) designed to reach specific target
populations
3 . Narrowcasting : use of mass media to target audiences by use of selected media channels . 
Roles played by media in interventions : 
1 . Media as educator
2 . Media as supporter
3 . Media as promoter
4 . Media as supplement . 
Levels of Audience Organization and Uses of Mass Media
1 . Individual Level : health behaviors , physical indicators , health status
a . Awareness raising
b . Knowledge development
c . Attitude [ Note : Mass media is effective in changing attitude , but it has not been well supported that
changed attitude is associated with changed behavior ] 
d . Skills ( cognitive , social , behavioral )  : all are available through mass media
e . Self-efficacy : mass media works to model behavior , teach needed skills , encourage interim behaviors , 
and reduce dysfunction arousal ; authors believe that using mass media to develop self-efficacy is
underutilized
f . Behavior : mass media alone is unlikely to change behavior ; however , creative uses of mass media have
been successful in influencing other behaviors and antecedents ; currently this is limited in impact , due to
PLack of understanding of how to change behavior in general
PLack of understanding of how to translate known behavioral principles into media campaigns
PLimited use and understanding of intervention for high-level audience organizations
2 . Level of Social Networks : characteristics of social networks ( e . g .  , being married , spending a lot of time
with friends or relatives , belonging to a church , etc .  ) have been shown to have a profound impact on health , 
but the mechanism is not well understood
a . Structural Indicators : the social system and how people are linked together within it ; structural
indicators influence the flow of health information within a network ; interpersonal influence within a given
network is more effective in bringing about “ higher order individual change ( i . e .  , changes in attitude and
behavior ) 
b . Network Interactions : promotion of changes in communication behavior within social networks , such
as looking at spousal and peer groups
3 . Level of Organizations ( i . e .  , worksites , school , primary health care settings , etc .  )  ; use of organizations as
channels for delivery health programs has advantages
a . Indicators : focus mostly on aggregated measures of change in individuals
b . Information environment : all communication within an organization ( i . e .  , sum total of all mass media , 
targeted media , and interpersonal communication ) 
c . Physical facilities : conduciveness to the message ( e . g .  , vending machines with healthy food ) 
d . Activities offered : number , type , and timing
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 279 Interventions
e . Resources : funding and personnel
f . Collective efficacy : i . e .  , a group ’ s belief in its ability to solve its problems successfully
g . Policies : potentially most important variable , as it affects all the other variables within an organization ; 
however , little is known at this point about the effect of mass media on this variable
4 . Societal Level : normative behavior , laws and policies , the physical and information environments are
important because they also impact other levels
a . Indicators : structural or physical variables ( laws , policy , information channels )  ; mass psychological
variables ( i . e .  , collective values , norms , attitudes , opinions ) 
b . Information environment : mass media sets our collective genre ( i . e .  , what we think about as a
society ) 
c . Public opinion : mass media also plays an important role in establishing and maintaining public policy
and the allocation of public resources
d . Public policy : laws , policies , and allocation of resources at all levels of government have large impact
on health status
e . Social norms :  “ media influence has an insidious effect on the perception of individuals and on
normative behavior in the social systems ”  ( p . 197 ) 
f . Physical environment : a reflection of a commitment to health , but the influence of mass media on them
is not well understood
Expert Opinion = 63%
Peternelj-Taylor , C .  ,  & Johnson , R .  ( 1995 )  . Serving time : Psychiatric mental health nursing in
corrections . Journal of Psychosocial Nursing , 33 ( 8 )  , 12-19 . 
The authors describe correctional nursing as a highly specialized area of nursing practice and “ not simply nursing
in a special environment ”  ( p . 12 )  ; they view the conflicting philosophies of caring and custody which nurses face
daily as a special challenge in ascribing to inmates the right of autonomy . Nurses constantly “  ‘ walk the line ’ 
between the requirements of security , health care , and client advocacy ”  ( p . 14 )  . The authors suggest reframing
these as non-competing concepts and stressing , rather , the reality of correctional health care ; caring and custody
can coexist . 
Expert Opinion = 60%
Bramlett , H .  , Gueldner , S .  ,  & Sowell , R .  ( 1989 )  . Consumer-centric advocacy : Its connection to nursing
frameworks . Nursing Science Quarterly , 156-161 . 
Bramlett et al . begin by tracing the concept of the nurse as a patient advocate from Nightingale ’ s time forward . 
They note that it was not until 1973 that the International Council of Nurses ’ code dropped its language about
loyalty and obedience to physicians . 
The article also discusses various definitions of advocacy : 
1 . Kohnke ( 1982 )  : the act of pleading for , or giving verbal support to , a cause
2 . Military view : a situation where power is unequally distributed , where a stronger figure speaks out on behalf of
a weaker individual ( the weaker individual always sacrifices some loss of control to the stronger ) 
3 . Paternalism vs . Consumerism : an authority figure establishes what is best ( waning view )  ; consumerism is the
increased involvement of a better-informed public in their medical decision making
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 280 Interventions
New Mode : Consumer Centric : combines the emphases on the client ’ s rights in decision making with the nurse ’ s
role in supporting those rights . 
Requires : 1 ) maximum transfer of knowledge to the client ; 2 ) promotion of client participation in decision making , 
3 ) client ’ s freedom to implement decisions
This model requires the client be an informed participant . However , the authors argue that , since not all clients
are capable of being full participants , consumer-centric advocacy is needed . This blends strict consumerism with
selected components of paternalism , appropriate to 
1 . Promoting the implementation of decisions and acts that clients would pursue for themselves were they able
2 . Promoting the restoration of individuals ’ decision making and participative ability as quickly as possible
The authors conclude by comparing this understanding to King , Newman , Orem , and Rogers ’ nursing theories . 
Consumer-centric advocacy is determined to be supported by all . 
Expert Opinion = 53%
Rubin , H .  ( 1997 )  . Being a conscience and a carpenter : Interpretations of the community-based develop
model . In M . Weil & M . Newsome ( eds .  )  . Community practice–Models in action ( pp . 57-90 )  . 
Birminghamton , NY : The Haworth Press .  [ Note : Also published ( 1997 ) in J . Community Practice , 4 ( 1 )  , 
57-90 .  ] 
The author describes a study in which he was the participant / observer in a community development project where
he collected data ( i . e .  , stories ) from development workers regarding the dilemma between balancing the “ heart
and the mind ” they constantly face . The reality for community development workers is that the “ balance between
the bottom line and the obligation to help people ” is a very fine line ( p . 63 )  . Advocacy ( in the form of community
organizing ) also is weakened by a focus on community development , because individuals are forced to work with
the very people they would otherwise be organizing against . However , a national survey of community-based
development organizations showed that 50 percent engaged in community-organizing activities . The author
proposes “ new advocacy ” in which community development organizations work in coalitions with traditional
advocacy organizations under the notion they have more to gain than to lose . 
Expert Opinion = 52 . 5%
Bernal , E .  ( 1992 , July-August )  . The nurse as patient advocate . Hastings Center Report , 22 ( 4 )  , 18-23 . 
Bernal traces the evolution of nursing thought about the basic nature of their relationships with patients from
Nightingale ’ s adoption of the military model , under which the primary relationship ( and obligation ) was to the
physician and the promotion and protection of the patients ’ faith in their physician to the role of advocate for
patients rights and interests . The movement has been to the far side of the continuum ( in the author ’ s opinion )  , 
which places nursing as the advocate and guardian for patients ’ rights against the hospital and doctor . Bernal
asserts that neither are accurate and , instead , urges consideration of a covenantal model . 
In this model , attention is called to the “ reciprocal indebtedness ” between the public and nursing : the professional
power of the nurses is a gift from the public to the profession given in exchange or its expertise and orientation
toward the service of others ( p . 220 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 35%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 281 Interventions
Mallik , M .  ,  & McHale , J .  ( 1995 , January 25 )  . Support for advocacy . Nursing Times , 91 ( 4 )  , 28-30 . 
Mallik and McHale describe instances of nursing ’ s patient advocacy role taken to the extreme of “ whistle
blower ” status on substandard patient care in the UK . A discussion of the dilemma between nurses ’ loyalty to
employers and responsibilities to patients is presented . They conclude by suggesting that “ employment power ” is
a significant detractor to nurses ’ performance of the advocate role in that employers hold the ultimate power , loss
of employment . 
Expert Opinion = 32 . 5%
Gerber , L .  ( 1994 , July )  . Case management models : Geriatric nursing prototypes for growth . J . 
Gerontological Nursing , 18-24 . 
Case management is described as both an “ administrative service that ‘ directs client movement through a series of
phased involvements with the long term care system and an advocacy system that “ integrates the formal and
informal care giving segments ”  ( p . 18 )  . However , other than a statement that nursing case management models
operate in the “ best interest of clients ”  ( p . 20 )  , in which one could assume negotiation or some other form of
advocacy on the part of the client might occur , the concept of advocacy is never developed . 
Expert Opinion = no rating available
Texts and Monographs
Gadow , S .  ,  & Schroeder , C .  ( 1996 )  . An advocacy approach to ethics and community health . In E . 
Anderson & J . McFarlane . Community as partner : Theory and practice in nursing ( 2nd ed .  )  ,  ( pp . 123-
137 )  . Philadelphia : Lippincott . 
The authors explain the ideological shift in community health nursing from viewing the “ community as client ” to
viewing the “ community as partner .  ” In the former ,  “ client ” connotes a “ dependency and passivity , and neediness
in conjunction with professional authority , expertise , and invulnerability ”  ( p . 124 )  . Nurse-community partnership , 
on the other hand , connotes a relationship in which the professional helps the community discern their values and
needs and develop an encompassing health concept that includes all views ; it is defined by the community
members ( not the professional ) and , therefore , cannot be generalized to other communities . 
This shift in perspective also requires a shift in the role of the professional to that of an advocate , or one who 
 “ commits to enhance client autonomy and to assist clients in voicing their values ”  ( p . 128 )  . Advocacy , then , 
becomes the ethical framework for community health nursing practice and demands that “ everyone in the
community be represented , not just those with political or professional authority ”  ( p . 124 )  . The authors suggest
that even valuing inclusiveness of diverse views in health care decisions does not approach partnership because it
is still limited by the “ universalist ethical tradition that frames service delivery in the United States ”  ( p . 125 )  . 
Universalism operates on the assumption that all individuals are identical , equal , and autonomous and as have
evolved from our society ’ s search for a single set of principles on which a system of justice could be grounded . 
This , however , has served to disenfranchise those who are different , such as the poor , underinsured , alienated , 
etc . It also contributes to the role definition of the health professional in these three ways : 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 282 Interventions
1 . Assumption that there is only one acceptable view of health and that it is the right of the professional to
define it , thus ignoring the various meanings of health within a single community . Clients who do not fit the
mold are labeled as “ noncompliant ,  ” rather than held to a different understanding of health
2 . Assumption that private lives are excluded from public life has led to the relative nonaddress of such issues
as domestic violence , child abuse , child care , and reproductive health 
3 . Assumption that the professional is the expert authority and , therefore , has the right to establish what is 
 “ normal ” in a community . 
The dilemma with the universalism tradition , however , is that professional knowledge often lags behind social
changes , leaving health care decisions based on invalid assumptions . 
The ethical framework of advocacy is offered as an alternative to universalism . This holds that : 
1 . Health decisions are based on values
2 . Value questions can be addressed only when choice exists . 
Under the advocacy framework , the professional , while obligated to act in the client ’ s best interest , applies the
following tenets to practice : 
1 . Is not permitted to interpret that interest contrary to the client ’ s definition
2 . Enhances client autonomy by involving not only respect for , but also engagement with , clients in expressing
their values as unique persons
3 . Accepts the likelihood that for most people significant health alteration requires reorientation and a new
version of personal autonomy ; it is the professional ’ s role to participate with clients in developing autonomy in
the new situation by helping them discern their values
4 . Involves the client in establishing a self-body relation that reconciles the extremes of subjectivity and
objectiveness
5 . Ultimately , self-determinism is the freedom to interpret experience and determine meaning for oneself ; the
professional ’ s role is to assist the client in the process of deciding on that meaning ( pp . 128-131 )  . 
Application to community health : 
1 . Aim is to enhance community self-determination through construction of a unique health narrative that
guides delivery of services
2 . Reliance on participatory research methods as the basis of data generation for decisions ( methods
frequently used include focus groups ) 
3 . Collective or community knowledge and the building of relationships as the basis of collective problem
solving
4 . On the basis of the latter , the authors see public health nursing ( as well as school-based clinics and
community nurse-managed clinics ) as exemplifying this new understanding of partnering and being “ ideally
suited ” to adopting the role of PHN-as-advocate . 
Text = 81%
Helvie , C .  ( 1998 )  . Advanced practice nursing in the community ( p . 11 )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Helvie defines advocacy as speaking for those unable to speak for themselves and states this is true at the
individual , group , and / or community level of practice . 
Text = no rating available
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 283 Interventions
Smith , C .  ,  & Mauer , F .  ( 1995 )  . Community health nursing : Theory and practices ( p . 16 )  . Philadelphia : 
WB Saunders . 
Advocacy is defined as “ any instance of speaking or writing on behalf of someone else , and using persuasion in
the support of another . This requires the skill of assertive communication and the knowledge of communication
channels within and among organizations .  ” 
Text = not rated
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 284 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Social Marketing 
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 285 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : SOCIAL MARKETING
Definition
Social marketing utilizes commercial marketing principles and technologies for programs designed to
influence the knowledge , attitudes , values , beliefs , behaviors , and practices of the population-ofinterest . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : Pregnant and childbearing women 
Problem : Alcohol use during pregnancy
Community Example : 
A PHN holds focus groups with women at the WIC clinic . One focus group is with women who report
no alcohol use during pregnancy ; the other is with pregnant women who report using alcohol at least
three times a week . The PHN asks the first group what influenced their decision not to drink during
pregnancy ; she asks the second group what could make them reduce their drinking . She uses the
information from these groups to design posters and brochures for the WIC clinics . In addition , based
on the fact that women in the focus groups reported not knowing what fetal alcohol syndrome ( FAS )  
 “ looked like ,  ” she initiates at WIC a continuous showing of videotapes depicting children with FAS
and what life is like for them and their families . 
Systems Example : 
A PHN working in a small rural county is assigned to write a FAS prevention grant in partnership
with the local hospital . The PHN coordinates the grant activities , which include mass media efforts 
( e . g .  , billboards , radio spots read by local celebrities , and newspaper articles )  . One newspaper article
highlights local pharmacists ’ agreement to insert information on the effects of alcohol during
pregnancy in all prenatal vitamin prescriptions . Multiple posters ( available through the grant ) are
placed in every bar in the community . Local bartenders are engaged as “ partners ” in the effort to
reduce alcohol use among pregnant women . Since the American Legion and VFW posts are key to the
community ’ s social life , a special effort is made to engage these organizations in reducing alcohol use
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 286 Interventions
among pregnant women . After two years , the project is able to document an increase in
community awareness , but is not yet able to document a decrease in alcohol use among pregnant
women . 
Individual / Family Example : 
A PHN who does home visits with high-risk pregnant women in the community visits a pregnant
woman who refuses to answer any questions about alcohol use . The PHN continues to establish a
relationship with her by reinforcing the woman ’ s positive behaviors , such as eating healthy foods and
going to all of her prenatal appointments , during her pregnancy . The PHN occasionally repeats the
message that it is important not to drink alcohol during pregnancy , but does not “ press the topic ” or
ask about alcohol use when the woman does not respond . After several more home visits , the PHN
again brings up the topic , and the woman finally shares her fears . She saw something on a TV show
about alcohol use during pregnancy which said that “ pregnant women should be reported for child
abuse if they drink during pregnancy .  ” She interpreted that as “ the law ,  ” and was reluctant to talk to
the PHN about it , because she was unsure why the PHN was visiting her in the first place ! After all , 
her sister had just had a baby , and she hadn ’ t had any PHN visits , so the woman assumed someone
had reported her for having a beer at the local bar . The PHN uses the opportunity to explain again
why she is visiting and assure the woman that she is not going to “ report her .  ” At that point , the
client is at least willing to talk about alcohol use , and the PHN moves into the health teaching
intervention . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Social marketing is a relatively new intervention , first introduced in 1971 . In many respects it is similar to other , 
longer-established interventions . For instance , social marketing is like health teaching in that both are
implemented to change attitude and behavior . In fact , some would argue that social marketing is a special
application of health teaching . In public health nursing , health teaching is probably more frequently used at the
individual / family and systems ( that is , provider education ) practice levels . Social marketing , on the other hand , is
more frequently utilized at the community level of practice . At that level , social marketing overlaps with
advocacy at the community level , where it is often implemented as media advocacy .  [ See related Abby Note .  ] In
this role , it has the potential to be implemented simultaneously with any other intervention utilizing a mass media
strategy . 
63 The basic steps for social marketing are presented in greater detail than those of other interventions , 
since it is a newer intervention and less familiar to public health nurses . 
64 Adapted from : Siegel , M .  ,  & Doner , L .  ( 1998 )  . Marketing public health : Strategies to promote social
change . Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 287 Interventions
BASIC STEPS63 for Social Marketing64
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
Stage One : Planning
1 . Analyze the situation
A . Study the social environment , that is , the behaviors of the community , system , individual , and / or
family that you are attempting to influence and the factors contributing to that behavior . This identifies
factors that could compete against social marketing efforts , such as peer pressure or tobacco
advertisements . The following factors should be considered in the assessment : 
• current science
know what works and what does not work to change behaviors 
• social environment
determine the relevant protective factors ( strengths ) and risk factors ( vulnerabilities ) operating 
• past activities and results
assess how the factors are perceived ( positive or negative ) and how that might shape current
attitudes 
• complementary and competing activities
identify what else is going on in the environment that might work for or against your planned
strategy ; consider the potential for partnering with others implementing related activities
• framing of policy issues
analyze who makes decisions and how they are made ; plan your strategy accordingly . 
B . Select potential target audiences and sources of additional information . 
An “ audience ” can be an individual , a family , a discrete sub-population , and / or the entire populationof-interest . 
C . Identify and prioritize issues based on public health importance . 
This step involves considering the issue ’ s “ importance ” from both its science base ( that is , what
research suggests is important to the health of the overall population ) and the public ’ s perception of its
importance . Take head lice , for instance . It has limited importance from the viewpoint of risk to
population health but enormous importance from the public ’ s viewpoint . 
D . Identify strategies most likely to be effective . 
Each strategy has to be considered in terms of the context of the current focus and resources available . 
65 Siegel and Doner add a fifth “ P ” –that of Partners . They believe social change is more attainable if all
community entities interested in the change join forces ( p . 216 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 288 Interventions
What is effective with one individual , family , system , or community may not work the same way with the
next . 
2 . Set goals and objectives ; specify behaviors , conditions , and / or policies to be changed . 
When the focus is at the systems or community level of practice , the PHN organizes a group of
representatives from the audience to advise in the development of goals and objectives . They are discussed
and refined until they are mutually understood and measurable . The PHN should always set goals and
objectives with individuals or families who are the focus of the intervention . 
3 . Determine primary and secondary audiences . 
The primary audience is the population-of-interest , discrete sub-group , family , or individual in which
behavioral change is desired . The secondary audience is others who can help the primary audience make
the desired change . 
When working with audiences at the community level of practice , it is useful to break the audience into
sub-groups with similar characteristics . This process is called “ segmentation .  ” 
6 . Understand “ target ” audiences . 
A . Identifies and prioritizes the audiences ’ basic needs , desires , and values
B . Assesses how current behavior and its attributes satisfy those needs , desires , and values
C . Explores ways of framing the desired behavior to reinforce core values . 
This is the crux of the social marketing intervention . Know your “ audience ” well enough to understand
what the current undesirable behavior provides that makes it so attractive . Once that is
determined , the challenge is finding ways to frame the desired behavior to be as attractive , if not more so , in
meeting those same needs . This is easy to talk about , hard to do . 
5 . Develop a plan addressing product , price , place , and promotion ( the “ 4 P ’ s ”  )  . 65
Marketing plans , whether commercial or social , always apply the “ 4 P ’ s .  ” Product , price , place , and
promotion are the variables that can be altered to sell a product successfully . Together , they are usually
referred to as the “ market mix .  ” 
product : 
the idea , behavior , good , or service exchanged with the target audience for a price ; the product
can be tangible or intangible ; in public health it is usually the latter . 
price : 
cost to the target audience of making the desired change , or “ what they have to give up ”  ; in
commercial marketing this is almost always money ; in public health the price is more likely to be
time , effort , lifestyle , or psychological cost . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 289 Interventions
place : 
in commercial marketing this is the outlet through which products are available ; in social marketing
it is often a psychological “ place ” or a visualization of the new “ place ” the changed behavior will
bring ; for instance , what would a smoke-free work place or a sense of well-being be like
promotion : 
all activities intended to communicate the behavioral change to the audience ; this includes
combinations of advertising , media relations , events , personal selling , and entertainment ; at
systems- and community-level practice , it also includes grass-roots advocacy , lobbying , and media
advocacy .  [ See related Abby Note .  ] 
6 . Develop communication strategy
A . Frames the communication to reinforce and not to conflict with the audience ’ s core values . 
B . Focuses on the benefit promised and the evidence supporting it . 
C . Considers important questions integral to developing a communications strategy : 
• Who is the audience , and what are they like ? The better they are known , the more effective the
communication message . 
• What is the action they should take–and what are they doing now ? How great a change will this
be for them ? 
• What are the obstacles that stand between the audience and the desired behavior ? Examples
could be beliefs , pressures , misinformation , competing understandings of the issue , no future
orientation , or a lack of feeling personally susceptible . 
• What is the audience ’ s benefit from engaging in the behavior ? It must have a personal reward ; a
benefit to the overall health of the population will not motivate . 
• What is the support for that benefit–what will make it credible to the audience ? Hard data and
logic can work , provided that they are understandable , relevant , and believable to the target
audience . However , data and logic are difficult to make emotionally appealing . 
• What are the best openings for reaching the audience–and what are the channels available and
appropriate for conveying the message ? That is , at what times , places , and situations will the
audience most likely be receptive to hearing the message ? What channel of communication best
suits them ( for example , mass media , print , visual , audio , etc .  )  ? 
• What image should communication convey ? The goal is to portray the desired behavior as
something audience members can see themselves doing , which is also consistent with their core
values . 
7 . Conduct message concept testing . 
Pre-testing the message you want to convey ( that is , how to change the behavior ) is critical before fully
implementing the strategy . A variety of methods can be used : 
• central site interviews : are conducted where members of the target audience gather ( these are
appropriate to use when needing to know how an audience will respond , but not needing much detail
about why )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 290 Interventions
• omnibus surveys : involved adding questions about what the PHN wants to know onto other surveys
being conducted ( these are appropriate when the target audience is a large segment of the general
population and the message requires no background information )  . 
• theater style testing : requires bringing a sample of the target audience to a central site , presenting the
communication , and asking them to respond to a questionnaire administered on site ( this is appropriate
when more in-depth information is needed )  . 
• in-depth interviews : select a sample of target audience members and go to them to gather the needed
information ( these are appropriate if theater style testing is infeasible )  . 
• focus group interviews : allow information to be collected from several people at once , but the results
can be subjective and open to interpretation ( these are appropriate when long materials are to be
developed and responses are needed early in their development )  . 
• professional and field interviews : send materials and a review form or convene a meeting in which
materials are reviewed ( these are appropriate when needing to ensure the credibility of the message
and / or increase stakeholder buy-in )  . 
8 . Refine products and materials . 
9 . Build in process evaluation measures . 
It is important to incorporate a plan for monitoring progress toward goal attainment before implementation . 
This assures regular consideration of activities that may need revision or refinement along the way . When
working at the individual / family level of practice , this means seeking frequent feedback . For systems and
community levels , other methods are used to gain audience feedback ; these include using “ bounceback ” 
postcards or satisfaction surveys as methods for monitoring media coverage and actual policy changes . 
Stage Two : Implementation
1 . Produce products and materials planned . 
2 . Coordinate with partners . 
Consider several important points when working with partners : 
• think of partners as target audiences ; the benefit of partnering may need to be continually “ sold ” to
them
• consider the partner ’ s impact on the planned behavioral change ; do they add or detract from the
credibility of what is being implemented ? 
• monitor the possibilities of legal and ethical issues that may arise ; theoretically , these should have been
considered during the planning phase , but not every issue can be anticipated
• consider roles that partners play ; they often evolve over the lifetime of the partnership and should be
evaluated routinely for continuing appropriateness
• be flexible ; partners cannot always keep the size of the commitments made initially ; if considerable
change results , the plan ’ s goals and objectives may need to be refined to reflect this change in
resources
• put agreement in writing ; partners may be subject to short-term memory loss regarding commitments
made
• understand the challenges inherent in working with partners 
< partnering is time consuming
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 291 Interventions 
< true partnership means all aspects of the plan are open to negotiation 
< partners ’ involvement inherently means giving up some control over the process and outcome . 
3 . Implement intervention . 
Stay faithful to the plan while at the same time remaining open to opportunities that may present themselves . 
4 . Conduct process evaluation . 
This answers the questions ,  “ Did we do what we said we would do ?  ” and “ How useful was the plan as a
guide to action ?  ” 
5 . Refine products , materials , and ways of presenting them , as needed . 
Stage Three : Evaluation
1 . Conduct outcome evaluation . 
Outcome evaluation answers the question ,  “ Did we change what we intended to change ?  ” In other words , 
if knowledge was intended to change , then knowledge change needs to be measured . If behaviors are the
intended change , then changes in behaviors need to be measured . If attitudes are intended to change , then
changes in attitudes need to be measured . 
• Behavioral change is a long process in most cases ; since most programs are often required to produce
outcomes long before the actual change could be reasonably expected , intermediate measures are
often needed . 
• A baseline measure must be determined prior to implementing a strategy in order to measure any
change . 
2 . Refine social marketing strategy . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 292 Interventions
Notes from Abby
The PHNs will find many concepts of social marketing familiar . It doesn ’ t take many years of public health
nursing experience before PHNs realize that sales and the art of selling are a lot of what they do every day . 
Consider “ Abby ” knocking at the door . She has to have the skill to introduce herself and “ sell ” her product to
get invited through that door . 
While the vast majority of what is written about social marketing assumes it occurs at the systems or community
level of practice , it has equal application at the individual or family level . The axiom of public health nursing at that
level is , after all , to “ begin where the client is .  ” What better way to know where to begin than to apply the social
marketing assessment process ? If you substitute the word “ client ” for “ audience ” in the phrase “ know your
audience ,  ” the process applies directly . 
One of the social marketing strategies for the fourth “ P ” is personal selling–which is much of what PHNs do , at
least initially , in establishing relationships with their clients . Carmen de la Cuesta describes selling tactics used by
British home visitor nurses in a qualitative research study . She finds that experienced home visitors can easily
describe what they do to “ get in the door ” and “ sell themselves and their services ” using marketing language . 
Source : de la Cuesta , C .  ( 1994 )  . Marketing : A process in health visiting . J . Advanced Nursing , 19 , 327-353 . 
Media advocacy is one type of social marketing implemented at the systems and community level . It involves
combining social marketing and community organizing through access points such as television , newspapers , 
radio , and billboards . Typical strategies include using paid placement of messages ( as opposed to relying on free
PSA ’ s–public service announcements ) and “ earned media ” attention or “ making the news .  ” 
Examples of “ earned ” media attention include : 
• message framing , so the message can be “ pegged ” or associated with some important local or national event
• breakthrough announcement regarding what is new or different about the message
• celebrity association
• controversy 
• injustice
• irony
• local “ peg ,  ” or why this message is important or meaningful to local residents
• milestone , or why this message is an important historical marker
• personal angle , or getting a personal story about the message to “ give it a face ” 
• seasonal “ peg ,  ” or its relationship with holidays or seasonal events ( for example , National Public Health
Week )  . 
Source : Wallack , L .  ,  & Dorfman , L . et al .  ( 1993 )  . Media advocacy and public health : Power for prevention . Newbury Park : Sage
Publications . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 293 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Social Marketing
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practice expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . KNOWS THE AUDIENCE . 
Best Evidence : Wright , Naylor ; Andreasen , 1995 ; Golden and Johnson ; Maibach ; Walsh ; Siegel and Doner ; 
Manoff , 1985
The more a PHN incorporates knowledge of the target population , especially the influence of demographic and
cultural characteristics , on behavior , the more effective the social marketing intervention . 
This is key to social marketing effectiveness , since behavior is learned in the family and social environments in
which people are reared and live . Therefore , any measures taken to change behavior must also consider these
demographic and cultural aspects . Several authors provide examples to demonstrate this : 
‚ Golden and Johnson found that among those individuals who considered themselves at severe or extreme
risk for HIV infection , giving further information about risk was actually counterproductive . It intensified
their perception of HIV inevitability and led to a reduction in the use of prevention methods . The authors
concluded that it is important to “ use tactics which are consistent with the realities for the target individual .  ” 
‚ Wright and others used information gained through extensive ethnographic interviewing among Navajo
regarding the influence of traditional beliefs and kinship on infant feeding practices . Breast-feeding rates
among mothers delivering at an Indian Health Service hospital were dramatically increased when printed
material emphasized how healthy breast-fed children are and how nursing shows a mother ’ s love . In
addition , a native foster grandmother who had successfully breast-fed her own five children was introduced
as a mentor during the hospital stay . 
2 . CONVEYS A LONG-TERM STRATEGIC PLAN . 
Best Evidence : Walsh ; Andreasen , 1994 ; Jernigan and Wright
While social marketing alone may influence behavior , it does not always change it . For that reason , social
marketing needs to be included as part of an overall , larger strategy that includes a variety of strategies . This is
especially true for media advocacy campaigns : 
‚ Jernigan and Wright describe successful media campaigns as “ setting up ” for further action
‚ Walsh and others ’ review of the evolution of social marketing in public health notes that “ persistence and a
long time frame ” are critical to effective social marketing efforts , because changing behaviors takes
considerable time . They describe examples of social marketing efforts where the project funders are
demanding evidence of outcomes just when change is getting underway . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 294 Interventions
3 . ENGAGES THE TARGET POPULATION IN THE PROCESS BY USING METHODS THAT
ARE EMPOWERING AND CULTURALLY SENSITIVE . 
Best Evidence : Andreasen , 1995 ; Goldon and Johnson ; Siegel and Doner ; Gries and others
Involving the target population can assure that social marketing does not deteriorate into a means of manipulation . 
For example , Gries and others tested different models for reducing alcohol use in college dorms . They found
higher participation rates in dorms where the program curriculum had been modified to include issues students
had identified as important . They found that emphasizing altruistic motivations about coming to the session to get
information on how to help others is key to higher levels of participation . 
4 . ANTICIPATES AND MANAGES THE USE OF CONTROVERSY AND CONFLICT . 
Best Evidence : Woodruff
Implementing media advocacy or other mass media campaigns on controversial issues will almost always draw
attention to the debate . The challenge is to seize the controversy as an opportunity . 
Woodruff describes a dramatic story of 80 groups coming together in California to mount a media advocacy
campaign against the alcohol trade industry ’ s use of sexist advertising . The campaign , called “ Dangerous
Promises ,  ” pressured the Beer Institute , the Wine Institute , and the Distilled Spirits Council of the U . S . to amend
their advertising codes to include specific statements regarding : 
‚ their portrayal of women ( or any ethnic or minority group ) 
‚ violence in relationships
‚ suggestions of sex as an expected result of , or reward from , drinking alcohol . 
The wine group agreed , but the others did not . By reframing the issue to a public health perspective of violence
against women , rather than sexism in advertising , the coalition was able to get far more serious attention from the
broadcast and print media . After approximately a year of sustained effort , the beer and distilled spirits trade
organizations finally agreed to major revisions in their advertising codes . 
5 . ACQUIRES INFORMATION ON THE ISSUE AND ITS UNDERLYING FACTORS , WITH AN
UNDERSTANDING THAT “ PERCEPTION IS REALITY .  ” 
Best Evidence : Andreasen , 1994 ; Gray ; Siegel and Doner
Formative research is the method often used to gain this information . Although anything with the term “ research ” 
tagged onto it can sound daunting , formative research really means listening systematically to the wants and needs
of the audience and setting aside the tendency to add interpretations to what is
heard . The key is not what the PHN thinks the audience is saying , but seeking clarification until the PHN knows
what they are saying . 
66 For further reading on how to do focus groups , see : Krueger , R .  ( 1994 )  . Focus groups : A practical guide
for applied research ,  ( 2nd ed .  )  . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 295 Interventions
Results from such a process provide valuable information on the actions the targeted audience is willing to take
and its perceptions of motivators and barriers . Examples of formative research include : 
‚ focus groups66
‚ in-depth interviews with key informants
‚ in-depth interviews with a randomly selected sample of the audience . 
6 . THE AUDIENCE PERCEIVES THE PHN AS CREDIBLE . 
Best Evidence : Stubblefield ; Jernigan and Wright ; Samuel
A credible spokesperson is important in social marketing applications that rely heavily on use of the mass media , 
such as media campaigns or media advocacy . 
‚ Stubblefield promotes use of persuasive communication with a credible person “ delivering the message ” as
an effective way to market health promotion
‚ Samuel , in describing “ lessons learned ” from Project LEAN , a national campaign to reduce dietary fat
consumption , finds that selection of credible spokespersons strengthened the campaign
‚ Jernigan and Wright review case studies of successful media advocacy and find that “ who speaks for the
campaign defines the campaign in the public eye . In particular ,  ‘ authentic ’ voices often frame and add
power to the story being told .  ” 
7 . CONSIDERS THE LIMITATIONS OF SOCIAL MARKETING . 
Best Evidence : Andreasen , 1994 ; Ling ; Maibach and others ; Montazeri ; Siegel and Doner
The PHN should be aware of the limitations of social marketing : 
‚ Maibach and others , for instance , reporting on a 1996 consensus conference on the future of social
marketing , note that the potential for social marketing is limited by :  
< lack of adequate financial resources 
< lack of support from senior management in public health organizations 
< lack of collaboration among organizations with complementary goals 
< a workforce inadequately trained in social marketing . 
‚ Ling and others prepare a comprehensive literature review , from which they conclude that social
marketing ’ s major weaknesses are the :  
< heavy investments of time , money , and human requirements 
< the requirement for sustained promotional effort , which public health can rarely afford . 
‚ Montazeri stresses that social marketing has value as a tool for effective communication , but should only be
used in a “ proper balance ” with other public health approaches . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 296 Interventions
‚ Siegel and Doner discuss the peculiar role consumer demand plays in social marketing as opposed to
commercial marketing ( p . 31-38 )  . In commercial marketing , demand is always at some level of positive ; 
the consumer is interested in the product at least to some extent . The worst cases a commercial marketer
faces are those in which demand is faltering ( that is , demand has decreased ) or irregular ( demand
fluctuates )  . 
In marketing public health ’ s “ products ”  ( that is , behavioral change )  :  
< demand is a greater challenge ; demand is almost always some level of negative : 
• negative demand
the public dislikes the product , does not want it , and / or is not willing to pay the price for it
• no demand
the public is simply uninterested in the product 
• unwholesome demand
the product the public does demand is counterproductive to their health ( for example , alcohol and
other drug consumption )  .  
< the environment in which the marketing takes place is hostile ( for instance , counter marketing
competing for the same audience occurs at the same time )  
< those doing the social marketing often lack the advocacy skills necessary to be effective . 
8 . EVALUATES BOTH PROCESS AND OUTCOMES . 
Best Evidence : Manoff , 1985 ; Siegel and Doner
Monitoring social marketing strategies as they are “ rolled out ” is critical to success . Experts also emphasize
evaluating outcomes , or determining if desired behavioral changes are attained .  ( A program might run well
without achieving its intended outcomes .  ) 
The dilemma , as noted elsewhere , is that social marketing approaches must be sustained for long periods of time
to achieve change at systems and community levels . Change occurs slowly . This places greater importance on
evaluating social marketing efforts along the way through measuring intermediate outcome indicators . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 297 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Alan Andreasen offers six markers of excellence in social marketing : 
• Program managers understand the target audiences ’ needs , wants , perceptions , and present behavioral
patterns before acting
• Program managers segment target markets , where politically feasible , and devise budgets and strategies that
are specifically adapted to the characteristics of each defined segment
• All major elements of strategy and tactics are pretested with members of the target audience
• Program managers utilize the six steps of the behavioral change process :  
< acquire knowledge regarding options 
< embrace the values that permit behavior adoption 
< perceive the behavior as potentially real to them 
< conclude that the positive consequences of the new behavior exceed the negative 
< believe that they have the ability to carry out the action required 
< believe that others who are important to them support their action . 
• Program managers explicitly recognize the existence of direct or indirect competition for the target
consumer ’ s behavioral choice . 
• Strategies designed to effect behavior change always comprise the “ 4 P ’ s ” of marketing . 
Andreasen , A .  ( 1994 , Spring )  . Social marketing : It ’ s definition and domain . J . Public Policy and Marketing , 13 ( 1 )  , 112 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 298 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Social Marketing
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health nursing
and then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice and
academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage are included at the end
of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who reviewed it . 
It reflects their opinion of the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice . 
Review Articles
Ling , J .  , Franklin , B .  , et al .  ( 1992 )  . Social marketing : Its place in public health . Annu . Rev . Public
Health , 13 , 341-362 . 
The authors represent a comprehensive overview of the history and evolution of social marketing ( SM ) as a
discipline , its theory development , its strengths and weaknesses , and its potential .  ( Note : Includes 71 references .  ) 
History : First labeled social marketing by Kotler and Zaltman in 1971 , it was used by Manoff in the 1960s for
breastfeeding and oral dehydration therapy health education campaigns in developing countries . 
Definition :  “ Social marketing uses marketing ’ s conceptual framework of the 4 P ’ s : Product , Price , Place , and
Promotion . Social marketers adopted several methods of commercial marketing ; audience analysis and
segmentation ; consumer research ; product conceptualization and development ; message development and testing ; 
directed communication ; facilitation ; exchange theory ; and the use of paid agents , volunteers , and incentives ”  ( p . 
342 )  . 
Strengths : 
1 . It brought greater precision to audience analysis and segmentation and added psychographic data ( i . e .  , 
attitudes , preferences , personality traits ) and social structure data ( i . e .  , churches , worksite , family ) to the
traditional demographic data set used in public health
2 . The systematic use of qualitative methods , such as focus groups , was added to public health methods
3 . It introduced the use of incentives and special promotion efforts
4 . Tracking of progress after implementation was promoted
5 . Strategic use of mass media was introduced , targeting specific audiences as opposed to general public health
outreach use of media
6 . The realistic use of resources available is promoted
7 . It pushes for attainment of high standards
8 . The concept of “ price ” attached to behavioral change was introduced ; public health workers tend to assume 
 “ if it is good for you , you must want it ,  ” when the real question is “ how can we make people want it ?  ” 
Weaknesses : 
1 . Marketing practices require heavy investments of time , money , and human resources
2 . Constraints on the 4 P ’ s are inherent to public health
a . Public health does not have the flexibility to adjust products and services to clients ’ interests and
preferences
b . Public health cannot move their products nearer the demand as readily
c . Behavioral change through SM requires the commitment to a sustained promotional effort which public
health can rarely afford
d . Buying air time may erode the availability of PSA ’ s over time
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 299 Interventions
Future
1 . Development of “ development communication ,  ” or greater concern with interpersonal , group , and mediated
communication , particularly with communities , is needed
2 . Increased emphasis ( and training ) on communication for health educators must exist
3 . Increased emphasis must be placed on public relations in public health ( in the sense of media outreach , special
events , in-house communication , and community education ) 
4 . Evolution of a broader , more comprehensive perspective that includes policy , economic and social
circumstances , personal altitudes , political and religious allegiances , societal norms and the entrenched interests of
business , institutions , and certain professional groups is required
5 . Increasing work must be undergone in the area of health promotion ( here defined as a “ broader version of
health education )  . 
Review = 41%
Research Reports
Wright , Naylor , et al .  ( 1997 , October )  . Using cultural knowledge in health promotion : breastfeeding
among the Navajo . Health Education and Behavior , 24 ( 5 )  , pp . 625-639 . 
A three-pronged intervention to increase breastfeeding on a Navajo reservation during the early 1990s is
described and analyzed . On the community level , community empowerment techniques were implemented to
create a more supportive collective opinion of breastfeeding ; included were related radio spots , an infant T-shirt , 
billboards , and a slide tape show . On the systems level , provider education was used to change knowledge and
skills regarding breastfeeding within the provider group . The individual intervention level ( referred to as the 
 “ micro-change ” level ) included written and videotaped educational materials teaching breast feeding for use
immediately post-partum , plus promotional materials for use prenatally . In addition , a native bilingual “ foster
grandmother ” visited the maternity ward daily to talk with new mothers about her own breastfeeding experiences
and how well her grown children were now doing . A new mothers ’ support group was also attempted , but
abandoned after encountering unspecified difficulties . 
Social marketing techniques were employed at all levels to create increased acceptance by incorporating cultural
knowledge into promotional activities . Initially , ethnographic interviews were done to explore how infant feeding
practices were related to daily life and to family and kinship and how they were influenced by traditional beliefs
and other sources . This information was then incorporated into the promotional designs by reframing current
understanding with the revised . 
Qualitative = 76%
Jernigan , D .  ,  & Wright , P . Medica advocacy : Lessons learned from community experiences . J . Public
Health Policy , 17 ( 3 )  , 306-330 . 
Media advocacy , or the strategic use of mass media and community organizing as a resource for advancing a
social or public policy initiative ”  ( p . 330 )  , is derived from the following : 
1 . Media relations provide basic principles of how to identify and approach media
2 . Social marketing provides insight into defining and targeting audiences and messages
3 .  “ Guerrilla media ,  ” or the use of small amounts of hard-hitting advertising , bring attention to an issue and / or
exert pressure on individual decision-makers
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 300 Interventions
4 . Community organizing influences media by showing widespread public support
5 . Political campaign media controls what media covers and shapes how it covers it . 
Through case studies focusing on the “ 4 P ’ s ” of marketing ( i . e .  , product , promotion , place , and price ) the authors
demonstrate the following : 
1 . Media advocacy is most successful when linked to a strong community-organizing base and a long-term
strategic vision . Broader coalitions open the way to bigger policy gains
2 . Attracting media attention is rarely sufficient to achieve permanent change
3 . Permanent change requires changing policy
4 . Clarity about long-term goals , and development and communication of a media strategy , frame , and symbols
that reflect those goals , are crucial to success
5 . Media advocacy is cumulative–successful campaigns set up further efforts
6 . The campaign ’ s spokespeople define it in the public eye . In particular , young people and “ authentic voices ” 
often frame and add power to the story being told
7 . Training and designating spokespeople keep the campaign ’ s message clear
8 . Making news–holding events , releasing research , or in some other way doing something “ newsworthy ” –will
generally draw media attention
9 . Advocates have power in relation to the media , in particular , the power to offer or withhold story ideas and
information
10 . Television requires visuals that tell the story in and of themselves
11 . Understanding the different audiences served by different media outlets enables campaigns to target key
constituencies . No media outlet or contact should be overlooked
12 . It is necessary to practice good media relations , including maintaining relationships , being accurate , using
every contact , and always having a spokesperson available
13 . The media have their own agenda–advocates need to understand what motivates the media , and how their
motivation differs from those of advocates
14 . Controversy draws media attention
15 . Media advocacy is often controversial and , as a result , is not for everyone or every situation
16 . Controversy over the accuracy of advocates ’ facts should be avoided
17 . Sensational tactics can attract media attention , but , alone , seldom achieve policy change
18 . Opponents of policy change may try to encourage controversy , in order to divide , or sow the appearance of
division , among coalitions for better health policies
19 . Computer-based electronic communications systems and other emerging technologies can help in planning
and sharing information
20 . Different groups or individuals can play different roles in media advocacy , depending on the personal or
institutional abilities and constraints
21 . Research , both scientific studies and community-based data collection and documentation , is needed and
helpful
22 . Funding for ongoing organizing is critical and often scarce 
 “ Media advocacy is about media , but more fundamentally , about advocacy , working to change public policies ”  
( p . 327 )  . 
Qualitative = 73 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 301 Interventions
de la Cuesta , C .  ( 1994 )  . Marketing : A process in health visiting . J . Advanced Nursing , 19 , 347-353 . 
The author reports on a grounded theory study investigating how health visitors ( in England ) introduce their
services to prospective clients and analyzing it using a marketing framework . 
Results showed : 
1 . Health visitors openly viewed their work as sales , most typically in enrolling clients for services that they had
not requested ( e . g .  , mandatory home visits to all children under five years of age ) and in situations of persuading
individuals and families to adopt or change life styles . 
2 . Tactics used to make home visiting services acceptable , relevant , and accessible to clients : 
a . promoting the service to make it familiar , acceptable , and desirable ( first encounter was critical ) 
•raising awareness : determining the client ’ s wants or needs and then describing the services available
to meet them
•personal presentation style exhibited by the health visitor was critical ( personality and appearance ) 
•displaying or demonstrating available services
b . adjusting delivery of the service to increase accessibility and reduce barriers
•bargaining a way , that is , allowing the client to choose the time , day of visit , etc . 
•exhibiting timing and opportunism
•pacing
c . tailoring the product
•making the “ cost ” attractive ( both in terms of psychological cost to the client , as well as any
monetary issues ) 
•arranging the agenda to “ meet the client where they ’ re at ” 
•negotiating and compromising : establishing goals that are attainable , rather than optimum
•performing “ fringe work ,  ” or going beyond the usual and customary nature of the work , to
accommodate the special needs of particular clients . 
Qualitative = 62 . 5%
Golden , L .  ,  & Johnson , K .  ( 1991 )  . Information acquisition and behavioral change : A social marketing
application . Health Marketing Quarterly , 8 ( 3 / 4 )  , 23-60 . 
The article describes an application of market analysis and segmentation in a social margin campaign focused on
AIDS prevention . Variables , including the core health beliefs element of the Health Belief Model , personal
knowledge , personality and involvement , and demographic variables , were tested in a randomized telephone
survey of residents of a southwestern state . The core health beliefs were important for all the health information
variables tested . The authors conclude that “ marketers need to first begin their strategy development with an
understanding of how target market individuals perceive themselves in relationship to the disease ”  ( p . 51 )  . 
Specifically , they found that if an individual perceived themselves as severely at risk , acquisition of new
information might be impeded . It is important , then , to use tactics that are consistent with the realities of the target
individual . 
Quantitative / Non-experimental = 49%
Gries , Black ,  & Coster .  ( 1995 )  . Recruitment to a university alcohol program : Evaluation of social
marketing theory and stepped approach model . Prev . Medicine , 24 , 348-356 . 
Social marketing theory was tested in designing a marketing campaign to abate apathy among students and
generate interest in alcohol reduction in a college dorm system . The intervention tested used the stepped
approach model , which increases the intensity of an intervention presented in a series preceded by an aggressive
social marketing campaign . Three dorms matched for demographics were used : one ( test ) was the source of
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 302 Interventions
focus groups and in-depth interviews used to develop the marketing strategy ; the second served as the control , 
receiving the invitation to participate through traditional methods ; the invitations for the third ( treatment ) were
based on social marketing principles of the 4 P ’ s ( i . e .  , price , place , product , and promotion )  . An attendance rate
of 3-5 percent was considered successful ( a rate similar to the rate considered successful in sales marketing )  . 
Attendance was much higher in the treatment dorm . Other factors found to be significant included focusing on
altruistic motivations to assist another drinker , factual information about the effects of alcohol , personal benefit of
abstinence , and attendance incentives ( i . e .  , food , prizes )  . 
Quantitative / Experimental = 44%
Expert Opinion
Gray , B .  ( 1994 )  . Health communicators as agents of social change . AMWA Journal , 9 ( 1 )  , 11-14 . 
Reporting information alone is insufficient to change health behaviors ;  “ the processing of new information is
impeded by disinterest ; disagreement , personal altitudes , beliefs and faults and perceived social norms ”  ( p . 11 )  . 
Three “ tools ” are used to overcome these impediments : 
Persuasion
In marketing regular commodities , producers determine what products consumers want then try to satisfy those
wants . Ideally , persuasion is not needed , as the product should sell itself . Selling health behavioral change with
social marketing is more difficult , since the “ products ”  ( i . e .  , attitudes or behaviors ) are invisible to the customer
and often unpopular . Commodity marketers use advertising ( i . e .  ,  “ the nonpersonal communication of persuasive
information ”  ) to persuade but traditional verbal methods do not work well in conveying mood or attitude . Social
marketers use , instead , image advertising , which visually puts the viewer in a scene that conveys the desired mood
or attitude–the “ primacy of image over fact .  ” In addition , when verbal and nonverbal cues conflict , the nonverbal
ones are the most compelling ( p . 12 )  . 
Positioning
When more than an image of health needs to be conveyed , the message is positioned , meaning the benefits of the 
 “ product ” are sold .  “ Benefits ” are constructed to appeal to a hierarchy of human needs from physiological , 
safety , and social , to personal needs . The trick is to “ position ” the health attitude or behavior in ways that are
meaningful to the consumer and will prompt action . 
Segmentation
Researching the group for which change is desired ( i . e .  , the “ target-adopter ” population ) for characteristics that
can be used to break the group down into subsections for specific marketing . Factors such as family , SES , and
culture are frequent criteria applied . 
Expert Opinion = 71%
Manoff , R .  ( 1997 )  . Getting your message out with social marketing . Am J Trop Med Hyg , 57 ( 3 )  , 260-
265 . 
This is a print of an address on social marketing given by Manoff at a l996 professional meeting . He offers
numerous examples of how social marketing techniques are used to provide necessary information to control or
prevent various tropical diseases in developing countries . In social marketing , the trick is to design messages by
using a two-way process in which communication with people is used to ascertain how to communicate to them . It
uses “ feed-forward rather than feed-back , to listen to and learn from people in advance , not to replace feedback but
to minimize feedback-shock–the belated discovery of preventable error ”  ( p . 261 )  . The “ problem ” often is found , 
after further probing via social marketing , to be only a symptom of the real problem that needs to be addressed . 
Expert Opinion = 65%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 303 Interventions
Walsh , D .  , Rudd , R .  , et al .  ( 1993 , Summer )  . Social marketing for public health . Health Affairs , 104-
119 . 
The authors provide an overview of the evolution and uses of social marketing in the early 1990s through a
review of textbooks , conference proceedings , application of the concept in five different areas of disease
prevention and health promotion , and interviews with 30 key informants in the field . They catagorize their findings
based on the three phases of process elements associated with the discipline : 
Phase One : Research and Planning
•persistence and a long timeframe are essential ; 10 years waiting for results is not unusual
•segmentation of the audience is a critical task and needs to include psychographic variables ( i . e .  , lifestyle and
personality factors )  , as well as traditional demographics . 
Phase Two : Strategy Design
•incentive is used for motivation of all participants
•teaching consumer skills supports behavioral change
•malleable products are crucial for consumer satisfaction ;  “ products ” that support a set of health– promoting
goals are essential and learned through close dialogue between health experts and the targeted consumer . 
Phase Three : Implementation and Evaluation
•program success requires leadership support
•community participation builds local awareness and ownership
•integration of feedback improves program effectiveness . 
The authors conclude that three “ powerful tensions remain unresolved ”  : 
1 . Theory versus practice
practitioners view the intuitive approach as superior to the theoretical , although development of the latter is
advancing
2 .  “ Research to know versus research to show ” debate
•Should resources be targeted toward formative or summative research ? 
3 . Clash of market versus social values
•commercial marketer is satisfied with a 1-2 percent shift in a large market , whereas health promotion
objectives generally seek behavioral shifts of 20-30 percent
•commercial marketers usually do not collect baseline data , preferring to use the funding instead for formative
research and product design
•commercial marketing selects the easy targets , while social interventions often seek out the hard-to-reach
bottom 11 percent of the population so lacking in resources that commercial marketers would never consider
them
•for many , use of marketing orientation in public health seems fundamentally at odds with the core values of
public health
•social marketing emphasizes individual change strategies and deflects attention from the social and physical
environment
•marketing reflects commercial values and interest and is , therefore , part of the problem . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 304 Interventions
Future Issues
1 . Determining where social marketing can have its largest effect
2 . Paying closer attention to cultural appropriateness and boundaries between persuasion and manipulation . 
Expert Opinion = 57%
Samuel , S .  ( 1993 , Jan-Feb )  . Project LEAN–Lessons learned from a national social marketing
campaign . Public Health Reports , 108 ( 1 )  , 45-53 . 
The author reports on the achievements of the project begun in 1987 and funded by a private foundation to
reduce dietary fat consumption to 30 percent of total calories in American diets . A national campaign was
implemented to promote these dietary changes among persons , reinforce the changes through organizations , and
facilitate the change in settings where people make food choices . Important lessons learned were : 
1 . Advertising and public health professionals must be more aware of their differing approaches to the
development of messages
2 . Well-placed publicity , not public service advertising , may be the most appropriate and effective
communications strategy for national campaigns
3 . Media monitoring and tracking must be built into the program
4 . National campaign strategies and material have important benefits for state or community programs
5 . Building a network of state and local programs strengthens and sustains the campaign
6 . Selection of credible campaign spokespersons strengthens the message
7 . Partnership with other organizations is an essential ingredient for success . 
8 . Collaboration with the private sector expands the campaign . 
Expert Opinion = 55%
Blair , J . E .  ( 1995 , October )  . Social marketing : Consumer focused health promotion . AAOHN Journal , 
43 ( 10 )  , 527-531 . 
Blair , an occupational health nurse , describes application of social marketing principles as a means of increasing
participation in employee wellness programs . Marketing begins with a study of consumer needs and wants . Next
the 4 P ’ s of marketing are applied , conceiving of employee wellness as a product at three levels : core ( the benefit
gained )  , tangible ( the actual gain )  , and augmented ( tied to long-term adherence to the chosen behavior )  . The
author concludes that , to be successful , social marketing : 1 ) provides a theoretical basis to increase awareness of
preventable health conditions and participation in wellness programs ; 2 ) has a philosophy that underscores the
necessity to be aware of , and responsible to , the consumer ’ s perception of needs ; 3 ) is distinguished by its
emphasis on “ non-gamble ” and of products such as disease , attitudes , and lifestyle changes ; 4 ) has a marketing
mix that is a social marketing strategy intertwining elements of product ( price , place and promotion ) to satisfy the
needs and wants of consumers . 
Expert Opinion = 52%
Woodruff , K .  ( 1996 , August )  . Alcohol advertising and violence against women : A media advocacy case
study . Health Education Quarterly , 23 ( 3 )  , 330-345 . 
The author describes a community organizing and media advocacy campaign in California in the early 1990s to
pressure the alcohol industry to change the sexist ways in which women are portrayed in their advertising and
promotion . More than 80 groups came together to petition the industry ’ s three major trade associations to
amend their advertising code to include items addressing their concerns . The wine industry group agreed , but the
beer and distilled spirits groups refused . The campaign then turned to media advocacy , focusing on the key
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 305 Interventions
elements described by Wallack et al .  : assure community consensus ; focus on public health ; set the agenda ; gain
access ; and reframe the debate . Lessons learned regarding media advocacy include starting where the journalists
are ; developing professional relationships with journalists ; building coalitions based on commitment , not
convenience ; agreeing in advance on an appropriate level of confrontation ; planning several ways to keep the
issue on the media agenda ; not being seduced by the spotlight ; remembering media advocacy is only one method . 
Expert Opinion = 46%
Stubblefield , C .  ( 1997 )  . Persuasive communication : Marketing health promotion . Nursing Outlook , 45 , 
173-177 . 
The author suggests that “ effective health education depends on selecting the most appropriate theory and related
interventions ” and that “ integrating marketing principles into health promotion efforts ” would increase effectiveness
in relation to promoting lifestyle changes ( p . 173 )  . She describes the message-learning approach to persuasive
communication . Factors include : 
1 . Source : who is delivering the message
•credibility
•perceived power
•intent to persuade
2 . Message : what is being suggested
•fear : the message provides a strong argument that the recipient will suffer negative consequences if the
recommendations are not accepted , and the message provides strong assurance that adoption of the
recommendation will eliminate the negative consequence
•cognitive dissonance : creating a message that is in conflict with beliefs promotes consideration of those
beliefs and the potential to change them
•concrete , vivid information versus abstract : personal stories are remembered
•negative versus positive appeals for health behavior change : the value of an option will seem greater
when framed in terms of potential losses from not acting on the option , rather than in terms of potential gains
for action on it ; negative consequences are more likely to prompt health promotion-related actions
Stubblefield speaks to the ethical concerns raised by some that persuasive communication is manipulation and , 
therefore , inappropriate to use in health education . She suggests that health professionals first ask the following
questions before launching such approaches : 
1 . What are we selling ? 
2 . Who are we selling it to ? 
3 . How are we selling it ? 
4 . Whose side are we on ? 
Expert Opinion = 44%
Maibach , E .  , Shenker , A .  ,  & Singer , S .  ( 1997 )  . Consensus conference on the future of social
marketing . J . of Health Communication , 2 , 301-303 . 
The field of social marketing was started in 1971 ; this conference was held to review the first 25 years and look
ahead ; data was collected via a pre-conference Delphi process and reported at the meeting . Based on the
results , a modified model was designed , featuring the following 10 elements : 
1 . Social marketing programs are designed to respond to the audience ’ s needs , wants , and perceptions
2 . The objective of social marketing programs is to promote appropriate behavioral change among audience
members
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 306 Interventions
3 . Research is used to segment and profile target audiences and to identify appropriate distribution and
promotion channels
4 . Formative research is used to develop and test concepts and executions
5 . Strategies are developed and implemented specifically to meet the perceived needs of the target audiences
6 . Ideally , products are delivered through distribution channels identified in audience research
7 . Programs are promoted through media and organizational channels identified in audience research
8 . There is meaningful tracking of program implementation through process evaluation
9 . Audience response is documented through the impact of routine evaluation
10 . Evaluation data are used to modify and improve the program . 
Barriers to consistent and optimal application of the model : 
1 . Inadequately trained workforce
2 . Limited financial resources
3 . Lack of support from senior management
4 . Lack of collaboration among organizations with complementary goals . 
Expert Opinion = 32 . 5%
Montazeri , A .  ( 1997 )  . Social marketing : A tool not a solution . J . Roy Soc Health , 117 ( 2 )  , 115-118 . 
The author discusses the strengths and limitations of social marketing and concludes that 
1 . Social marketing has value if it is used as a tool for effective communication of health-related messages and
not as an end in itself
2 . Social marketing should be used in a proper balance with public health-oriented approaches . 
Expert Opinion = 25%
Texts and Monographs
Andreasen , A .  ( 1994 , Spring )  . Social marketing : Its definition and domain . J . Public Policy and
Marketing , 13 ( 1 )  , 108-114 . 
In this article , the author reviews the historical evolution of social marketing and suggests a revised , more precise
definition be adopted so that it “ not be held responsible for failures for which it should not be held accountable ”  
( p . 108 )  . 
Kotler and Zaltman ’ s 1971 definition ( the first formal definition )  :  
 “ Social marketing is the design , implementation , and control of programs calculated to influence the
acceptability of social ideas and involving considerations of product planning , pricing , communication , 
distribution , and marketing research .  ” 
Problems with it : 
•has a confusing name
•is unclear whether private-sector marketing can do social marketing
•limits social marketing to ideas , whereas it also involved attitudes and behaviors
Proposed :  
 “ Social marketing is the adaptation of commercial marketing technologies to programs designated to influence
the voluntary behavior of target audiences to improve their personal welfare and that of the society of which
they are a part .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 307 Interventions
Better because it
keeps social marketers focused on the outcomes they are best suited to influence
keeps the discipline of social marketing distinguishable from its academic “ competitors ” 
keeps social marketing programs out of areas in which their likelihood of failure is high
Key Elements
1 . If commercial marketing ’ s “ bottom line ” is production of sales , social marketing ’ s should be 
 “ influencing behavior ” 
2 . Social marketing is applied to a program , not only a campaign , and therefore , needs to continue across time
3 . Social marketing is focused on behavioral change and should not be diverted for other purposes as that would
be an “ enormous waste ”  ; it is not communication , it is not education , it is not propaganda
4 . Social marketing programs influence behavior ; they do not always change it
5 . Social marketing seeks to influence voluntary behavior
6 . Social marketing seeks to benefit target consumers and / or the society as a whole , not the marketer . 
Proposes three criteria be met in order to be considered social marketing : 
1 . Applies commercial marketing technology
2 . Has as its bottom line the influencing of voluntary behavior
3 . Seeks primarily to benefit individual / families or the broad society and not the marketing organization itself
Offers Eight Characteristics of Excellence in Social Marketing
1 . Program managers understand the target audiences ’ needs , wants , perceptions , and present behavioral
patterns before acting
2 . Program managers segment target markets , where politically feasible , and devise budgets and strategies
specifically adapted to the characteristics of each defined segment
3 . All major elements of strategy and tactics are pretested with members of the target audience
4 . Program managers conceive of the decision process by which target consumers commit to and understand a
six-step target behavior ( p . 112 ) 
5 . The program explicitly recognizes that it faces direct or indirect competition for the target consumer ’ s
behavioral choices . 
6 . Strategies designed to effect behavioral change always comprise all four elements of the “ 4 P ’ s ” marketing
mix . 
Andreasen , A .  ( 1995 )  . Marketing social change : Changing behavior to promote health , social
development , and the environment ( pp . 1-32 )  . San Francisco : Jossey-Bass . 
Defines social marketing as :  
 “ Social marketing is the application of commercial marketing technologies to the analysis , planning , execution , 
and evaluation of program designed to influence the voluntary behavior of target audiences in order to
improve their person welfare and that of their society ”  ( p . 7 )  . 
Key Points : 
1 . The ultimate objective of social marketing is to benefit targeted individuals or society and not the marketer
2 . The basic means of achieving improved welfare is through influencing behavior , in most cases bringing about a
behavioral change
3 . The target audience has the primary role in the social marketing process . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 308 Interventions
Why Social Marketing Works Better Than .  .  . 
1 . The Education Approach , which assumes that individuals will do the right thing if only they understand why
they need to do it and how to do it . The author critiques the Health Belief Model to demonstrate what does not
work with the education approach : 
a . Does not focus on behavior , but , rather , assumes that if one can change beliefs , behavioral change will
follow
b . Ignores the effects of social pressure
c . Does not acknowledge that delivering facts to change beliefs may have a “ boomerang ” effect and actually
provide negative results
2 . The Persuasion Approach , which assumes that action takes place only if people are sufficiently motivated . 
This requires the consumer to adopt the persuader ’ s view of the world ( which may or may not fit for the
consumer ) 
3 . The Behavioral Modification Approach , which assumes that people do what they do because they learn the
techniques and are rewarded for it . However , this is very costly , because it has to be carried out at the individual
level
4 . The Social Influence Approach , which assumes that changing community norms and collective behavior is the
most cost-effective way to reach and change individuals and families . However , it is only effective when the
following conditions are met : 
a . Social issues and norms are well understood and accepted
b . The pressures to conform are extremely strong
c . The behavior is understood as socially important and visible . 
Key Features of Social Marketing
1 . Consumer behavior is the bottom line
Learning facts is only important if it leads to a desired behavioral outcome
because behavioral change is a long-term effort , smaller steps need developing
2 . Programs must be cost effective , which makes trade-offs , ignoring certain markets , seeking cooperative
alliances , etc .  , part of the activity
3 . All strategies begin with the customer
Recognize that customers only take action when they believe that it is in their interest ; 
begin with an understanding of the target audience ’ s needs and wants , their values , their perceptions
4 . Interventions involve the “ 4 P ’ s ”  : 
Product : it proposes the right kind of behavioral offering 
Price : perceived benefits outweigh the costs to the customer
Place : behaviors must be easy to do
Promotion : it employs the kind of promotional technique most appealing to the audience
5 . Market research is essential to designing , pretesting , and evaluating intervention programs . 
Since customers control outcomes , it is critical to know “ where they are coming from ” 
6 . Markets are carefully segmented , recognizing that customizing approaches to special populations is effective
7 . Competition is always recognized , in that , for every choice a customer makes , there are competing interests
that must be considered . 
Text = 80%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 309 Interventions
Siegel , M .  ,  & Doner , L .  ( 1998 )  . Marketing public health : Strategies to promote social change ( pp . 29-
65 )  . Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen Publishers . 
Chapter 2 : A Challenge for the Public Health Practitioner
Public health , by its very nature , is in the business of marketing , since achieving health , whether individual or
societal , requires an exchange–the key requirement of marketing . The authors conclude , therefore , that the 
 “ primary challenge of the public health practitioner is to market social change ”  ( p . 31 )  . The change is in three
specific areas : lifestyle choices ( individual level )  ; changes in social and economic conditions ( community level )  ; 
and changes in social policy ( systems level )  . 
This presents an unique marketing challenge for three reasons : 
1 . Unfavorable state of individual and societal demand for social change
In commercial marketing , there are eight states of the demand level for a product which require different
marketing techniques : full , overfull , faltering , irregular , and latent 
In social marketing , there are three demand levels : negative demand ( most public health products )  , no
demand , or unwholesome demand . 
•Negative demand : the public dislikes the product , does not want it , and is not willing to pay for it
regardless of the benefits ( e . g .  , reducing intake of fatty fast foods ) 
•No demand : the public is simply uninterested in the product ( e . g .  , job training for the homeless ) 
•Unwholesome demand : the choices are deemed undesirable and unhealthy by public health
practitioners , but are in high demand by the public ( e . g .  , tobacco , drugs ) 
2 . Hostile environment in which social change must be marketed
Social marketers often face competition from counter-marketing forces , making the effort even harder . One
source is active , such as campaigns by tobacco companies promoting smoking , while public health is trying to
reduce use . The other source is passive and embedded in the social environment via ingrained social norms . 
3 . Limited training in the skills necessary to market social change
•Inadequate emphasis on advocacy in public health practice , which is often confused with lobbying
•Limited expertise in advocacy among the current public health workforce
•Inadequate training in advocacy for public health students and practitioners
Chapter 3 : An Opportunity for the Public Health Practitioner
Marketing Individual Health Behavior Change
Studies show that it is not really health itself that people value , but the freedom , independence , autonomy , and
control over their lives that it affords . Therefore , the most compelling “ product ” a public health professional can 
 “ sell ” is not health , but all the things that come with health . It also is important to keep in mind that if people
maintain certain behaviors ( such as smoking )  , they usually have a good reason for doing so–rational or not .  
 “ The key is to redefine the public health product and its benefits in a way that appeals to the most compelling core
values of the target audience .  .  .  . The public health practitioner must first find out what the consumer wants and then
redefine , repackage , reposition , and reframe the product in such a way that it satisfies an existing demand among
the target audience ”  ( p . 48-49 )  . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 310 Interventions
1 . Finding Out What the Consumer Wants 
 “ Before public health practitioners can design programs that will be successful in changing individual behavior , 
they must attempt to get under the skin of their target audience and to explore core values .  .  . and how they related
to the audience ’ s perceptions of health , disease , behaviors , behavior change , and the experience of illness ”  ( p . 
50 )  . 
2 . Redefining the Public Health Product 
Remember that customers only take action when they believe that it is in their interests :  
 “ Public health practitioners must learn to redefine the public health product so as to offer a promise that appeals
to people ’ s core values ”  ( p . 52 )  . 
3 . Repacking , Repositioning , and Reframing the Public Health Product
The process includes the search for appropriate metaphors , symbols , words and phrases , visual images , and
themes ”  ( p . 53 )  . In reframing public health products , practitioners must recognize that the most deeply ingrained
core value ( i . e .  , freedom ) has two meanings : the freedom from something , as well as the freedom to do
something . 
Components of these include : 
1 . Defining the product
2 . Determining the promise of the benefit that the product should offer
3 . Developing an image for the product that is consistent with the promise
4 . Providing support for the promise . 
Marketing Public Health Programs and Policies
The process here is similar to marketing behavioral change to individuals , except that the target audience is not the
individual , but the public in general and policy-makers in particular . However , the needs and wants of policymakers regarding health and a healthy society are different from those of the individual :  
 “ Public health practitioners must begin to sell something other than health itself , or health behavior change itself , if
they are ever to be effective in addressing the chronic disease epidemic . 
PFirst they must begin to sell freedom , independence , control , identify , and rebellion . In other words , they
have to redefine their product so that it offers benefits that will fulfill a clearly identified need or desire among
their target audience . 
PSecond , they must package the product , position it , and frame it in a way that appeals to their audience ’ s
core values . This means that it must place and promote the product in a way that will demonstrate to their
audience how the practice will fulfill their desire or needs .  .  .  . The practitioner must define the product so that it 
Soffers a benefit desired by the target audience , 
Soffers a promise for how the product will satisfy important needs and desires of the target
audience , 
Spresents a visual image of the product that reinforces the audience ’ s core values Sprovides
support or documentation that the product will indeed deliver the promised benefit 
Each of these components of the market strategy must work together to reinforce the most important and
compelling core values of the target audience .  ” 
Text = 74%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 311 Interventions
Manoff , R .  ( 1985 )  . Social marketing : A new imperative for public health ( pp . 106-117 )  . New York : 
Praeger . 
A stepwise process for developing a social marketing plan is provided : 
Strategy Development
1 . Define the problem and set the objectives
2 . Identify the target audience
3 . Define the proposed behavioral change
4 . Identify the resistance points
5 . Assess media availability
6 . Design the product , i . e .  , the strategic response to the product
7 . Choose distribution systems 
8 . Conduct research about the primary audience 
Strategy Formulation
9 . Determine messages or the principle point needing to be conveyed
10 . Target audiences and segments
11 . Determine media
12 . Delineate the product ( i . e .  , consumer target groups , physical characteristics , consumer benefits ( s )  , name , 
pricing , packaging , promotion strategy , and distribution channels
13 . Conduct research on tracking methods for evaluation
14 . Integrate with other ongoing activities
Strategy Implementation
15 . Prepare prototype materials
16 . Test materials
17 . Prepare final 
18 . Inaugurate
19 . Determine resource requirements
Strategy Assessment
20 . Conduct process evaluation
21 . Conduct summative evaluation
22 . Determine resource requirements . 
Text = 56 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 312 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Policy Development 
& Enforcement 
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 313 Interventions
Interventions are activities taken by PHNs on behalf of communities
and the individuals and families living in them . 
Assumptions about all PHN Interventions .  .  .  
 " They are population-based ; that is , they : 
Sare focused on an entire population 
Sare guided by an assessment of community health 
Sconsider broad determinants of health 
Sconsider all levels of prevention 
Sconsider all levels of practice 
 " The public health nursing process applies at all levels of practice . 
INTERVENTION : POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND
ENFORCEMENT
Definition
Policy development places health issues on decision-makers ’ agendas , acquires a plan of resolution , 
and determines needed resources . Policy development results in laws , rules and regulations , 
ordinances , and policies . Policy enforcement compels others to comply with the laws , rules , 
regulations , ordinances , and policies created in conjunction with policy development . 
Examples at All Practice Levels
Population-of-interest : Entire community
Problem : Housing hygiene 
Community Example : 
Public health periodically receives calls from concerned citizens regarding isolated elderly living in
questionable housing conditions . The public health nursing agency views such reports as a reflection
of a community norm that is , in effect , an informal policy . Every call is responded to with the belief
that each call deserves an assessment , despite the possibility of a crank call . This practice , in turn , 
encourages continuing community involvement . 
Systems Example : 
As part of the response to a specific housing hygiene report ( see individual example ) a PHN meets
with the county attorney , the sanitarian , law enforcement officer , and social worker . While they
acknowledged that there was a problem , their conclusion was that the situation was not a public
health nuisance . After a year of repeated contacts , the client agreed to move into a small apartment . 
Two weeks later the garage burned due to spontaneous combustion . The fire chief notified the PHN
that he would not allow his men to enter the house again due to unknown hazards in the debris . 
Further investigation finally resulted in an abatement order . After this situation , the PHN met with
the county attorney to propose a land use ordinance that would declare a property a public health
nuisance if it presented a threat to the health of emergency personnel . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 314 Interventions
Individual / Family Example : 
A PHN received several referrals from concerned citizens regarding the safety of an 80-year-old
woman living by herself in her childhood home . The PHN ’ s assessment revealed a farm site littered
with old cans , garbage , clothes , vehicles , and a double car garage stuffed full of clothing . The lady
was dressed in many layers of clothing . Eighteen cats lived with her in a house with floors covered
with twelve inches of cans , clothes , cat feces , and other debris . The house had no running water and
the only source of heat was a lamp next to a bed heaped with clothing . The entrance door was
permanently ajar due to debris , resulting in skunks living in the basement . The client stated that she
could not tolerate the entrance door being closed because cats die and their spirits could not leave if
the door was closed . Despite the PHN ’ s efforts , the client refused to accept any assistance to clean up
her house . The PHN initiated a vulnerable adult evaluation ( as required under law ) that resulted in a 
 “ not sufficiently vulnerable ” finding . Though repeated contacts , the PHN was able to establish a
relationship with the woman and successfully initiated a referral to a physician and local home care
provider . However , her living conditions were unchanged . 
Relationships to Other Interventions
Policy development and enforcement relates to a variety of other interventions . Since its intent is to bring health
issues to the attention of decision-makers for the purpose of changing laws , rules , regulations , ordinances , and
policies , it is frequently paired with other interventions operating predominantly at the community or systems
practice levels , such as collaboration , coalition building , and , especially , community organizing . The system ’ s
level of health teaching , provider education , often follows policy development and precedes , or is implemented
in conjunction with , policy enforcement . Advocacy is a frequent co-intervention at this level . In contagious
disease outbreaks , policy development and enforcement is frequently paired with surveillance , disease and
health event investigation , screening , outreach , case-finding , referral and follow-up , and case
management . At the individual / family level , policy development is often paired with health teaching , 
counseling , consultation , case management , and advocacy . 
67 Adapted from J . E . Anderson ’ s model , as presented in Barbara Hanley ’ s chapter ( 1993 ) in Mason , 
Talbott ,  & Leavitt ( Eds .  )  . Policy and politics for nurses : Action and change in the workplace , government , 
organizations , and community ( 2nd ed .  )  ( pp . 75-79 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 315 Interventions
BASIC STEPS for Policy Development and Enforcement67
Working alone or with others , PHNs .  .  . 
1 . Identify problems experienced by the target population for which a policy solution would be
appropriate ; reframe the problem into a policy issue by asking : What could or should be done
about this issue ? 
• establish the policy agenda
• consider the values held by decision-makers and stakeholders engaged in the policy development
• develop and analyze options for resolution
• identify the policy-making body with jurisdiction over the issue
• identify other individuals and groups who might also be interested in working toward resolution of
the issue . 
2 . Formulate the policy
• present the issue and options for resolution to policymakers
• establish objectives 
• draft the policy language
• identify stakeholders and other interest groups and invite their participation , often through hearings 
( where appropriate ) or written comments . 
3 . Adopt the policy language
• add budget and funding requests
• carry out hearings or other means of soliciting input from stakeholders . 
4 . Implement and monitor the policy
• develop rules and guidelines necessary for a functioning program , including conditions requiring
enforcement
• disseminate rules and guidelines to those impacted by the policy or otherwise needing to know
• determine how the policy will be monitored and who will monitor it
• monitor policy implementation . 
5 . Enforce components of the policy where compelling compliance has been authorized
• encourage compliances first through education about the policy and its rationale
• negotiate conditions of compliance as allowed in the policy
• assure due process
• institute methods to force compliance as allowed in the policy if conditions are not met . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 316 Interventions
6 . Evaluate the policy for effectiveness
Based on data and other feedback regarding intended and unintended consequences of policy
implementation , modify the policy by repeating the basic steps . 
Notes from Abby
Patricia Smart , writing in Milstead ’ s Health Policy and Politics : A Nurse ’ s Guide , notes there are five basic
categories of “ tools ” or methods to be used when designing policy : 
• Authority Tools : those ( such as regulations , rules , or mandates ) used to guide the behavior of agents and
officials at lower levels
• Incentive Tools : tangible payoffs ( positive and negative ) promoting action without encouragement or
coercion . 
• Capacity Tools : information , training , education , and resources enabling individuals , groups , or agencies to
make decisions or carry out activities . 
• Symbolic Tools ( such as logos )  : those appealing to individual ’ s , groups ’  , or agencies ’ systems of beliefs and
values . 
• Learning Tools : those used when it is unclear what would motivate the target population into action . 

Milstead , J .  ( Ed .  )  .  ( 1999 )  . Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen Publications , p . 159 . 
Application to Practice .  .  . 
Much of the literature written for nurses on policy development focuses on influencing federal-level policy . 
However , in the work world of the typical PHN , it is much more common to deal with policy at the local level . 
The basic steps and best practices presented for policy development can be adapted in most circumstances . 
Notice , the basic steps describe policy development , not political involvement . It is true that some degree of 
 “ politicking ”  ( in the sense of using influence or otherwise attempting to persuade decision-makers ) is inherent in
the process of setting the policy agenda . Authority boards with whom PHNs work will often have established
rules of conduct ( often unwritten ) about how much and what kinds of influence ( i . e .  ,  “ politicking ”  ) is allowable
from their staffs . Similarly , most boards will have established rules of conduct regarding staff involvement in
partisan politics ; the PHN is wise to be aware of these . 
68 Hall-Long , B . A .  ( 1995 , January / February )  . Nursing ’ s past , present , and future political experiences . 
N & HC : Perspective on Community , 16 ( 1 )  , 24-28 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 317 Interventions
BEST PRACTICES for Policy Development and Enforcement
Best practices are recommendations promoting excellence in implementing this intervention . When PHNs
consider the following statements , the likelihood of their success is enhanced . The best practices come
from a panel of expert public health nursing educators and practitioners who blended evidence from the
literature with their practical expertise . These best practices are not presented in any ranking or
particular order ; each may not apply to every implementation of the intervention . 
1 . UNDERSTANDS THAT ALL PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING IS POLITICAL . 
Best Evidence : Aroskar ; Cohen ; Evers in Farrunt and Ever
Public health nurses need to understand ( and believe ) that their involvement in policy development and
enforcement is a social mandate grounded in public health nursing ’ s ethic of caring and commitment to social
change and social justice . 
As Aroskar states ,  “ As nurses we have opportunities to raise [ ethical ] questions in any number of arenas in policy
review mechanisms , in proactive policy development or revision of existing policies , both in our own institutions
and in the wider community ”  ( p . 270 )  . She offers Warwick and Kelman ’ s discussion of the areas of policy
where ethical issues should be raised before decisions are made , noting they include : 
‚ the choice of policy goals that maximize certain values and minimize others
‚ the definition of the target population and their involvement
‚ the means chosen to implement the policy ( these have the potential to range from coercive to voluntary ) 
‚ a consideration of the direct and indirect consequences of a proposed policy . 
Cohen and Mason provide a continuum of the developmental stages through which nurses progress in their
political activism : 
‚ buy-in level : reactive response to a perceived personal professional threat or a “ wake-up call ,  ” with a
focus on nursing issues
‚ self-interest level : reactive to nursing issues , but from a “ what ’ s in it for me ” perspective
‚ political sophistication level : proactive on nursing and other health issues
‚ leading the way level : proactive on leadership and agenda-setting for a broad range of health and social
policy issues . 
Hall-Long provides an interesting review of nursing ’ s involvement on the political scene68 and concludes with a
rouser or “ call to action ” to encourage nurses ’ involvement in the policy arena :  “ Following the lead of our political
pioneers risk-taking behavior , contemporary nurses need to face the political challenges of the 21st century to
guarantee representation around the public policy-making tables . Once around those tables , political voices and
power will be welded to the nursing profession and to the consumers they represent ”  ( p . 28 )  . 
69 Kingdon , in turn , based his model on previous work by Cohen , March , and Olsen ’ s “ garbage can ” model
which describes the policy process as “ series of options floating around seeking a problem ”  ( Hanley , p . 74 )  . See : 
Cohen , M .  , March , J .  ,  & Olsen , J .  ( 1972 , March )  . A garbage can model of organizational change . Administrative
Quarterly Review , 17 , 1-25 ; Kingdon , J . W .  ( 1995 )  . Agendas , alternatives , and public policies . New York : Harper
Collins College Publishers . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 318 Interventions
2 . USES SCIENCE-BASED EVIDENCE TO INFLUENCE POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND
ENFORCEMENT . 
Best Evidence : Badovinec ; Conn ; Hanley ; Spradley and Allender ; Swanson and Nies ; Milstead
Science-based evidence used for policy development should be comprehensive and succinct and should include
an analysis of financial impact . 
Most of the textbook authors reviewed adapted their models of policy development from J . W . Kingdon . 69
Kingdon suggests that three “ streams ” have to come together at the right “ window of opportunity ” in order for
public issues to be addressed through policy . 
The three streams are : 
1 . The Problem Stream
This stream is marked by indicators ( such as economic or health indicators ) of a problem , by a sudden
crisis , or by feedback that a program is not working as intended . 
2 . The Policy Stream : 
Ideas for policy change come from everywhere . It does not matter where or from whom the idea comes . 
What matters is what made it take hold and grow . To “ stay ,  ” a policy idea must meet the following five
criteria : 
‚ Technical feasibility
‚ Value to the community
‚ Tolerable cost
‚ Anticipated public agreement
‚ Reasonable chance elected officials will be receptive to it . 
3 . The Political Stream : 
This stream includes public mood , pressure group campaigns , election results , composition of the
decision-making board , and changes in top management . 
The fourth variable is the probability that the “ streams ” will converge at the right “ window of opportunity ,  ” or
time . Agendas are affected more by the problem and political streams . The policy stream is affected more by
which criteria ( feasability , value , cost , public agreement , or officials ’ receptiveness ) is strongest at that moment .  
 “ Windows ” open for developing or changing policy , because of changes in the political stream or because new
problems capture officials ’ attention . 
70 The entire March 2000 issue of the Journal of Public Health Management Practice is devoted to
developing a constituency for public health . For a description of one state ’ s approach ( with nine recommendations
to developing county commissioners as one of those constituencies )  , see Lind , P .  & Finley , D .  ( 2000 , March )  . 
County commissioners as a key constituency for public health . J . Public Health Management Practice , 6 ( 2 )  , 30-38 . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 319 Interventions
Public health nursing significantly impacts policy development in the problem “ stream .  ” Data that support
the existence of problems and their consequences on health have huge importance there . Although PHNs
gather and interpret epidemiological data , they often fail to use the data to support policy development . 
Conn and Amer point out that data do not speak for themselves . Their suggestions for presenting results
to policy-makers are good advice for any data presentation : 
‚ do not bore policy-makers with the details of how data is collected and interpreted
‚ present only the major points , using the most dramatic statistics
‚ use anecdotal evidence ( that is , stories ) to personalize the meaning of the results ; the more they
can reflect real situations from a policy-maker ’ s own constituency , the greater their impact ( p . 
270 )  . 
3 . INCLUDES PARTICIPATION OF THOSE CONSTITUENCIES POTENTIALLY AFFECTED BY
THE POLICY . 
Best Evidence : Badovinec ; Evers in Farrunt and Evers ; Hanley ; Spradley and Allender ; Swanson and Nies ; 
Milstead ; Longest
Good policy is made better when those affected are involved . Across authors , however , a range of opinion exists
about when and how to involve constituents70 ( that is , members of a group sharing common characteristics , such
as all persons living in the same voting district )  . 
Longest , for instance , acknowledges that while constituents need to be engaged in the process to reduce their
resistance to change , they often come to the discussion with unalterable “ mindsets .  ” 
He categorizes the four prevailing mindsets on this issue as : 
‚ True Romantics
those who choose to ignore the concept of economic limits
‚ Pseudo Romantics
those who understand economic limits , but choose to think that someone else in the future will figure out
the details
‚ Truly Self-Serving
those so intent on ensuring that their own interests are served , that other issues become secondary
‚ Procrastinators
those who understand economic limits , but choose to delay action , usually due to the potential for political
repercussions . 
On the other end of the continuum are those invested in “ community empowerment ” concepts , where the
members of the community themselves are the policy-makers .  ( See the advocacy intervention for further
discussion of empowerment .  ) 
71 Readers of these best practices interested in further enhancing their skill set in this area could benefit
from reading Negotiating at an Uneven Table : A Practical Approach to Working with Difference and Diversity 
( 1996 ) by Phyllis Beck Kritek , professor of nursing and chair of the Department of Mental Health and Management , 
University of Texas / Schools of Nursing . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 320 Interventions
4 . DEVELOPS SKILL NECESSARY FOR POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND ENFORCEMENT . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
The Expert Panel recognized that the inherent potential for conflicting viewpoints in policy development requires
PHNs to have expert communication skills , particularly in the areas of conflict management , negotiation , and
mediation . Those PHNs involved in policy enforcement must have these skills . 
5 . BUILDS PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEMS . 
Best Evidence : panel recommendation based on practice expertise
Public Health Nurses need to develop both personal and professional support systems to deal with the ethical
dilemmas and role conflict occasionally encountered in policy development and enforcement . 71 Whenever
possible , a PHN should seek a mentor as part of this support system . The more PHNs take on the role of
advocating for policy development and becoming politically active , the more likely they will need a strong
support system . 
6 . UNDERSTANDS THE LIMITATIONS OF POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND ENFORCEMENT . 
Best Evidence : Longest ; Milstead
The PHN should strictly adhere to the policy implementation plan . Marlene Wilken , writing in Milstead ’ s
textbook , describes the multiple areas where policy implementation can go awry : 
Tractability , or the degree of difficulty encountered in the management and control of implementation . It
includes such things as whether or not the agency charged with administering the policy has access to : 
‚ technology required to enact and enforce the policy
‚ staff who possess the necessary competencies
‚ resources sufficient to deliver the program enacting the policy
‚ composition of the target group whose behavior is to change
‚ management competencies equal to the complexity of the change created by the policy . 
Structure , or the extent to which the implementing agency can structure or organize the process of policy
enactment : 
‚ clear objectives 
‚ causal links established between the interventions and the desired change 
‚ sufficient jurisdiction and authority to make things happen . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 321 Interventions
Nonstatutory variables , or environmental factors : 
‚ socioeconomic conditions
‚ public support
‚ prevailing attitudes of staff
‚ resources of constituency groups
‚ commitment and leadership skill of the implementing officials . 
Independent variables , or 
‚ extent to which the organization or agency charged with enacting the policy may choose to
undermine the intent of the policy by inserting regulatory program elements they are unable to put
into the policy itself
‚ pressure from rival agencies
‚ public acceptance of the program . 
7 . UTILIZES BOTH INFORMAL AND FORMAL POLITICAL PROCESSES . 
Best Evidence : Badovinec ; Cohen ; Conn and Amer ; Kingdon as found in Longest and Milstead ; Furlong in
Milstead
If PHNs are to be effective in policy development , they must be very familiar with both the formal and informal
ways in which policy work is done . Formal ways include knowing the legislative process at both the state and
federal levels of government . They also include knowing how any organization or group sets its policy . This is
usually explained in a constitution or set of bylaws established by the group . The most difficult step , however , in
advancing the issue to be addressed , is to get decision-makers ’ agendas . This requires engaging them in the
issue , a largely informal process based on interpersonal relationships . Overall , policy development is largely an
informal process requiring patience , presence , and timing . 
Presence means to be visible or known as associated with a policy issue . The more PHNs can establish
a visual association between themselves and an issue , the more likely policy-makers will remember who
they are or , at least , what they stand for . At times , borrowing a well-known person , such as a sports
figure or movie star , to serve as the issue ’ s “ spokesperson ” can create the needed “ presence ” for the
issue . Every issue needs a champion or a cheerleader–an advocate–to keep it alive and capture the
interest of others . 
Timing means knowing when to push forward with an issue and when to hang back . As those authors
who reference Kingdon and his three policy “ streams ” note , success is all in the timing . The “ window of
opportunity ,  ” as Kingdon calls it , will only be open to a policy suggestion when all the political conditions
are in the right place . 
Furlong presents a case study of the ten-year process it took to create the National Institute for Nursing Research
within the National Institutes of Health . Although largely a story of what happens when both poor timing and
competing champions exist , it is instructive , nevertheless . Policy-makers are not patient with groups or
organizations who present opposing or even differing views of the same policy issue ; they generally just want to
know who is for a policy and who is against it . They also need to hear and see the issues brought forward by
someone the constituents support as their spokesperson who is also articulate and accustomed to public debate . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 322 Interventions
Notes from Abby
Trevor Hancock , writing in Farrunt and Evers ’ Healthy Public Policy at the Local Level ( 1990 )  , suggests that
public policy that promotes health will reflect the following principles : 
• A long-term view 
• Political commitment
• Processes and structures that allow different sectors to work together ( for example , coalitions , 
collaboratives , councils , task forces , etc .  ) 
• Public support
• Community-driven process
• Multifaceted strategies 
• Credibility and expertise on the parts of both the initiator and spokesperson
• Win / win solutions
• A new organizational culture to maintain it ( p . 9 ) 
Hancock also notes that “ health may be a useful metaphor for addressing issues such as social injustice and
environmental deterioration .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 323 Interventions
BEST EVIDENCE for Policy Development and Enforcement
Each item was first reviewed for research quality and integrity by graduate students in public health
nursing . It was then critiqued for its application to practice by at least two members of a panel of practice
and academic experts . The nature of the material and a score expressed as a percentage is included at the
end of each annotated citation . The percentage is the average of scores assessed by the experts who
reviewed it . It reflects the strength of the item ’ s contribution to practice in the opinion of the experts . 
Review Articles
none
Research Reports
Coburn , A .  ( 1998 , January / February )  . The role of health services research in developing state health
policy . Health Affairs , 17 ( 1 )  , 129-151 . 
Funded by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation , Coburn visited universities involved in state
health policy in five states ( Maryland , Minnesota , North Carolina , Washington , and Wisconsin ) and developed
case studies regarding the appropriate role of the university in the often highly political state environment . 
Findings include : 
PRegarding state policy-makers : 
Sstate policy-makers are becoming increasingly sophisticated consumers of complex research and policy
analysis , which drives demand for university research
Sdemand for policy analysis and technical assistance is increasing , often accomplished through contracts
with outside sources , especially in states downsizing their own staffs
PFrom the university perspective , Coburn found that doing state-level work does not have the status many
academicians feel they need and that it often requires more work than state agencies are willing or able to pay
for . In addition , many university promotion criteria devalue state-level work as compared to other
accomplishments . 
He notes that a “ tension exits between the need to maintain a strong link to policymakers and agencies and the
need to remain sufficiently independent so as not to be ( or be perceived as ) agents of the government . His
recommendations for improving the links include : 
Pdeveloping a formal technical assistance program to assist other states in developing effective partnership
programs
Psoliciting funding from foundations and other funders to finance such partnerships
Pdeveloping academic training programs in state health policy analysis . 
Qualitative = 30 . 5%
Expert Opinion
Rains , J .  ,  & Hahn , E .  ( 1995 , April )  . Policy research : Lessons from the field . Public Health Nursing , 
12 ( 2 )  , 72-77 . 
The authors describe an application of research methods to generate data useful to policy decisions within a 48-
hour period . A diversion program for those charged with alcohol and / or marijuana possession was evaluated to
determine the relationship ( if any ) between successful completion of the program and subsequent charges . The
authors found that successful completion of the program reduced the number who reoffended within the first 12
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 324 Interventions
months , but resulted in no difference after that . These findings led to further re-evaluation . Final
recommendations included incorporating screening for ATOD use in the program , referral to therapy for
treatment where indicated ( as opposed to information-giving only )  , and extended follow-up . The authors also
discuss important “ contextual issues ,  ” such as the differences in philosophies between the criminal justice and
public health nursing disciplines . They conclude ,  “ In each policy development situation the nurse can adopt the
most appropriate research role , whether it be academic and neutral , as in the ‘ objective technician ’ role , or more
political , as in the ‘ issue or client advocate ’ role ”  ( p . 76 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 79%
Badovinac , K .  ( 1997 , October )  . Policy advocacy for public health practitioners : Workshop on policy
change . Public Health Nursing , 14 ( 5 )  , 280-285 . 
The author reports on workshops attended by more than 1 , 000 public and community health practitioners in
Ontario from fall 1995 through spring 1997 . The workshop series was entirely funded by the Health Promotion
Branch of the Ontario Ministry of Health . The intent was to provide information and skills to better equip public
health practitioners with the means of initiating policy change . 
The basic workshop was three hours in length and utilized small-group activities to cover the following topics : 
Pidentifying and analyzing problems with information-gathering techniques
Pidentifying key stakeholders for a given issue
Punderstanding the process by which bylaws are enacted
Paccessing and persuading decision-makers
Pgeneral information on advocacy and lobbying strategy . 
The advanced workshop was six hours long and covered the following topics : 
Plearning / problem-solving styles to identify strengths in collaborative work , such as coalition building
Pproblem analysis from the perspective of ideological orientations vis à vis
downstream / midstream / upstream thinking
Ptrends in macroscopic issues ( e . g .  , economics , public sentiment , etc .  ) and their relationship to coalition
development
Ppersonal leadership style analysis
Peffective framing of policy issues around an environmental , social justice perspective ; exercises included
experience with critical analysis and argument rebuttal
Ptactical planning models ( top-down , bottom-up , random events ) 
A survey of randomly selected workshop participants three months after completing the workshops was positive
toward both the skills learned and their practical application . 
Expert Opinion = 77%
Conn , V .  ,  & Armer , J .  ( 1996 , November / December )  . Meta-analysis and public policy : Opportunity for
nursing impact . Nursing Outlook , 44 ( 6 )  , 267-271 . 
The authors suggest that nursing , and especially public health nursing , could do more to influence public policy
through the use of meta-analysis . Meta-analysis , a means of quantitatively summarizing the pooled results of
multiple previously conducted primary studies , has the following strengths : 
Psummarizes numerous primary studies
Pmay find ample effects in small sample sizes
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 325 Interventions
Phas the potential to find consistency amid apparent inconsistences
Pexamines multiple outcomes
Pexamines program effectiveness in both process and outcomes
Drawbacks include insufficient numbers of primary cases that consider the variable of interest or of primary
studies with adequate rigor to be included . 
In using meta-analysis results with policy-makers , the authors suggest
Pnot boring them with the process details
Pincluding only the major points and only a few numbers when presenting verbal testimony
Pusing anecdotal evidence ( i . e .  , stories ) to humanize the meaning of the results
Expert Opinion = 76%
Aroskar , M .  ( 1987 , Nov / Dec )  . The interface of ethics and politics in nursing : Can we do ethics
effectively in the real world without doing politics ? Nursing Outlook , 35 ( 6 )  , 268-272 . 
Ethics is a discipline within the broader domain of philosophy . It is the systematic study of what our
conduct and actions ought to be with regard to ourselves , other human beings , and the environment , the
justification of what is right or good , the study of what our lives and relationships ought to be–not
necessarily what they are . Ethics in nursing , an area of applied ethics , is using the insights gained from
systematic study and reflection to achieve more ethical decision making in practice and policy
development . Ethics in nursing also includes consideration of the environments in which client care occurs
and of the integrity of individual practitioners of nursing and of the profession collectively .  .  .  . Ethical
situations in patient / client care and in related policy making are often characterized by relationships in
which there are questions about what should be done .  .  .  . To promote decision making that takes explicit
account of ethics , the political / power dimension must also be taken into account ( p . 268 )  . 
Aroskar asserts that nursing must take the necessary leap to incorporate community values into its ethical
structure , which has historically focused only on individual ethics :  “ Balancing pursuit of the good of the individual
with that of the common good requires sensitivity to both ethical and political dimensions in using ethical reasoning
and moral imagination in the arenas of health care ”  ( p . 269 )  . She says that the interface between politics and
ethics happens at three levels : that of the nurse / client / physician political triad ; the public policy-making arena ; and
institutional / organizational activity . It is nursing ’ s job to anticipate the ethical issues related to proposed policy
and influence the policy before it is set . Ethical principles that hold for the individual may not for communities as a
whole ; therefore , the notion of what constitutes justice will inevitably include “ tension between individual
autonomy , the health , safety , and welfare of all ( i . e .  , the common good ) and our local , national , and global
interconnectedness and interdependence ”  ( p . 272 )  . Aroskar suggests that ethical principles shape nursing ’ s
perspective on policy decisions and , in order to affect policy , nursing is 
inevitably involved in political thought and action ; she concludes by inferring that political action is necessary to
meet nursing ’ s social mandate ( p . 272 )  . 
Expert Opinion = 73%
Ryder , D .  ( 1996 )  . The analysis of policy : Understanding the process of policy development . Addiction , 
91 ( 9 )  , 1265-1270 . 
The author describes an eight-stage model of the policy development process , using substance use prevention in
Australia as the basis for his examples : 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 326 Interventions
Agenda Setting Government decides what action is ( or is not ) required on a particular issue ; essentially this is a
political issue which may or may not be based on scientific evidence
Issue Filtration Government decides the means by which options for action will be generated ; this may include
contracting with consultants , holding public meetings , relying on internal staff , etc . 
Issue Definition Problems , options , and opportunities that government needs to consider are clarified ; filtration
and definition stages are iterative
Forecasting Government considers the probable consequences , should a given policy be adopted ; this
includes costs and economic impact
Options Analysis Government reviews the various options that will achieve the desired goals and selects the
most appropriate ; forecasting and analysis stages are iterative
Objective Setting Government sets objectives to measure the effectiveness of the policy chosen
Monitoring Consequences of the chosen policy are monitored against its objectives ; unintended
consequences may also be monitored
Maintenance / Government decides to continue with the policy ( maintenance )  , replace it 
succession / with an alternative policy ( succession )  , or discontinue it ( termination ) 
termination
The author concludes by providing recommendations to researchers regarding positioning their findings for
greatest policy impact : 1 ) form alliances with others holding similar aims ; 2 ) provide evidence that can be used as 
 “ ammunition ” which also promotes allies ’ causes ; 3 ) choose the “ battle ” which plays to the research findings ’ 
greatest strength and the opposition ’ s weakest . 
Expert Opinion = 58%
Cohen , S .  , Mason , D . et al .  ( 1996 , Nov / Dec )  . Stages of nursing ’ s political development : Where we ’ ve
been and where we ought to go . Nursing Outlook , 44 ( 6 )  , 259-266 . 
The authors present developmental stages of nurses ’ political interest and characteristics in the areas of action , 
language , coalition building , and policy shapers . In terms of action , the following
descriptors apply : 
Stage 1 ( buy-in )  : reactive , with a focus on nursing issues
Stage 2 ( self-interests )  : reactive to nursing issues
Stage 3 ( political sophistication )  : proactive on nursing and other health issues
Stage 4 ( leading the way )  : proactive on leadership and agenda-setting for a broad range of health and social
policy issues
The authors call for more of nursing to move into Stage 4 development so that “ the public will benefit from
nursing ’ s expertise and the advocacy that nursing can provide on behalf of the public ”  ( p . 263 )  . To get there , the
following recommendations are set : 
PBuild coalitions , constituencies , and collaborations around health and social issues
PDevelop leadership capacity : current leaders must seek out those with potential and provide mentoring
PIntegrate health policy development into core curricula and not treat it as an “ add on ” 
PDevelop public media expertise : publish in non-nursing journals and the popular press ; create a presence in
mass media
PIncrease sophistication in policy analysis , policy research , and nursing research with policy implications . 
Expert Opinion = 57 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 327 Interventions
Davis , C .  , Oakley , D .  ,  & Sochalsi , J .  ( 1997 )  . Leadership for expanding nursing influence on health
policy . In B . Spradley & J . Allender ( Eds .  )  , Readings in community health nursing ( pp . 570-579 )  . 
Philadelphia : Lippincott-Raven .  
[ Note : previously published ( 1982 , January ) in JONA , 12 ( 1 )  , 15-21 .  ] 
The authors contend that for nurses to be effective in working at “ aggregate ” levels ( i . e .  , community or systems
levels )  “ nurses [ must ] increase their political expertise and their activity in the political arena ”  ( p . 570 )  . Successful
political action requires that nurses assume leadership roles ( meaning the capacity to establish and maintain
reciprocal relationships with the group for which they are providing leadership ) and the capacity for action in the
following three areas : 
1 . Obtain and maintain current and accurate information on policies affecting the issue or problem through the
use of 
Formal channels ( e . g .  , memberships , networks in formal organizations ) 
Informal channels ( e . g .  , informal contact with other leaders ) 
The information received needs to be considered in the context of those providing the information . 
2 . Build a support base by disseminating the information to recruit support as well as to inform . 
3 . Provide direction through offering a concise plan , with specific activities , for workers at all levels ; minimize
the potential for internal strife by keeping the group focused on common goals , rather than on satisfying
personal needs .  
 “ Tips ” for effectiveness in a variety of political actions are provided : 
1 . Have a seven-item checklist for organizing and directing a political action group : 
a . Organize a steering committee
b . Develop a briefing sheet for information supporters 
c . Include a list of activities that all supporters can do
d . Assemble phone lists of all other key leaders
e . Use the telephone for making contacts when time is limited or to reinforce material sent in the mail
f . Identify one central phone as the “ headquarters ” or reference point
g . Hold frequent steering committee meetings since “ coordination is the unequivocal basis for success ”  
( p . 573 )  . 
2 . Have a clear concise statement of what you want ready ( rather than just a description of the problem or
issue )  , when working with decision-makers . 
3 . Have a checklist for an effective interaction with a decision-maker ( p . 574 )  : 
a . Know the person ’ s interests , past voting patterns , connections
b . Make an appointment ; if necessary , first develop a relationship with any aides important to the issue or
problem
c . Offer a briefing sheet ( no more than two pages ) to all with a “ need to know ”  ; include information
regarding whom to call for additional information
d . Include a list of organizations or people known to the decision-maker who support your position
e . State arguments in terms the decision-maker uses and values ( e . g .  , cost-savings )  ; seek mutual goals
where possible ; do not appeal merely to ego
f . Follow up with a letter of thanks ; continue to provide relevant information
4 . Seek to develop long-term political involvement locally
a . Convene a local interest group of nurses around a common issue or concern
b . Strive to develop a broad-based coalition
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 328 Interventions
c . Identify resource needs ( e . g .  , postage ) and other material costs ( e . g .  , people time , prestige , etc .  ) 
d . Choose a neutral meeting site
e . Convey a sense of personal commitment in the invitation through such gestures as hand writing
invitations , rather than using labels
f . Plan a comfortable meeting atmosphere , organized and professional .  ( Note : Keep food at a minimum ; 
too much distracts from the importance of the meeting .  ) 
g . Work cooperatively
h . Maintain contacts . 
Expert Opinion = 51%
Jossens , R .  ( 1997 , July / August )  . Strategies for development of contemporary nursing policy . J . 
Professional Nursing , 13 ( 4 )  , 222-227 . 
Jossen sends a call to the nursing profession to use this time of change and uncertainty in the health care arena to
redefine and name nursing ’ s course for the future . Specifically , she proposes : 
1 . Maintaining clarity of definition , direction , and objectives between nursing groups . 
Jossen especially calls for consistency in nursing around the differentiation of primary health care ( as defined in the
Alma Alta declaration of 1978 ) and primary care ( the 1965 revision of the medical model )  . 
2 . Reassessing “ community-based care ” as the defining focus of future nursing practice . 
Jossen fears this is too open to interpretation to serve as a central force to define nursing in the future . She notes
it is far too often practiced as bringing the medical model into a community setting , without addressing healthy
communities . It also serves to segregate hospitals as other than community , which is wrongly conceived . She
suggests substituting other phrases and proposes “ community integrated .  ” 
3 . Involving representatives of nursing ’ s full constituency in professional policy decisions . 
Jossen believes that “ community-based ” disenfranchises large groups of nurses whose education and practice is
hospital focused and that its continued use will only further divide the profession . Instead , she proposes nurses be
purposefully engaged in the process of policy change . 
4 . Using the input of nursing alliance organizing , including organizations that represent ADNs . 
Jossen notes that “ major nursing policy positions should use and reflect the organized diversity of professional
nursing alliances ”  ( p . 225 )  . 
5 . Supporting documentation , research , and demonstration projects concerning the impact of health care reform
strategies on individual , family , and community health . 
Jossen encourages nursing research to focus on client outcomes related to the changing system in order to better
prepare for articulating nursing ’ s role . 
6 . Using collaborations with health disciplines seeking similar objectives . 
Jossen suggests the further liaison between public health and nursing , whose models “ share many characteristics in
common ”  ( p . 226 )  . 
7 . Exploring innovative methods of including practicing nurses in changing educational philosophies . 
Jossen urges going forward in ways that do not “ retroactively redefine a nurse ’ s preparation or practice ”  ( p . 22 )  . 
8 . Continuing to reanalyze and modify strategies , as necessary , in the ongoing work toward policy changes and
health care reform . 
Jossen argues for continuing discussion about nursing and health care futures . 
Expert Opinion = 45%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 329 Interventions
Texts and Monographs
Swanson , J .  ,  & Nies , M .  ( 1997 )  . Community health nursing : Promoting the health of aggregates ( pp . 
194-213 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders .  
 “ Policy deals with values . It treats the ‘ should ’ of a situation .  .  .  . Policy articulates the guiding principles of
collective endeavors , establishes direction , and sets goals . It influences and , in turn , is influenced by politics . 
Through the policy process , policy directives may become realized or obstructed at any step along the way ”  ( p . 
199 )  .  “ The premises supporting the goals of health policy should be equitable distribution of services and the
assurance that the appropriate care is given to the right people , at the right time , and at a reasonable cost ”  ( p . 
199 )  .  “  [ Policy ] evolves slowly and incrementally as an accumulation of many small decisions . It also changes
slowly because changes in the social beliefs and values that underlie established policy develop within the context
of actual service delivery . More often , once a direct health care service is offered , especially an official , taxfunded service , it is difficult to discontinue it ”  ( p . 200 )  . 
Steps in the policy process ( adapted from Spradley , 1985 ) include : 
1 . Formulation : defining the problem and “ getting it on the agenda ”  ; 
includes policy analysis , or the identification of those who benefit and those who lose as a result of a policy
2 . Adoption : committing resources ( e . g .  , through legislation , ordinances , etc .  ) 
3 . Implementation ( regulatory plan )  : establishing and carrying out a plan of action ( e . g .  , promulgating rules , 
procedures , and protocols ) 
4 . Evaluation : comparing the actual effects of the policy with its desired effects ; also , comparing the policy ’ s
actual effects with its anticipated effects
The authors go on to provide a thorough overview of the government ’ s authority for the protections of the
public ’ s health , safeguards provided by the balance of powers within government , the legislative process ( how a
bill becomes a law )  , and nurses ’ participation in the political process . 
Text = 74%
Hanley , B .  ( 1993 )  . Policy development and analysis . In Mason , Talbott ,  & Leavitt ( Eds .  )  , Policy and
politics for nurses : Action and change in the workplace , government , organizations and community 
( 2nd ed .  )  ( pp . 71-87 )  . Philadelphia : WB Saunders . 
Kingdon ’ s and Anderson ’ s models for policy process are reviewed .  ( Note : See the Longest and Milstead
abstracts for discussion of the Kingdon model .  ) 
Anderson ’ s Sequential Model
Stage 1 : Policy Agenda : there are three levels of policy agendas ( discussion , action , and decision )  , but the
development process for each is the same : 
1 . Identify a policy problem ( i . e .  , a situation that produces needs or dissatisfaction for which relief is sought )  ; 
development of issues papers is a common method . 
2 . Refine the problem into a policy issue ( i . e .  , a problem with societal ramifications of concern to a number of
people and on which there are conflicting opinions for resolution )  . 
3 . Consider the values held by the stakeholders as they determine the amount of political interest the issue
will generate
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 330 Interventions
4 . Frame the issue as a question : What could or should be done about this issue ? 
5 . Develop and analyze options for resolution . 
6 . Identify the policy-making body with jurisdiction over the issue . 
7 . Identify other individuals and groups who might also be interested in working toward resolution . 
Stage 2 : Policy Formulation : policy-makers determine the type of policy options to be developed and set
objectives . This is a technical phase where legislative or regulatory language is drafted . It is often carried out
through hearings in which special interest groups , among others , participate . 
Stage 3 : Policy Adoption : the decision is made to adopt a policy , allowing it to go forward to develop related
budget and funding requests ; hearings are frequently used at this point to gain testimony from interested groups
Stage 4 : Policy Implementation : the administrative agency charged with implementing the policy develops rules
and guidelines necessary for a functioning program ; once drafted , there is usually a period of time for public
response ; drafting rules and regulations provides the administering agency an opportunity to insert related agenda
items , which may not have made it into the legislation or which may undermine legislative intent
Stage 5 : Policy Evaluation : feedback regarding intended and unintended consequences of the implementation are
collected . Once established , policies are rarely terminated , but may be modified . 
Text = 70%
Milstead , J .  ( 1999 )  .  ( Ed .  )  . Health policy and politics : A nurse ’ s guide . Gaithersburg , MD : Aspen
Publications . 
Chapter 2 : Agenda Setting ( written by E . A . Furlong ) 
The author focuses on the historical process of establishing the National Institute of Nursing Research within the
National Institutes of Health as a case study exemplifying several models of agenda setting . Kingdon ’ s model for
political agenda setting , Schneider and Ingram ’ s model for social construction of target populations , policy design , 
and the contextual dimension to policy initiation , development , implementation , and redesign are featured : 
PKingdon ’ s Model : establishing an issue as an agenda item is related to 
SProblem Streams : these are marked by systematic indicators of a problem , a sudden crisis , or feedback
that a program is not working as intended
SPolicy Streams : ideas for policy change come from everywhere ; the key is not where or whom the idea
comes from , but what makes it take hold and grow ; the presence of a “ policy community ”  ( i . e .  , a group
interested in seeing it progress and willing to put resources to it )  ; to “ stay ,  ” a policy idea must meet the
following five criteria : 
Technical feasibility
Value acceptability
Tolerable cost
Anticipated public agreement
Reasonable chance elected officials will be receptive to it
SPolitical Streams : these include public mood , pressure group campaigns , election results , composition of
Congress , changes in the administration
SProbability that the Streams will converge at the right window of opportunity : agendas are affected more
by problems and political systems , whereas alternatives are affected more by the policy stream ;  
 “ windows ” open because of changes in the political stream or because new problems capture officials ’ 
attention . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 331 Interventions
A second model for understanding this policy process is Bobrow and Dryzek ’ s model for studying the political 
 “ context ” in which policy ideas are kept alive and moving . The contextual dimensions include : 
Pcomplexity and uncertainty of the decision-system environment
Pfeedback potential
Pcontrol of design by an actor or group of actors
Pstability of the policy ’ s actors over time
Pmotivation of the audience to action . 
Scheider and Ingram ’ s Model focuses specifically on the “ social construction of the target population ,  ” or those
groups affected by the policy . They state that , by knowing how elected officials perceive the target population , 
policy can be better designed . That model includes two traits : 
an awareness of the shared traits that make a particular group socially meaningful
specification of values , symbols , and images that one associates with a target population
Text = 55%
Chapter 5 : Policy Design ( written by Patricia Smart )  
 “ Policies that address social problems in the United States usually are formulated by a combination of legislators
and aides , the executive branch , courts , and special interest groups . In addition , professional experts are often
asked to serve as panel members or consultants or to serve on committees that provide input to policy-makers ”  
( p . 148 )  . 
Policy design is a “ process that can occur at both the policy formulation and the policy implementation phases or
as a blueprint approach that shapes policy ”  ( p . 154 )  . Five “ tools ” are generally used by government to design
policy : 
PAuthority Tools : used to guide behavior of agents and officials at lower levels ; examples include laws , 
regulations , and mandates
PIncentive Tools : providing tangible payoffs ( positive and negative ) to take action without encouragement or
coercion
PCapacity Tools : providing information , training , education , and resources to enable individuals , groups , or
agencies to make decisions or carry out activities
PSymbolic and Hortatory Tools : appealing to individual ’ s , groups ’  , or agencies ’ systems of beliefs and values
PLearning Tools : used when the basis upon which the target population might be moved to take problemsolving action is unknown or uncertain 
 “ Fire alarms ” are signals built into a policy that alert policy-makers that the design , implementation , or evaluation
phase is in danger of failing .  
 “ Fuzzy or crisp charges ” are words describing the degree of clarity of objectives and directors or implementation
in a mandate or law ;  “ fuzzy ” leaves more room for interpretation . The author then compares how policy was
developed regarding reducing infant mortality in South Carolina and the Netherlands using Schneider and
Ingram ’ s Model ( pp . 162-182 )  . 
Text = 59%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 332 Interventions
Chapter 6 : Policy Implementation ( written by Marlene Wilken ) 
Policy implementation is a dynamic process involving directed change that results in the accomplishment of the
policy goals ; the single most important factor in successful policy implementation is availability of sufficient
resources to carry it out . 
Implementation usually goes through several stages : 
PPassage of the basic statute
PPolicy decisions of the implementing agency
PCompliance of target groups with those policy decisions
PActual impact , both intended and unintended
PRevisions to the basic statutes
Each stage is vulnerable to change from one or more of the following variables : 
PTractability , or the degree of difficulty encountered in the problem ’ s management and control
Saccessibility of the technology required
Sdiversity of the proscribed behavior
Ssize and composition of the target group whose behavior is to change
Scomplexity of the behavioral change expected
PStructure , or to what extent the implementing agency can structure or organize the process of policy
implementation
Sclear objectives required
Scausal links between the government interventions and the attainment of program objectives must be
understood
Sofficial responsibility for implementing the policy or program must have jurisdiction over a sufficient
number of critical linkages so the objective can be obtained
PNonstatutory Variables , or environmental factors : 
Ssocioeconomic conditions
Spublic support
Sattitudes
Sresources of constituency groups
Scommitment and leadership skill of the implementing officials
PIndependent Variables , or 
Sthe organization or agency charged with carrying out the policy mandate ; administrative agencies
frequently use the regulatory process to include program elements they are unable to put into legislation
Scompetency of the personnel involved
Spressure from rival agencies
Spublic ’ s acceptance
PFlawed basic design . 
Factors related to successful implementation : control is at the heart of success
PThe program is based on sound theory relating changes in target group behavior to achievement of the
desired end-state ( i . e .  , objectives ) 
PThe statue or basic policy decision contains unambiguous policy directives and structures the implementation
process so as to maximize the likelihood that target groups will perform as desired
PThe key players in implementing agencies use adequate managerial and political skills , while being dedicated
to statutory ends
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 333 Interventions
POrganized constituency groups and elected or appointed officials maintain active support throughout the
implementation process
PThe ranking of statutory objectives remains stable over time , so as to manage conflict in the environment that
could undermine the statute . 
Text = 69%
Farrunt , W .  ,  & Evers , A .  ( 1990 )  . Healthy public policy at the local level . Boulder , CO : Westview
Press . 
Chapter 1 : Developing Healthy Public Policy at the Local Level ( written by Trevor Hancock ) 
Principles of Healthy Public Policy : 
1 . A long-term view 
2 . Political commitment
3 . Intersectoral processes and structures : A way for many sectors in the community to work together
4 . Public support
5 . Community-driven process
6 . Multifaceted strategies 
7 . The initiator and activist must be credible and have expertise
8 . Win / win solutions
9 . New organizational culture to maintain it
10 .  “ Health may be a useful metaphor for addressing issues such as social injustice and environmental
deterioration ”  ( p . 9 )  .  
 “ One of the major problems we can anticipate in developing health policy at the local level is lack of congruence
between national and local policy concern ; this will be particularly keenly exacerbated when there is a party
political difference between the local administration and the regional or national administration ”  ( p . 10 )  . 
Text = 46 . 5%
Longest , B .  ( 1998 )  . Health policy making in the United States ( 2nd ed .  )  . Chicago : Health
Administration Press . 
Chpt 1 : Health and Health Policy–Definitions and Background
Longest suggests that at all levels of health policy , the values held by the majority culture will be reflected . For the
U . S .  , at least at the turn of the century , those values include : 
Pindividual autonomy 
Pself-determination
Ppersonal privacy
Pcommitment to justice for all members of society ( Longest notes this is widely held , but not universal ) 
Pfaith in the potential of technological ; rescue
Plong-standing desire to prolong life , regardless of cost ( Longest notes there are signs this may be changing )  
( pp . 1-30 )  . 
Public policy =  “ authoritative decisions that are made in the legislative , executive , or judicial branches of
government , intended to direct or influence the actions , behaviors , or decisions of others ”  ; authoritative =  
 “ decisions made within the three branches of government ( at any level ) that are within the legitimate purview of
those who make the decisions ” 
Health policy = when public policies pertain to health or influence the pursuit of health ; they generally affect or
influence groups or classes of individuals or types or categories of services
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 334 Interventions
Private-sector health policy = authoritative decisions made by private health companies ( i . e .  , product lines , 
pricing decisions , etc .  , made by managed care organizations ) and their trade organizations ( i . e .  , JCAHO or
National Committee for Quality Assurance )  . 
Longest acknowledges that private and public health policy decisions impact upon each other , but notes that this
book focuses only on the public side . 
Forms of health policies : 
Laws : this is true regardless of the level of government at which they are made
Rules / Regulations : these are established to guide the implementation of laws and have the force of law
Operational Decisions : protocols and procedures made at the level of the governmental agency charged
with implementing the rules / regulations which spell out how they will be implemented
Judicial Decisions : decisions made by the courts regarding whether an authoritative decision is in keeping
with the intent of the rule or law to which it is related ; the courts can overrule authoritative decisions made by
the other branches of government ; they affect policies even though they do not make them
Macro Policies : policies made at the very top levels of government that have an impact on all other levels , 
e . g .  , whether to have national health service
Categories of Health Policies ( Note : These reflect areas where the government intercedes because the market
economy , left on its own , has “ failed to achieve desired public objectives ”  )  : 
P Policies : those designed to provide net benefits to some distinct group or class of individuals or
organizations at the expense of others to ensure that public objectives are met 
( e . g .  , government subsidies provided to rural hospitals , medical schools , etc .  ) 
PRegulatory Policies : directive approaches government takes to ensure that public objectives are met
SMarket-entry Restrictions : licensure , certificate-of-need programs
SPrice Regulation : establishment of reimbursement rates
SQuality Controls : FDA
SMarket-Preserving Regulations : rules of conduct established for market participants such as anti-trust
laws
SSocial Regulation : rules to ensure socially desirable outcomes such as OSHA , blood-borne pathogen
regulations , etc . 
Assumption about the relationship between health policy and health :  “ Policies .  .  . impact on health through an
intervention variable , health determinants . Health determinants , in turn , directly impact on health ”  ( p . 12 )  . 
PHealth policies and the environment : designed to guard against poor health outcomes associated with
physical , chemical , and biologic exposures and also with factors related to poor health in socio-cultural and
economic environments
PHealth policies and human behavior and genetics : designed to intervene with lifestyle choices and genetic
pre-determinations that promote ill-health ; minimum government intervention here due to conflict with societal
values toward personal autonomy
PHealth policies and health services : policies that affect availability and access to services
SMoney : projected expenditures for health in 2000 is 52 percent from private , 36 percent from federal , 
12 percent from state and local ; the trend is for decreasing private share and dramatically increasing
federal shares
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 335 Interventions
SWorkforce : in 1998 , 11 percent of nonagricultural workers in the U . S . were in health-related fields ; the
trend shows health care workers as the fastest growing component with the federal government
controlling the supply through subsidies for education and training
STechnology : availability tends to drive demand , which results in greater expenditures
SHealthcare System : government promotes systems changes through financial manipulations , such as the
Hill-Burton Act , which expanded rural hospitals , and institution of employer-paid health insurance postWWII ; there have been three phases of change in the system : 
Phase I : 1960s and before , with multiple independent , fragmented service providers
Phase II : 1970s to current , with dramatic vertical and horizontal integration reducing fragmentation
Phase III : the future , with fully integrated systems , but fewer of them ; this will mostly be driven by the
dominance of managed care
Because of the “ powerful link ” between health policy and health outcomes , Longest argues that “ politically
competent people [ who ] know how to participate efficiently in the actual drafting of legislative proposals or in
providing testimony at the hearing in which legislation is developed ” are critical . 
Chapter 2 : The Context and Process of Public Policymaking ( Summary , pp . 60-61 ) 
The process is highly complex , interactive , and cyclical , incorporating the following phases : 
formulation , implementation , and modification . It is a process among human beings and , as such , is subject to the
use of power and influence between the demanders of health policy ( i . e .  , health and consumer organizations and
interest groups ) and its suppliers ( i . e .  , elected and appointed members of government , plus the civil servants who
staff them )  . The process is not only cyclical , but redundant , resulting in no real beginning or end to the process . 
Chapter 3 : Policy Formulation : Agenda Setting ( Summary , pp . 90-92 ) 
Agenda setting is the “ confluence of problems , possible solutions to the problems , and political circumstances that
permit certain problem / possible solution combinations to progress along to the point of legislation development .  ” 
Chapter 4 : Policy Formulation : Development of Legislation ( Summary , pp . 120-121 ) 
The process through which the “ solution possibilities ” constructed through agenda setting are converted into law
by following a prescribed legislative protocol . 
Chapter 5 : Policy Implementation ( Summary , pp . 166-167 ) 
Rule making is the process through which the enacted laws are given the steps necessary to guide their
implementation ; where authorized to do so , the administering agency may also promulgate regulation . The actual
management of the operational activities associated with implementation usually is the “ domain of the appointees
and civil servants who staff the executive branch of government .  ” Operational success is dependent on the clarity
of the policy itself , the characteristics and attributes of the agencies charged with implementation responsibilities , 
and the capabilities of the senior-level managers of these agencies . 
Chapter 6 : Policy Making Outcomes and Consequences ( Summary , pp . 203-204 ) 
Those affected by the policies , whether positively or negatively , share two concerns : anticipating the impact and
influencing the formulation and implementation stages of policy development . These groups and organizations
may pool their resources to effect greater power and focus on the development process . 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 336 Interventions
Chapter 7 : Policy Modification ( Summary , pp . 239-240 ) 
This involves feeding back policy consequences and related actions into the policy formulation process . Most
U . S . health policies result from the modification of prior policies . There are continuing opportunities to stimulate
modifications at all levels . It is this built-in flexibility to respond to changes over time that allows the process to
function . 
Chapter 8 : The Future of American Health Policy
Determinants of health are defined as “ physical , sociocultural , and economic environments in which people live ; 
their behaviors and genetics ; and the type , quality , and timing of he heath service their receive ”  ( p . 244 )  . Public
health policy can affect all of these and , therefore , is a powerful contributor to the overall health status of
Americans . The areas of critical influence on future health policy include : 
PObjectives of Health Policy : Longest says in the long run the objectives will most impact future policy , but at
this point they “ exist for numerous and divers specific health policies , but not of the overall set of policies ”  ( p . 
247 )  . To get to that point “ will require extraordinarily broad thinking .  .  . made even more difficult in regard to
health policy by the splintering effect of the diversity of individuals , organizations , and interest groups who
seek to influence policymakers ’ thinking and actions ”  ( p . 248 )  . He predicts that truly successful broad health
policy must impact on all determinants of health , not just health services . 
PThe Political Marketplace : uncertainty will continue to add “ fluidity ” to the policy-making process
PLimitations of Public Policy in a Market Economy : the inability of health policy to produce desired outcomes
will increasingly give way to the power of markets as a means toward this end
PGrowing Role and Importance of Health Policymaking at the State Level : states ’ traditional roles– 1 ) 
financing or paying for health services for several categories of people , 2 ) ensuring the public ’ s health , 3 ) 
regulating health-related professionals and organizations , plus 4 ) experimenting with comprehensive health
reform strategies–will continue . 
PLooming Economic Limits of the Pursuit of Health : at some point we will reach the limit of what we as a
society are willing to pay for health , and hard decisions will have to be made ; how these decisions will be
made will depend on which of the four mindsets prevails at the time : 
STrue Romantics , the group who choose to ignore the concept of economic limits
SPseudo Romantics , the group who understands economic limits , but choose to think that someone else
in the future will figure out the details
STruly Self-Serving , those so intent on ensuring their own interests are served that other issues become
secondary
SProcrastinators , those who understand economic limits and choose to act , but not now , usually due to
potential for political repercussions
Challenges : 
1 . Current policies do not provide for long-term funding of existing health programs . 
2 . The emergence of new , threatening contagious diseases and the return of older , now drug-resistant
diseases . 
3 . The growing burden of chronic diseases , especially as populations age . 
Text = 41 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 337 Interventions
Kickbusch , I .  , Draper , R .  ,  & O ’ Neill , M .  ( 1990 )  . Healthy public policy : A strategy to implement the
health for all philosophy at various governmental levels . In A . Evers , W . Farrunt ,  & A . Tigan ( Eds .  )  , 
Healthy public policy at the local level .  ( pp . 1-6 )  . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . 
These authors propose that to impact significantly on health , governments must move away from “ the excessive
emphasis on curative medicine and behavioral approaches to disease prevention that have characterized health
policy development in the industrialized world since the 1950s ”  ( p . 1 )  . They acknowledge this is “ not a new idea
but an old one reborn ,  ” and they credit Nancy Milio ’ s seminal book , Promoting Health Through Public
Policy , and Trevor Hancock ’ s essays on “ beyond health care ”  ( both , early 1980s ) as “ central to this process ”  
( p . 3 )  . 
They propose , instead , that governments focus on creating environments in which people can be healthy by
continuing in the spirit of the “ Health for All ” movement established by the World Health Assembly in 1977 , the
strategies stemming from the Declaration of Alma Ata the following year , and , the convening of the First
International Conference on Health Promotion in November 1986 , which resulted in the Ottawa Charter for
Health Promotion . This conference was co-sponsored by the WHO , The Canadian Ministry for Health and
Welfare , and the CPHA . The Ottawa Charter identifies five overlapping and interactive means of action : building
healthy public policy , creating supportive environments , strengthening community action , developing personal
skills , and reorienting health services . A second international conference was held in Adelaide , Australia in 1988
which focused specifically on the practical implications of building healthy public policy . Case studies were
presented focusing on a set of policy priorities : 1 ) women ’ s health , 2 ) food and nutrition , 3 ) tobacco and alcohol , 
and 4 ) creation of biologically , chemically , and physically supportive environments ”  ( p . 2 )  . The place to start
these policy changes , according to the authors , is at the local level since “ politicians at this level are more closely
in touch with their electors and respond more clearly to their concerns ”  ( p . 4 )  . 
The following challenges are foreseen in formulating such policy : 
1 . Politicians and the public must engage in a dialogue that will redefine health expectations in terms of
environmental change and not in terms of better and more technological medical care . 
2 . Public service managers will have to learn the skill of lateral management and recognize achievements
in terms of cooperative action rather than the expression of hierarchical control and power . 
3 . Compartmentalized approaches to work and reliance on experts only should not be acceptable any
more in the field of healthy public policy . 
4 . Public health authorities will have to relearn the skills of advocacy , mediating and negotiating that were
the very substance of public health when it began during the 19th century . 
5 .  [ The academic community ] must move away from its narrow focus on health care and go into the
complexities of analyzing the impacts of health for political decision-making in other sectors .  .  .  . For this a
much broader and more interdisciplinary approach to work is needed .  .  .  ( p . 4 )  . 
Text = 37 . 5%
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 338 Interventions
This page has been intentionally left blank . 
Public Health 
Interventions
Applications for Public 
Health Nursing Practice
Appendix
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
March 2001
For Further Information please contact : 
Linda Olson Keller at : linda . keller @ health . state . mn . us or
Sue Strohschein at : sue . strohschein @ health . state . mn . us
Development of this document was supported by federal grant 6 D10 HP 30392 , Division 
of Nursing , Bureau of Health Professions , Health Resources and Service Administration , 
United States Department of Health and Human Services . 
Minnesota Department of Health
Division of Community Health Services
Public Health Nursing Section
339 
CORNERSTONES OF PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING
PUBLIC HEALTH NURSING IS THE SYNTHESIS OF THE ART AND SCIENCE OF : 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND NURSING
Population-Based Relationship-Based
Grounded in Social Justice Grounded in an Ethic of Caring
Relies on the Science of Epidemiology Holistic
Focus on Health Promotion and Prevention Sensitivity to Diversity
Long-term Commitment to the Community Independent Practice
Public health nursing practice is population based , that is , based on a process that determines the health status of the community , identifies populations at risk , and
determines the priority health problems of the community ; and plans , implements , and evaluates public health strategies accordingly at community , systems , or
family / individual levels . The selection of these strategies are based in the science of epidemiology . 
Public health nurses ’ commitment to the communities , families , and individuals they serve emanates from a combination of the passion underlying their social
justice beliefs that all persons , regardless of circumstances , are entitled equally to a basic quality of life , their ethic of caring and compassion , and their sensitivity to and
respect for the worth of all people , especially those persons who are vulnerable . 
Public health nursing practice is relationship-based , that is , all public health nursing interventions are provided in the context of a relationship . The relationships
that public health nurses establish with the communities , families , individuals , and systems they serve are grounded in personal integrity , honesty , consistency , 
and trustworthiness . 
Public health nursing is committed long term to promoting and maintaining health and preventing illness , injury , and disability . The interventions that public health nurses
utilize for health promotion and prevention encompass a holistic approach that includes the inter-relationship of mind , body , spirit as well as the dynamic relationships between
people and their physical and social environments . 
Public health nurses use their extensive knowledge of the community to organize community resources to collaboratively meet the health needs of community , families , 
and individuals . As do all public health professionals , public health nurses can and will work alone if others are unable or choose not to work on an issue . Most
public health nursing interventions are independent nursing functions as outlined in the Nurse Practice Act . 
Minnesota Department of Health , Section of Public Health Nursing , June 1999
Appendix A
Appendix B 
Public Health Interventions
March 2001 
Minnesota Department of Health 
Division of Community Health Services 
Public Health Nursing Section 
340 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 341 Interventions
Literature Search and Analysis of Evidence 
in Support of Public Health Interventions
Public Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century
The original interventions set was developed from the practice experience of over 200 PHNs practicing
in Minnesota in 1994 . 1 
It was based entirely on the wisdom gained through the practice experiences of
those involved . At the time , resources for a thorough search of supporting public health nursing
literature were not available . The Minnesota Department of Health ’ s 1998-2001 HRSA grant ,  “ Public
Health Nursing Practice for the 21st Century ,  ” allowed this work to go forward , resulting in the
development of basic steps and best practices for the 17 population-based public health nursing
interventions identified in the Public Health Interventions ( PHI ) Model . To accomplish this , a rigorous
search of literature relevant to the interventions was conducted , and then analyzed by an expert panel of
public health nursing practitioners and educators . Using a consensus process , they crafted a set of
recommendations for basic steps for implementing each intervention , as well as how to implement them
with excellence . The entire search and consensus process was carried out in a series of phases . 
Phase One : Establishing the knowledge baseline
To estimate the knowledge base regarding the interventions , the 51 accredited baccalaureate nursing
preparatory programs in the five states participating in the grant ( Iowa , Minnesota , North Dakota , 
South Dakota , and Wisconsin ) were sent a letter inquiring about the texts used in their community
health / public health nursing curriculum . This was based on the assumption that the majority of PHNs
currently employed in local public health agencies in the five states most likely would not have traveled
beyond the five state region to receive their basic education . Seventeen programs ( 33 percent ) 
returned the survey . The texts most frequently reported were ( in descending order )  : 
•Stanhope and Lancaster ( 1996 ) Community Health Nursing : Promoting the Health of Aggregates , 
Families and Communities
•Swanson and Nies ( 1997 ) Community Health Nursing : Promoting the Health of Aggregates
•Clemen-Stone , McGuire , Eigsti ( 1998 ) Comprehensive Community Health Nursing : Family , Aggregate and
Community Practice
•Spradley and Allender ( 1996 ) Community Health Nursing : Concepts and Practice
•Smith and Mauer ( 1995 ) Community Health Nursing : Theory and Practice
•Stolte ( 1998 ) Wellness : Nursing Diagnosis for Health Promotion
These texts were reviewed for their content regarding any of the 17 interventions . In addition , any
materials referenced in their development were obtained . 
Phase Two : Design and Implementation of a search strategy 
Minnesota Department of Health library staff collaborated in development of the search strategy
development and implementation . Two approaches were used : 
A . Each of the interventions was separately searched as a key term independently and again in
combination with “ public health nursing ,  ”  “ nursing ,  ” and “ public health ” in the following data
bases : CINAHL , Medline , HealthStar , Dissertation Abstracts , PsychINFO , and Sociofile . An
initial yield of approximately 900 titles resulted . 
B . A retrospective 10-year-review of the following journals was completed searching under
the same strategy : American Journal of Public Health , Public Health Nursing , Nursing
Outlook , and Journal of Community Health Nursing . 
Appendix C
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 342 Interventions
The results of the journal retrospective review and the search by interventions were compared for
frequency of similar items . Those , in turn , were compared with the references associated with the
public health nursing texts . The resulting 665 articles , papers , dissertations , conference proceedings , 
etc .  , provided the core of the initial set of readings to be reviewed . 
Phase Three : Review of the identified literature for rigor and acceptability
Students enrolled in graduate nursing programs in the five participating states2 
were recruited to review
the literature for methodologic quality . Each reviewer was required to have successfully completed the
research course requirements for their respective graduate programs . A tool for assessing
methodologic quality3 
was distributed and inter-rater reliability achieved using audio-conferencing . 
From October , 1998 through April , 1999 the students reviewed 665 articles , monographs , 
dissertations , proceedings , textbook chapters , books , etc . Those with a quality rating of 70 percent or
better constituted the pool of materials considered for their application to public health practice . The
distribution was : 
Surveillance : 13 Health Teaching : 15 Advocacy : 16
Disease Investigation : 1 Provider Education : 12 Social Marketing : 18
Outreach / Case-Finding : 11Counseling : 7 Policy Development : 22
Screening : 12 Consultation : 5
Referral and Follow-up : 11 Collaboration : 21
Case Management : 13 Coalition Building : 12
Delegated Functions * Community Organizing : 12
Phase Four : Review for practice application
These 201 articles were next reviewed by public health nursing practice experts and educators for their
potential to advance practice . 
A . Review criteria were established by the grant ’ s advisory committee . 
B . A review tool incorporating the criteria4 
was developed and field tested by an expert 
practitioner and educator not involved in the project . 
C . The grant ’ s advisory committee generated an initial list of practice experts and educators to
serve on the expert panel ; this list was supplemented with names submitted by PHN consultants
employed by the state health departments of the participating states . The number recruited from
each state was proportional to the number of nurses practicing in public health in that state . A
panel of 42 was eventually recruited . 5 
Orientation and inter-rater reliability was achieved using
audio-conferencing with groups of five . From April through May , 1999 each piece of material
was read and rated for practice application by two panelists ; where panelists ’ rating were in
wide disagreement , the item was read by a third expert . Each expert read and rated
approximately 30 items . The results were entered into a data base .  
* The material on delegation as it pertains to nursing was developed mainly from related material available at the
National Council of State Boards of Nursing website and other material referenced there . 
Phase Five : Consensus development
Recommendations for implementing each intervention with excellence , based on the findings in the
literature , were developed through a consensus process adapted from that used by the federal Council
on Health Care Technology and work by Saint and Lawson . 6
A . A two-day meeting was held in Minneapolis in June , 1999 . On day one , panel members
met with their fellow intervention group readers to discuss and debate the merits of the materials
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 343 Interventions
read . The meeting was facilitated by a non-panelist with preparation in consensus
development . For each piece of material , the panelists who read that piece presented their
rating and rationale and led brief discussion regarding its application to practice . At the end of
the day , each group generated an intervention definition and a list of practice recommendations . 
On day two , all panelists met together . Each intervention group presented their
recommendations and lead discussion . At the end of each presentation , the whole group
indicated the extent of their agreement through a voting process . 7
B . The results of the consensus were incorporated into the intervention definitions and
recommendations . In July , 1999 the revised set was distributed to the panelists for their review , 
comment , and second consensus vote , using a mailed survey process . 
Phase Six : Testing
The results of the second consensus vote were considered in developing the first draft of “ Public Health
Interventions : Applications for Public Health Nursing Practice .  ” After each round of testing , 
suggestions and comments were incorporated into successive drafts . However , the organization of the
interventions ’ content remained the same : definition with examples from each practice level ( i . e .  , 
community , systems , individual / family )  ; basic steps to implement the intervention ;  “ best practices ” to
consider in implementing each intervention with excellence ; abstracts of the evidence from which the
best practices were drawn ; and “ Abby Notes ” with additional information and insights drawn from both
the literature and practice . 
A . Round One : Participants and preceptors field testing the population-based public health 
nursing continuing education curriculum from October , 1999 through May , 2000 provided
comment regarding the utility of the draft . 
B . Round Two : Those comments were incorporated into development of the second draft of 
interventions document which was distributed as part of the 9th Annual Public Health Nursing
Practice Workshop ,  “ Getting Behind the Wheel ,  ” held in St . Paul , June 8-9 , 2000 , and
sponsored by the Minnesota Department of Health / Section of Public Health Nursing . This
same draft was offered to the original panel of experts for their review and comment in JulyAugust , 2000 ; approximately half of the original group responded . 
C . Round Three : A second panel of expert reviewers were recruited , this time from a national
pool , to critique the second draft . 14 public health nursing practice experts and 14 educators
participated . 
Results from both Round Three testing and comments from the original set of expert panelists were
considered in preparation of the final document ,  “ Public Health Interventions : Applications for Public
Health Nursing Practice .  ” 
Section of Public Health Nursing Public Health 
Minnesota Department of Health 344 Interventions
1 . A structured exercise during a workshop repeated around the state by the MDH / Section of Public Health Nursing in 1994 was
used to collect the data . It was later analyzed by an expert panel consisting of public health nursing consultants employed by
the Minnesota Department of Health .  [ Note : For further discussion , see Keller , Strohschein , Lia-Hoagberg ,  & Schaffer .  ( 1998 , 
June )  . Population-based Public Health Nursing Interventions : A Model from Practice , Public Health Nursing , 15 ( 3 )  , 207-215 .  ] 
2 . Members of the grant ’ s advisory committee served as liaison between the grant staff and the graduate programs . The students
who participated in this phase were : Mary Jo Chippendale , University of Minnesota ; Jennifer Deschaine , Bethel College ( St . 
Paul )  ; Kathy Lammers , Minnesota State University at Winona ; Deborah Meade , Augsburg College ( Minneapolis )  ; Jackie Meyer , 
University of Iowa ; Dolores Severtson , University of Wisconsin-Madison ; Victoria Von Sadovszky , University of WisconsinMadison . 
3 . Tools for Analyzing Evidence in Support of Public Health Nursing Practice , 3rd Ed .  ( 1999 , February )  . Minnesota Department
of Health / Division of Community Health Services .  [ Note : This set of analysis tools and the processes for their use was
patterned after that utilized by the federal Agency for Health Care Policy and Research in their development of practice
guidelines .  ] 
4 . For additional information regarding the tool , contact Sue Strohschein at 320 /  / 650-1078 . 
5 . The panel members are listed in the Acknowledgments . 
6 . Committee of the Institute of Medicine ’ s Council on Health Care Technology .  ( 1990 )  . Consensus Development at the NIH : 
Improving the Program . Washington , DC : National Academy Press ; Saint , S .  ,  & Lawson , J . R .  ( 1994 )  . Rules for Reaching
Consensus : A Modern Approach to Decision Making . San Diego : Pfeiffer and Co . 
7 . The group was asked to indicate their preference for the following categories of agreement : agree without qualification ; agree
but with qualification ; have reservations but can live with it ; and can ’ t live with it–needs changing . Reservations , suggestions , 
comments , etc . were recorded . 