Don’t Call Me Crazy! — The Reality of Name Calling in Mental Health

On the other side of things, name calling in a more general sense can actually lead to mental health issues for people. People may develop depression or suicidal thoughts as a result of the name calling that they have been vulnerable to. Further name calling about the mental health issues can then increase the severity of this situation and the circle is endless.
What is shaming in regards to mental health?
Name calling has long been recognized as one of the cruellest and most damaging forms of bullying that exists. Attempting to define people and put everyone into categories is at the core of this reason. When you hear yourself being described by physical, or in this case, mental attributes, your own perception of yourself can change and this can have a negative effect on both confidence and personality.
The old age saying, ‘sticks and stones may break my bones but words will never hurt me’ does not at all ring true. Words can have a very serious impact on us. Often people will internalize the names that they have heard others calling them, which can lead to deeper issues and have significant psychological effects.
How name calling can lead to mental health issues
Being called fat can have a very severe impact on a person’s body image and even if this person loses weight, they may still view themselves as the larger person that they were once defined as. This can cause a number of body disorders from body dysmorphia to anorexia nervosa or bulimia. Working through these illnesses can be a lifetime struggle for people. It is important to use words carefully and to change the way language is utilized in order to help people rather than to tear them down.
How language surrounding mental health makes issues worse
Name calling is never positive. Calling a girlfriend psycho to, referring to someone as schizo or even saying that a person is making you depressed is not ok. It can trivialize mental health and cause true sufferers to feel shame associated with these names.
In more recent years, this has been taken a step further. Hurling insults, which are in fact diagnosis, at people who are not genuine sufferers of such illnesses, has become more commonplace. Casually deciding someone has OCD because they are tidy or calling someone a psychopath because of the excessive emotions that they display often has a negative impact on people who may genuinely find themselves concerned about their own mental health. This is not helping with the stigma that is associated with mental health.
According to the mental health of young people in Australia: key findings from the child and adolescent component of the national survey of mental health and well-being show that most people do not seek help. This can be attributed, at least partly, to the stigma that is associated with it. Especially when you consider that mental illnesses among children and adolescents are common, affecting about 10% of young people, according to The British Child and Adolescent Mental Health Survey in 1999. This shows that name calling and stigma that is associated with mental health is a barrier for people seeking help. Looking at the large percentage of people that are suffering, this needs to change.
How can we improve the way we use language?
We can be more careful with how we speak about people as well as to people. By educating ourselves and others in what mental health really is and how it affects people who are close to us, we can develop empathy and therefore help those who are in difficult situations rather than simply calling them names because we do not understand. It is vital for everyone to understand that being mentally ill is the same as being physically ill. It is important to spread awareness so that it becomes commonplace for people to seek help. By changing the way we use language and the kindness we show to people, we may even be able to save lives.

Feels like you can add to the list? Go ahead and let us know in comments!