Rapid diagnosis of Buruli ulcer now possible at district-level health facilities
Latest development marks important step towards early treatment of this debilitating disease
30 September 2015 Departmental news Geneva Reading time : 2 min ( 501 words ) 

The World Health Organization , in collaboration with the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics , has started a thorough evaluation of an innovative diagnostic test developed by researchers at Harvard University that can lead to rapid confirmation of Buruli ulcer in a patient . 
Initial results from recent field trials in Benin and Ghana show that the test can detect mycolactone , a toxin produced by the bacteria that causes tissue damage and leads to Buruli ulcer . The most important aspect of this new test – which is more sensitive than microscopy – is that it can be carried out by technicians with minimal training in district hospital laboratories . 

The results are read within an hour .  
 
 “ This is a game-changer ” said Dr Kingsley Asiedu , Medical Officer at WHO ’ s Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases .  “ Diagnosed in its early stages , Buruli ulcer can be completely cured through treatment by a combination of antibiotics .  ” 

The challenge to overcoming Buruli ulcer is early detection and diagnosis , prompting WHO to advocate the development of a rapid point-of-care diagnostic test over the past decade . In 2010 , the researchers made a breakthrough by using boronate-assisted fluorescent thin-layer chromatography to selectively detect mycolactone when visualized with ultraviolet light . Further improvements have since optimized the method and the reading of results . 
Clinical diagnosis of Buruli ulcer currently relies on well-trained , experienced health workers . Polymerase chain reaction – the most widely used diagnostic test because of its high sensitivity – can be done only in reference laboratories , remote from affected communities ; results are available in a few weeks . 

The disease
Buruli ulcer is a chronic debilitating infection of the skin and soft tissue caused by a bacterium , Mycobacterium ulcerans . The infection begins as a painless nodule , plaque or oedema and develops into an ulcer , destroying the skin and soft tissue and causing large ulcers usually on the legs or arms . Patients presenting at health facilities with advanced ulcerative stages pose a major problem ; treatment is complex , involving surgery and skin grafting , and frequently results in long-term disability . 

Given the late detection of cases , many patients were referred to hospitals by community health workers at district level ; lengthy travel and costly hospitalization were major constraints . 

Buruli ulcer has been reported in 33 countries in Africa , the Americas , Asia and the Western Pacific . Some countries in West and Central Africa – Benin , Cameroon , Côte d ’ Ivoire , Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ghana – report the majority of cases . Australia and Japan are major endemic countries outside Africa . 

Since there is no knowledge of how Buruli ulcer is transmitted , preventive measures cannot be applied . Health education and active surveillance remain the cornerstone for control of the disease . 

Progress
Ten years ago , treatment relied almost exclusively on surgery that involved extensive excision , skin grafting and , in some patients , amputation of limbs . Significant progress has been made over the past decade and treatment is straightforward if the disease is detected early . Advances in the development of rapid point-of-care diagnostics have enhanced prospects for management of the disease . 