Skin NTDs : prioritizing integrated approaches to reduce suffering , psychosocial impact and stigmatization
29 October 2020 Departmental news Geneva Reading time : 5 min ( 1249 words ) 
The World Health Organization ( WHO ) advocates an integrated approach to control neglected tropical diseases of the skin ( the so‐called skin NTDs1 ) and enhance early detection , timely treatment , morbidity management and disability prevention . 

Skin NTDs prevail in settings characterized by fragile health systems and can lead to psychosocial problems , stigmatization , exclusion and distress . 

The WHO webinar on 21 October on tackling skin NTDs to reach the 2030 road map targets addressed this long-neglected aspect of NTDs , with unanimous calls for decisive action . 

Panel one : Addressing gaps
Roderick Hay , Advisor , International Foundation for Dermatology , UK said that almost 1 billion people have skin conditions caused mainly by six or seven common skin diseases . Skin NTDs present visible skin alterations , and because many of them occur in the same settings and have similar manifestations , joint approaches and resources can be used to detect and resolve the problems they create . Integration also benefits the partners that support work to control and prevent these diseases . 

Giorgio Cometto , Unit head , WHO Department of Human Resources for Health , noted the role and importance of community health workers in delivering primary health care interventions , as demonstrated in campaigns against HIV / AIDS and tuberculosis . He referred to a study that assessed the role of health workers in enhancing community care and supporting many interventions against NTDs . 

Victoria Williams , Assistant Professor , University of Pennsylvania , USA explained how technology can be used to detect and diagnose skin NTDs at an early stage . Today , education in visual health can be delivered through various devices including smart phones that can be used online and offline even in rural settings . She also mentioned use of the WHO application on skin NTDs and of artificial intelligence as clinical support tools and the potential of tele-dermatology . 

Pauline Kleinitz , Technical Advisor , WHO Disability and Rehabilitation unit , commented on WHO ’ s plan to develop a disability strategy that would include skin NTDs to promote equality in access to health services . She emphasized the importance of rehabilitation , care and case management in primary and secondary health levels , particularly for NTDs that result in chronic health conditions . 

Panel two : role of partnership and research
Claire Fuller , Chair , International Foundation for Dermatology , UK recalled that the new road map puts people at the centre of health delivery through inclusive , cross-cutting , integrated interventions . She said that inclusion is critical to tackling skin NTDs through dermatological care and acknowledged the support of a relatively new organization , GLODERM , in helping to advance NTD dermatology . 

Isra Cruz , Head , National School of Public Health , Instituto de Salud Carlos III , Spain spoke of integrated approaches and the need for appropriate tools to diagnose diseases , particularly skin NTDs , and the creation of WHO ’ s Diagnostics Technical Advisory Group , which has a dedicated sub-group working on skin NTDs . He referred to innovative ways to tackle many skin NTDs , including yaws and Buruli ulcer , and of public–private partnerships to develop tools for diseases such as mycetoma . 

Christian Johnson , Medical Advisor , Raoul Follereau Foundation , France said that integrating programmes represents a unique opportunity to reinforce and improve the efficiency of current interventions . Country ownership of programmes can generate investment in training and capacity strengthening – factors that have the potential to boost the morale of the health workers . 

Sahar Bakhiet , Head , Research Unit , Mycetoma Research Centre , Khartoum , Sudan explained how a holistic approach has enabled the Centre to diversify its operations , bringing services closer to people in villages who are affected by mycetoma and enabling early case detection and access to timely treatment in many cases . She also spoke of software training for various categories of health workers , which has facilitated exchange of precious data . 

Chandrakant Revankar , Public Health Consultant , USA described a WHO strategic framework document he is developing to help guide work on integrated control of skin NTDs and the immense response to an initial survey ( more than 250 respondents from 58 countries have contributed ideas )  . Integration is already happening in many countries , but more work may need to be done in areas such as social mobilization and tackling of stigmatization . 

Panel three : integrate to maximize country level impact
Yves Barogui , Chief Medical Officer , Buruli Ulcer Treatment Centre , Benin explained that interventions against skin NTDs including Buruli ulcer , leprosy , cutaneous leishmaniasis , lymphatic filariasis and yaws have been implemented in Benin and Côte d ’ Ivoire since 2015 . Integration has resulted in the examination of more than 16 000 people . One out of every 10 cases showed manifestation from an NTD , whereas most dermal cases examined were not NTDs . Among the commonest skin NTD manifestations were scabies , followed by Buruli ulcer and leprosy . He also highlighted challenges of implementing an integrated approach to skin NTDs . 

Julian Trujillo , Coordinator , Ministry of Health and Social Protection , Colombia spoke of control activities in Colombia , the problems faced in other countries and the challenges and gaps in overcoming them , including access to remote communities that mostly suffer from NTDs . He also referred to challenges posed by scarce resources , lack of capacity and deficiency of tools and diagnostics . 

Mourad Mokni , Head , Dermatology Department , La Rabta Hospital , Tunisia reported that a survey in WHO ’ s Eastern Mediterranean Region that included eight skin NTDs clearly showed cutaneous leishmaniasis with the highest burden . Other skin diseases that are prevalent in the region include fungal diseases and scabies . The survey also revealed that the challenges facing integration of skin NTDs are weak surveillance , cost of medicine and stigmatization associated with NTDs . 

Prima Yosephine , National Programme Manager for Leprosy and Yaws , Ministry of Health , Indonesia described the challenges that Indonesia faces in dealing with NTDs . Recently , leprosy and yaws elimination activities have been integrated to include active case-finding and school case-screening . She also referred to ongoing collaboration between various ministries and directorates of health services in tackling skin and other NTDs . 

Aya Yajima , Technical Officer , WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific , described how Vanuatu ’ s success against NTDs has resulted in elimination “ fatigue ” in populations subjected to large-scale treatment programmes . Indonesia is now integrating screening of NTDs with noncommunicable diseases . Although this innovative approach has been welcomed by the population , it has meant re-training staff and producing additional materials . Overall , however , it stands as a model intervention . 

Closing remarks
Oriol Mitja , Associate Professor , Hospital German Trias I Pujol , Barcelona , Spain spoke of the importance of integration in the delivery of interventions , which can also be very cost–effective and timely . He spoke of his experience in dealing with multiple diseases in Papua New Guinea and the important role of village health workers . He lauded the efforts of many of those present at the webinar , which have led to integrated approaches to skin NTDs since 2017 . Although it started slowly , he noted that some countries are adopting the approach and are allocating resources to tackle these skin NTDs . 

Mwelecele Ntuli Malecela , Director , WHO Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases , emphasized the importance of holistic , integrated approaches in tackling the physical , mental suffering and distress caused by skin NTDs and of integration in almost all its aspects including diagnostics , technology and capacity strengthening . She spoke of the importance also of working with sectors beyond health such as water , sanitation and hygiene and education . Most important of all is country ownership . She said skin NTDs are now an integral part of the new road map and that the shifts envisaged therein speak of everyone ’ s collaboration – from the ground level to national programmes . 