Volunteers and health-care workers pivotal to early case detection of Buruli ulcer ( Mycobacterium ulcerans infection ) 
25 March 2011 Departmental news Geneva Reading time : 2 min ( 573 words ) 

The World Health Organization ( WHO ) says support from village volunteers and primary or front-line health-care workers is crucial to early case detection and control of Buruli ulcer ( Mycobacterium ulcerans infection )  , a neglected tropical disease . Local support contributes to motivating community involvement in control activities and strengthening public health programmes . Timely detection of patients greatly improves their chances of a full recovery from the disease . 

Re-focusing the strategy
The introduction of antibiotic treatment in 2005 re-focused WHO ’ s strategy for control of the disease . Accumulating field experience and studies since then have proven that antibiotic therapy with rifampicin and streptomycin is effective in curing patients without the need for surgery in about a third of cases . Recurrence ( relapse ) of infection is today uncommon . 

Through early detection , most patients receive ambulatory treatment from local health centres , thereby minimizing disruption to their daily activities such as schooling or work . Primary health-care workers play an important role in ensuring adherence to treatment and in supervising the work of village volunteers . 
 
 
 “ Today , village volunteers and front-line health-care workers are the bedrock of the current early detection strategy of Buruli ulcer control ”  .  .  .  “ It is based on their referral that suspected cases are sent to the nearest health centre for treatment .  ” 

Dr Kingsley Asiedu , Medical Officer in charge of WHO ’ s Global Buruli Ulcer Control Programme
 
 
 “ One of our greatest challenges is the lack of mobility to help us visit a number of affected villages to carry out our work . A simple bicycle could help us a lot ”  .  .  .  “ We often have to contend with some traditional beliefs ( such as witchcraft ) and have to continuously convince the populations that Buruli ulcer is a disease which at an early stage , is easy to treat with antibiotics .  ” 
Mr Yusif Quaye , a teacher and village volunteer , Obom , Ghana .  


One of the key control strategies is enhancing case detection at the community level and strengthening the capacity of decentralized health centres to provide high-quality care of patients . In recognition of their contributions , village volunteers and front-line health-care workers from Benin , Cameroon , Ghana and Togo will participate for the first time in the annual meeting of the Global Buruli Ulcer Initiative at WHO ’ s headquarters in Geneva , Switzerland . 

Agenda plenary ( French ) 
Research agenda ( French ) 
This international meeting is important for global advocacy ; it provides a platform to share and disseminate new information about the disease as well as coordinate efforts among all partners . The views and contributions of the village volunteers and front-line health workers will be crucial in formulating recommendations for actions at the grassroots level . 
The meeting will be attended by about 150 participants from 29 endemic and non-endemic countries . WHO ’ s Global Buruli Ulcer Initiative has organized this annual event every year since it was established in1998 . The meeting convenes representatives from the ministries of health of affected countries , nongovernmental organizations , the research community and other interested parties involved in activities to control Buruli ulcer . 

The disease
Buruli ulcer , a chronic skin disease caused by infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans , starts as a painless nodule or lesion . Infection frequently leads to extensive destruction of the skin and soft tissue and the formation of large ulcers , usually on the arms and legs . 

Patients in whom the disease is diagnosed at an early stage can be successfully treated using antibiotics without the need for surgery . Delayed diagnosis may lead to long-term functional disability , sometimes involving amputated limbs , and serious social and economic impacts on affected people , especially women and children . 