There ’ s something about Sajal Aly , the entertainment industry ' s ' majboori ' 
UPDATED 03 JAN , 2022 11 : 28AM

MALIHA REHMAN

SENIOR FASHION WRITER

Despite her self-doubts , the actor is a powerhouse performer who doesn ' t need to post regularly on social media to be loved . 

Sajal Aly has the unique ability to light up the screen whenever she appears on it , drawing the eye and then holding you there , riveted . She ’ s a rare powerhouse , latent with talent , diversifying as she tries to not conform to a single character template . 

But Sajal is also a young girl who just loves what she does . She is petite , with eyes that speak volumes and a complete lack of pretense . She can get emotional , her eyes slightly watery as she makes an impassioned observation about a role that she loves or a lesson that she ’ s learnt or an ordeal that she ’ s suffered in the past .  
 
 “ I ’ m like that , I suppose ,  ” she muses to me .  “ Maybe I have just been through a lot in my life and I pour all my emotions into the roles that I play , with complete sincerity . Maybe that helps me in connecting with my audience more easily .  
 
 “ People often tell me that I make them cry with my performances ,  ” she continues .  “ I think that I can make them laugh just as well . Perhaps they just remember the crying more vividly because not every actor is able to inspire such emotion in his or her audience .  ” 

And just like that , my conversation with Sajal Aly begins , over hot soup and coffee on a mildly cold Karachi afternoon . The people sitting around us in the restaurant peer at our table every now and then , and some come up to talk to her . 

I ’ m glad that we have chosen to meet on a weekday at a not-too-crowded venue . Sajal is so incredibly well-loved that , had we been at a more popular venue , we wouldn ’ t have been able to talk . 

Is Sajal aware of the power she wields over her audience ?  “ I think I ’ m very lucky ,  ” she smiles .  “ Sometimes you strike lucky by a fluke .  ” 

Really , Sajal ? I counter . Does she really think that it ’ s merely luck , and not talent , that has enabled her to win rave reviews with every one of her performances in TV dramas , star in a Bollywood movie and land a major role in What ’ s Love Got To Do With It ?  , an upcoming Hollywood movie directed by Shekhar Kapoor and co-produced by Jemima Goldsmith ?  
 
 “ When I was selected for the Bollywood movie Mom , I thought that I was just lucky . Now that something similar has happened for the second time and I ’ m going to be making my Hollywood debut , I suppose that there is something in me that people like .  ” 

What is that something ?  “ I don ’ t know ,  ” she muses .  “ To date , whenever I ’ m about to start working on a project , I ’ m petrified . I ask my director if I ’ ll be able to do it .  ” 

Sajal Aly thinks she ’ s become the entertainment industry ’ s majboori — that it can ’ t ignore her even if it wanted to . But why would it want to ignore an actor who sets the screen on fire ? Why does she continue doubting herself ? And what exactly is up with her and her husband Ahad Raza Mir ? 

She recounts mentioning this to actor Bilal Abbas , her co-star in the drama O Rangreza and in the recently released film Khel Khel Mein .  “ He joked that I needed to stop doubting myself . He said that when we were acting together , he never realised how powerfully my performance would end up translating on screen !  ” Sajal smiles . She may count herself as lucky but she can ’ t deny that her acting prowess has a lot to do with her success . 

Hollywood heights
We begin talking about her international projects and Sajal reminisces about meeting the late Sri Devi , her co-star in Mom .  “ I asked her why they had selected me . There is so much talent in India . And she said ‘ Beta , it ’ s because you ’ re good at what you do ’  . She had seen my work in Pakistani dramas !  ” Sajal beams . 

Similarly , Sajal ’ s co-star in What ’ s Love Got To Do With It ?  , Bollywood veteran Shabana Azmi , met Sajal for the first time and immediately commented on one of her dramas .  “ I had been very nervous that I would be meeting Shabana Azmi for the first time and , beyond that , I would be walking with her , talking to her and sharing my screen with her . When she came in , I greeted her and she said ,  ‘ Oh ! I was just watching your drama .  ’ She had been watching Yaqeen Ka Safar !  ” 

She continues ,  “ The very first scene that we shot featured all of us . In the second scene , Shekhar Kapoor told me to improvise . He said that I had to keep talking and he would just film me .  
 
 “ I knew that he had liked my performance in the first scene and so I felt confident but , then , somewhere in the middle , I got lost in thought . He immediately prompted me and told me ,  ‘ Sajal , you ’ re doing great , stop doubting yourself .  ’ That ’ s the sign of a great director — to be able to catch out actors ’ emotions and push them towards doing their best .  ” 

It was rumored that she managed to land her role in What ’ s Love Got To Do With It ? with the help of her father-in-law Asif Raza Mir ’ s connections . Is this true ? 

Sajal reminisces about meeting the late Sri Devi , her co-star in Mom .  “ I asked her why they had selected me . There is so much talent in India . And she said ‘ Beta , it ’ s because you ’ re good at what you do ’  . She had seen my work in Pakistani dramas !  ”  
 
 “ No , I have a manager who lines up potential international projects for me ,  ” she corrects . Her husband , actor Ahad Raza Mir , filmed her audition and , once it was emailed to the movie ’ s team , it got approved . 

Pakistani actors who have gained international experience have often , in the past , commented on the lack of structure and professionalism back home . Does Sajal , with her experiences in Bollywood and Hollywood , also feel that Pakistan ’ s entertainment industry has a long way to go ?  
 
 “ There is really no difference except that , in Pakistan , we are working with smaller budgets ,  ” she says .  “ This means that we may have to make an extra effort and , sometimes , I may have to extend favours by working a few extra hours . That ’ s the only difference .  
 
 “ If an actor is lucky , he or she gets offered more international work but , regardless , I would never turn my back on my own industry . All the international work that has come my way has been because those filmmakers had seen my work in Pakistan . And when I go abroad , I do so as a Pakistani . I want to keep contributing and giving back to my industry with the work that I do .  
 
 “ I was also offered the title role in another Hollywood movie and the story was very exciting ,  ” Sajal reveals .  “ However , there was a single , very bold scene in the movie that I knew I couldn ’ t do .  ” 

You could have used a body double , I comment .  “ Even if I managed to do so , the people of my country would have connected that scene with me . I wouldn ’ t want to disillusion them like that .  ” 

Khel Khel Mein
Sajal may be deeply committed to Pakistan ’ s entertainment fraternity but this does not mean that she isn ’ t aware of the politics that simmer just beneath its glittery surface . 

I ask her if attitudes changed towards her once she had starred in Mom back in 2017 .  “ Yes , suddenly I was moved to the front row at events ,  ” she states matter-of-factly .  “ There was conjecture on ‘ how could Sajal Aly have been selected for a role opposite the legendary Sri Devi .  ’ I found it sad , because I had already worked with actors such as Sania Saeed and Nadia Jamil and , for me , they are just as illustrious as Sri Devi .  
 
 “ India had selected me because of my work in Pakistan , whereas Pakistan only moved me to the front row once I had worked in India . It ’ s high time that we start valuing our talent on its own merit !  ”  
 
 “ I ’ m this industry ’ s majboori ” 
Did the industry ’ s perception of her change substantially after the release of Mom ? Sajal ’ s acting prowess was widely acclaimed in the film .  “ I think opinions started changing before that , after my dramas Gul-i-Raana and Chup Raho ,  ” she reflects .  
 
 “ I have never been afraid of taking on unconventional roles . Even in the earlier years of my career , I took a risk with my role in the drama Quddusi Sahib Ki Bewa . I have literally built my career little by little , on my own merit . It isn ’ t as if I haven ’ t been snubbed in the past or even now . There ’ s a lot of favouritism but I have worked very hard and , now , people can ’ t ignore me . I have become this industry ’ s majboori , someone they can ’ t avoid .  ” 

I find this difficult to believe — how could anyone even want to ignore an actress as powerful as Sajal ?  “ Yes , they can ’ t anymore . I ’ m considered for so many difficult roles ,  ” she confirms .  “ But I sit with many of these industry power players and I know that they don ’ t want to give anyone a chance beyond their own network of friends .  
 
 “ I know that , a lot of times , they are just obsessed with people with social media followings . I have managed to weather the storm , but I think that there are so many other talented individuals waiting for their big break . Our directors and producers need to stop playing favourites . 

Ishq-i-Laa 
 “ There was this one time when I was nominated for my work in two major dramas , O Rangreza and Yaqeen Ka Safar . The show ’ s organiser at the time called me and invited me , and asked me if I was nominated for Best Model . I had been nominated for acting in two of the biggest dramas of the year that had been the talk of the town and I was shocked that she couldn ’ t have done her research before calling me up .  ” 

To date , Sajal hasn ’ t won a Lux Style Award — I find this very surprising .  “ I have been nominated many times and , honestly , it all gets balanced out because I get so much love from my audience ,  ” says Sajal .  “ I also don ’ t have a social circle that obsesses over awards , so that helps . Of course , it would feel great to win . The only time that I felt a bit bad was when Chhammi , my character in Aangan , didn ’ t win . That girl deserved an award .  ” 

Dramatic directions
We rewind in time to recall the firebrand called Chhammi — a garrulous , emotional character from pre-Partition Pakistan . There was a certain scene in Aangan that particularly stands out in my memory : a letter is read out to Chhammi that moves her and , within a span of 30 seconds , Sajal ’ s face undergoes a wealth of different emotions . 

I recount this scene to Sajal and she says ,  “ I don ’ t know what happened to me while I was playing Chhammi . It was as if someone were holding my hand and I just kept sinking deeper and deeper into the character . There was a lot that I learnt from my role in Aangan . 

Yaqeen Ka Safar 
 “ Ahad had told me that it was a great role and I didn ’ t read the script properly before signing on . When I did read the script , I realised that my scenes were much fewer than that of the other characters . I was also not very social media savvy and I barely put out any pictures of myself from the set . I worried that I would get lost in the story .  
 
 “ Somehow , though , my audience simply gravitated towards Chhammi . I got so much love for the role . It was proof that the length of your role and how much you promoted it on social media didn ’ t matter .  ” 

Another project that she worked in with Ahad — Sahad , as they are called , have been a favourite pair on-screen as well as off it — was the drama Yeh Dil Mera , a thriller with a very strong story which suffered at the hands of long drags and multiple flashback scenes . 

Does it hurt when a drama that she is deeply invested in deteriorates due to tropes used to prolong viewership and haul in more profits ?  
 
 “ It does . As an actor , you have created a character — the way she talks , her body movements , her facial expressions . It ’ s like nurturing a baby and , when you see that character ’ s journey getting ruined , you feel dejected . There have been times when I have insisted on changes and the producer and writer of the drama have not liked it . But I have to try .  ” 

O Rangreza
She pauses .  “ Sometimes actors and directors work with the writer and get changes made in the story . Sometimes , when a story is weak , production houses deliberately choose a strong cast that will be able to enhance it . But there ’ s only so much that we can do . If a script is bad , it ’ s bad and now , many actors just don ’ t sign on to a story that they don ’ t believe in .  ” 

She may have the lion ’ s share of good scripts coming to her now , but was there a time when Sajal accepted mediocre roles simply so that her career could move forwards ?  
 
 “ In the first six , seven years of my career , I did . I was the sole breadwinner of my family and I had to keep earning . Now , though , there are times when I end up refusing good scripts because of a lack of dates or simply because I take up too much time thinking over the role .  ” 

Does she regret that ?  “ I regret having missed out on working with certain directors on certain projects . People say that it ’ s very important to have a good chemistry with your co-actor , but I really don ’ t think it ’ s necessary for you to be prattling away with your co-actors . It ’ s more important to have a good chemistry with the director . I ’ m completely a director ’ s actress .  ” 

TV or film ? 
Coming to the present , she ’ s working with multiple directors . Her movie with Filmwala Pictures , Khel Khel Mein , was criticised severely although her acting won accolades . She ’ s also currently starring in two major TV dramas , Ishq-i-Laa with Yumna Zaidi and Azaan Sami Khan , and the multistarrer Sinf-i-Aahan , directed by Nadeem Baig . 

What prompted her to take on a script such as Sinf-i-Aahan , where she is playing a relatively uncomplicated role and is accompanied by an extensive ensemble cast ?  “ It can actually be very difficult to play a relatively normal character and make it interesting for the audience ,  ” she says .  
 
 “ That ’ s why I signed on to Sinf-i-Aahan . It also gave me the opportunity to work with Nadeem Baig . He is a very intelligent director and I think that he needs to keep working with new people and give them opportunities .  ” 

Her drama Ishq-i-Laa recently came under scrutiny when certain scenes were considered to be more romantic than what is usually shown on TV . Did she not feel that the intimacy shown in the drama was pushing boundaries ?  
 
 “ I think that a certain element of romance had to be incorporated into the drama , because it fits into how the story will proceed . It had to be believable , but we did stay within limits .  ” 

Khel Khel Mein ’ s flaws may not be something that she can comment openly on , considering that it is only her second cinematic release , but they could not be something that she wasn ’ t aware of . I sidestep a point-blank question and ask her if she prefers TV or cinema ?  
 
 “ I think cinema allows the actor to move into more of a fantasy world while TV is closer to reality ,  ” Sajal observes .  “ I ’ m attached to TV more at this point , and I think that our cinema needs to improve . I also think that professionals who know the craft need to start focusing on Pakistan ’ s film industry rather than people who are just dabbling with it for fun .  ” 

Would Sajal be willing to play the cinematic siren ?  “ I would love to , but I would want to work with the right script and the right director . Without them , I would just end up looking bad .  ” 

The question of exposure
Doesn ’ t Sajal feel that she is spreading herself too thin , seen far too frequently on TV ?  “ People have told me this but I think that there must be a reason why God has sent all these projects my way . I have the strength and energy to do all this work right now and I may not be able to do so one day . There are new people coming in and I can ’ t get complacent and miss out on the opportunity to work with so many great teams and directors .  ” 

She muses ,  “ I never see myself on screen because it disturbs me and I find too many flaws but , some days ago , I decided to watch my drama O Rangreza . I have been working so hard and so consistently that I needed to take a break and remind myself of the reason why I love acting . The drama came as such a surprise to me . I kept remarking to my sister Saboor that that was me on screen !  
 
 “ It was the sort of story that told you that you couldn ’ t love anyone to the point of worship . If you did , God put obstacles in the way in order to shake you up and remind you that the only one worthy of love like that is Him . I ’ m glad I got to give out such an important message . It ’ s one that I have learnt in my life .  ” 

And what about Sahad ? 

The topic of love steers the conversation towards the love of her life , actor Ahad Raza Mir . The two had a romance that was earmarked by their dramas together , followed by a magical , much-hyped wedding in Abu Dhabi right before the coronavirus pandemic broke loose . To their fans they are Sahad , avidly loved and followed on social media . 

But the two have not been seen together in recent times , leading to rumours that all ’ s not well between them . To the contrary , Sajal talks often about Ahad , and with a familiar fondness , although her reminiscences are mostly from the past .  
 
 “ Ahad has talked about me a lot in his past interviews but , somehow , I ’ m only doing it now ,  ” she smiles .  “ It ’ s just that I rarely give interviews and I worry that , if I ’ ll get asked about Ahad , I ’ ll just end up going on and on !  
 
 “ We had just got engaged when we started working in Aangan together . He had proposed to me and I had told him that he needed to reach out to my family . The very next day , I had fallen ill and Ahad ’ s mother had come to take care of me for three days . My father had been very surprised but my sister told him that Ahad ’ s family were thinking of marriage . Once I got better , Ahad ’ s parents came to Lahore , met my family and we got engaged .  
 
 “ I later asked Ahad why he had been in such a hurry to get engaged . He told me that he had been afraid that , if he didn ’ t ask me to marry him , he would lose me , and I would marry someone else ,  ” she smiles . 

Why haven ’ t the two been lately pairing up together for a project ? Their last acting tryst together was Dhoop Ki Deewar , a Zee5 mini-series that ran into controversy because it addressed the two-nation theory in a very bold way .  
 
 “ I thought that Dhoop Ki Deewar had a simple story and I would be working with a great team ,  ” she says about the series .  “ But Ahad and I did decide that we had been acting together far too frequently and that we should take a break from it , unless , of course , the sort of story comes along that we can ’ t resist .  ” 

She doesn ’ t get drawn on why the couple has not been seen together in public .  
 
 “ Do you know , the most emotionally difficult times of my life have been my most successful career-wise ? Like when my mother passed away , I was working on two of the biggest projects of my career , O Rangreza and Yaqeen Ka Safar ,  ” she states , without elaboration . 

I am left to draw my own conclusions about what this implies . The present time is also one where she is reaching new heights of success — I earnestly hope that it ’ s not a harrowing one for her personally . 

But that is how Sajal is — she triggers emotions in whoever she meets or even within the audience who see her on the screen . The sincerity that she has for her craft and the nuances that she adds to her performances translate to her pesona : honest , passionate , with so much that she says out loud and a lot more that can be read between the lines and from within her eyes . 

Is she the industry ’ s majboori like she says , someone they want to ignore but can ’ t ? I find that hard to believe . Sajal Aly does not need awards to validate her . She does not need to post regularly on social media in order to be well-loved . She doesn ’ t even need every project of hers to become a hit because , regardless , her performances earn praise . 

She may not be the industry ’ s compulsion , but she is certainly a source of great pride . There ’ s something about Sajal — and , despite her self-doubts , she knows it too . 