Ethical foundations in sustainable fashion
Kirsi Niinimäki
Abstract
Sustainability is fuzzy and wide concept and the discussion what to sustain continues , the resources or lifestyle . 
Furthermore how holistically the sustainability should be approached is under discussion . According to the holistic
approach for environmental ethics ecosystems and biosphere as a whole should be considered , not individual ’ s
rights . Furthermore in ethical discussion the value aspect is most important ; what is considered to be valuable and
from where value comes from . Furthermore environmental ethics raises deep questions ; who counts morally and
why . Moreover the human actions are under evaluation in environmental ethical discussion ;  “ how should human
beings act in the nonhuman natural world ”  . 
Environmental ethics can be applied in other fields e . g . in design and fashion . Values and ethics are fundamental
grounds also for sustainable fashion . Environmental pioneer 1995 argues that “ ethics are the philosophical basis for
making choices about morals and values ”  . He further continues that “ to think dispassionately about what we design
and why , and what the eventual consequences of our design intervention may be , is the basis of ethical thinking ”  . 
Accordingly it is worthwhile to investigate the value base in sustainable fashion and further to consider the
consequences of our design and industrial manufacturing processes in the clothing sector based on environmental
ethics . Moreover it is important to understand the consequences of our design practices ; e . g . how current design , 
manufacturing and business practices affect unsustainable consumption patterns . Products actually configure
consumers ’ needs and use patterns and hence design can be said to be “ practice-oriented ”  , which leads to certain
everyday consumption habits . Therefore designers , manufacturers and companies are responsible not only for the
environmental impacts of the fashion industry but also for the unsustainable consumption behaviour of consumers
and the increase of waste streams , i . e . the unbalance in the fashion system . 
This text provides an overview for ethical foundations in the fashion field . Even though a lot of research has been
done lately in the sustainable fashion field , the views have been limited and not well grounded on philosophical
knowledge about environmental ethics and value discussion . 
Keywords : Environmental ethics ; Values ; Sustainable fashion ; Corporate social responsibility ( CSR )  ; Ethical
consumption ; Extended producer responsibility ( EPR )  ; Sustainable business ; Greenwashing
Introduction
Sustainability is fuzzy and wide concept and the discussion
what to sustain continues , the resources or lifestyle . 
Furthermore how holistically the sustainability should be
approached and understood is under discussion ( e . g . 
Scherer 2003 , 355 )  . According to the holistic approach for
environmental ethics ecosystems and biosphere as a whole
should be considered , not individual ’ s rights ( Palmer 2003 )  . 
Furthermore in ethical discussion the value aspect is most
important ; what is considered to be valuable and from
where value comes from ( ibid .  )  . In addition environmental
ethics raises deep questions ; who counts morally and why . 
According to Palmer ( 2003 ) firstly the community , rather
than individual should be in the focus while evaluating
moral significance . Secondly ecological qualities have
primary value . Moreover the human actions are under
evaluation in environmental ethical discussion ;  “ how
should human beings act in the nonhuman natural world ”  
( ibid . 17 )  . 
This text provides an overview for ethical foundations
in the fashion field . Even though a lot of research has
been done lately in the sustainable fashion field , the
views and research approaches have been limited and
not well grounded on philosophical knowledge about
Correspondence : kirsi . niinimaki @ aalto . fi
Design department , School of Arts , Design and Architecture , Aalto University , 
PO Box 31000 , FI-00076 Aalto , Finland
© 2015 Niinimäki ; licensee Springer . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (  )  , which permits unrestricted use , distribution , and reproduction
in any medium , provided the original work is properly credited . 
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 
DOI 10 . 1186 / s40689-015-0002-1
View metadata , citation and similar papers at core . ac . uk brought to you by CORE
provided by Springer - Publisher Connector
environmental ethics and value discussion . Interesting
research is emerging mainly in the small niche areas
about sustainable fashion , its meaning and connection
to use phase and individual consumer ’ s needs and participation ( e . g . Fletcher 2008 ; Fletcher and Grose 2012 )  , 
but in fore mentioned the focus has been mainly on a
small and design-driven initiatives . This text focuses on
the change in the industrial scale . 
This text is based on author ’ s earlier writings extended with other experts ’ views of values in the sustainable fashion field . This knowledge is reflected
against environmental ethics . The text starts by reviewing environmental ethics and the current discussion going on in the sustainable fashion field . Thereafter new
business thinking in the context of sustainability , 
innovation for sustainable business , future oriented
thinking , collaboration with the customer , CSR , EPR , 
animal ethics and ethical luxury is presented . Moreover
the text discusses about greenwashing and ethical consumption . The text ends with the consideration how to
design value . 
Review
Environmental ethics can be applied in other fields 
( Light and Rolston III 2003 ) e . g . in design and fashion . 
Values and ethics are fundamental grounds for sustainable design . Environmental pioneer Viktor Papanek 
( 1995 , 70 ) argues that “ ethics are the philosophical basis
for making choices about morals and values ”  . He further
continues that “ to think dispassionately about what we
design and why , and what the eventual consequences of
our design intervention may be , is the basis of ethical
thinking ”  ( ibid .  )  . Therefore ethical thinking takes account the moral implications of our actions ( Clegg
2011 )  . Accordingly it is worthwhile to investigate the
value base in sustainable fashion and further to consider
the consequences of our design and industrial manufacturing processes have in the context of sustainable
development . 
It would be fruitful for designers to consider whose
values are included in the design process and on what
basis . It is also good to remember that there isn ’ t any
value-free design . We should design and construct a
new system and basis for value creation , to help us face
future challenges in the fashion discipline . Such a system
could serve to evaluate design proposals and their benefits for sustainable development in a long term . Furthermore manufacturing processes , business models and
marketing ethics could be included in this value evaluation process . However we need novel knowledge on
how to embed the dimension of environmental value
and future-oriented thinking into the current fashion
system . 
While including the ethical dimensions in the sustainability discussion , we have to start the discussion from
values . Values relate to beliefs about good and bad , right
and wrong , and they are the basis that gives direction to
our moral behavior ( e . g . Gibbins and Reimar 1999 )  . 
Paehike ( 2000 ) has listed the core values in environmentalism : firstly , the protection of biodiversity and
ecological systems ; secondly , consideration of negative
impacts on human health ; and finally the sustainable use
of resources . Moreover he argues that these values are
not sufficient , and we must challenge our whole way of
living : how we organize our societies and how we live
our lives , including new challenges in purchasing and
use patterns and in disposal behavior ( ibid .  )  . 
Leiserowitz , Kates and Parris ( 2006 ) argue that the
most important value in sustainable development is environmental protection . This is a very broad concept and
includes many different values and approaches . In
addition to environmental protection , in sustainable development there are three key ‘ stakeholders ’  : people , the
economy and society , whose sustainable development
also needs to be taken care of in the quest to achieve a
sustainable balance in the system . In this process values
such as equality , freedom , and democracy are most
important ( ibid .  )  . 
Walker ( 2007 , 70 ) argues that in the context of sustainable
development it is possible to add ideological value to objects . 
This means that through environmental values we can assess
products in a completely new way . Through this lens it is
possible to value e . g . redesigned objects according to their
environmental value . Accordingly eco-materials , leftover
materials , recycled products and parts , and a ‘ classical ’ appearance can be evaluated with the goal of increasing the
environmental and sustainable value of the product . 
Moreover renting , leasing and other actions aiming to
dematerialize consumption can be seen as sustainable value
actions ( Niinimäki 2011 )  . 
The ethical and value discussion is complex and hard to
do in the industrial context . As today it seems that possibilities in industry to make ecological and ethical choices
are limited , designers and producers do what they can , a
situation that can be described as realistic thinking . This
kind of value-based , yet realistic but narrow , approach to
sustainable fashion is the most common approach currently existing in the business . Best practice can be defined
to mean that designers and companies choose the best environmental and social solution that exists ( Niinimäki
2013 )  . Especially small- and medium-sized companies have
to make their choices from limited possibilities . Finding
suitable eco-materials that can be ordered in small
amounts , to give only one example , can be most challenging for small companies ( Niinimäki and Aakko 2014 )  . 
What an entrepreneur can do is thus limited and defined
by the resources available as well as based on the current
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 2 of 11
rather narrow knowledge base . Accordingly available resources create the action framework for sustainable-oriented designers and companies : i . e . what kinds of design
and production choices they can make . The bigger the
fashion company , the more power and possibilities they
have to influence sustainable practices in the field . Despite
these limitations , it is important that designers and
companies identify their own value base , act accordingly , 
and inform their customers about their values and ethical
actions ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
New business thinking in the context of sustainability
New radical business thinking is needed to create a bigger
change in the fashion field . The economic and industrial
systems of the fashion industry are currently based on extremely fast cycles of production , fast-changing trends and
planned obsolescence of the products . As garment prices
fall , producers must maintain profitability by increasing
the amount of sold units , which has led to a huge amount
of fashion products on the market and extremely saturated
markets ( Niinimäki 2011 ; 2013 )  . We must find new radical
ways to create a win-win situation for both consumers and
manufacturers - for all stakeholders - and for sustainable
development . We need more knowledge about consumers
and the consumption side to create a sustainable transformation process inside the fashion industry and business
that leads to sustainable consumption practices . We also
need to develop foresight and new systemic thinking on
how to move towards sustainable societies , in order to see
sustainable practices as an opportunity to design and not
to think that sustainability is an obstacle to doing business . 
Very often , the sustainable business approach is feared
to mean de-growth , but it can also be seen as a new
challenge and opportunity to do things creatively and
differently ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . Sustainable business logic
is based on fundamentally different logic than traditional
fashion business and not on the growth logic alone 
( Fletcher and Grose 2012 )  . 
Sustainable values lay the ground for credible and responsible sustainable business and marketing . Sustainable
business and marketing includes not only a sustainable
value base but also ethical consideration . This aspect
seems to be problematic for some manufacturers and
companies , they do not want to make moral claims about
what is right and what is wrong . However , for strategic
sustainability thinking , it is important to consider not only
what efforts and investments to make but if would it be
worthwhile to withdraw from some markets because of
ethical reasons or too big social or ecological risks ( Belz
and Peattie 2011 )  . In this regard , a deep assessment should
be made according to the company ’ s own value base . Including sustainability in the company ’ s strategic planning
might open new strategic possibilities but it can also be
done to prevent risks in legal , resource , environmental , 
reputational or sociopolitical levels ( Lowitt 2011 )  . 
As the fashion industry is international and global , principles of corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) should be
followed . Moreover , it is important to remember that
consumers ’ trust can only be achieved through open
communication and information and only through real
commitment to sustainability at all levels of the company ’ s
practices , avoiding too limited a sustainable approach and
a ‘ greenwashing ’ attitude . In addition , because of the global
character of the fashion business , the attribute ‘ Made in ’ is
today less relevant than the attribute ‘ Made by ’  , which
needs a lot of information gathering about the different
stages in manufacturing and communicating these aspects
not only to consumers but also to all stakeholders . 
Stakeholders in sustainable marketing thinking are not
only consumers and investors but can also include employees , business partners , suppliers , competitors , government ( through regulations )  , NGOs , pressure groups
and communities . Working with these stakeholders needs
consideration of not only exchanges but also long-term
relationships and future possibilities through radical
sustainable innovations ( Belz and Peattie 2011 )  . 
The global fashion business is fiercely competitive , and
simultaneously , Western consumers ’ environmental interest is increasing ; in this environment , sustainable business
thinking and sustainable marketing offer new business opportunities for the fashion industry . As it is challenging to
ensure profit with the existing fashion system and current
price levels , it is worthwhile to challenge the current unsustainable business models in fashion and rethink value
creation from a wider perspective : value proposals from
the consumers ’ side as well as from the environmental
perspective and through creating long-term relationships
between business and its stakeholders ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
In this context , it is possible to create sustainable value
proposals and stimulate new business thinking and business models that contribute to a decrease in materialistic
consumption . 
Innovation for sustainable business
Vezzoli ( 2007 ) argues that radical innovations are needed
which do not only depend on technological development
and innovations but also stimulate new interaction and
partnerships between different stakeholders as well as new
sustainable relationships between consumers and products . If we want to change the fashion system towards a
new kind of balance , we need new kinds of radical design
and business thinking . We have to change the current
economic paradigm , and we have to do business differently than we do today . Business and industry have to
redefine their tasks more radically in order to usher in
significant eco-innovations and most importantly allnew business strategies ( Ottoman 2011 , 90 )  . As Kemp
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 3 of 11 
( 2008 ) reports , a fundamental change is needed to reach
systemic change , but transition faces resistance and it
takes time to emerge . On the other hand , system level
changes can be based on paradigms , understanding how
ideas relate to each other to form accepted models 
( Fletcher 2008 , 73 , based on Meadows 1997 )  . As Fletcher 
( 2008 , 71 ) argues ‘ if we influence things at the level of a
paradigm , then a system can be totally transformed ’  . This
system level transformation needs questioning current
practices and understanding , and further , it needs a new
way of seeing and understanding . 
When we talk about eco-innovations , we mean products , services or processes that offer value not only for
both the business and customer but also to the environment through significant decrease in environmental
impact . Sustainable innovation is a larger systemic approach where sustainability thinking is integrated in all
levels of the business ( products , technologies , services , 
new business models , organisation model and relationship with stakeholders )  ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
The levels of innovation are described as follows 
( based on Brezet and van Hemel 1997 )  :  
( 1 ) Incremental ( small improvements for existing products )  
( 2 ) Redesign ( major redesign for existing products )  
( 3 ) Product alternatives ( new product or service concepts )  
( 4 ) System innovation and design for a sustainable society
The first level of innovation refers to small , incremental
product improvements . The second means redesigning
existing products and production processes ( e . g . in an
eco-efficient way )  , and the third innovation type aims
to find alternative methods of delivering the same function ( Brezet and van Hemel 1997 )  . Currently , our efforts
in sustainable fashion are between the second and third
levels . However , these innovation types are not enough , 
and we need to move towards more radical and systematic
innovative thinking while challenging the whole industry
and its current practices of doing business . 
Tischner and Charter ( 2001 ) identify four approaches
to sustainable design : repair , refine , redesign and rethink . 
The fourth approach is the one we should aim for and
close to the forementioned system level innovation . A
rethink requires a radical change in our mind set , and it
can offer breakthroughs for new lifestyles , ways of living
and doing things , as well as approaches to fulfil consumer
needs in a more sustainable manner ( Tischner and Charter
2001 )  . This approach needs strategic innovations that lead
to new business models . As Tukker et al .  ( 2008 ) argue , 
these new practices often stay in niches for a long period
until a window of opportunity opens and their breakthrough is possible . 
For this radical and strategic innovation approach , we
need a much more creative way of conducting the
business of fashion . Strategic innovation questions who
the customer is , what products or services should be offered and how to offer those products and services 
( Markides 1997 )  . It is not merely about rethinking the
fundamentals on the supply side but also about redesigning the business on the demand side , e . g . in the form of
the user experience and rethinking value creation moving
from product design to systems thinking ( e . g . designing
product-service systems ) or designing products for closed
loop system . 
Several companies acknowledge that market competition
is driven by products ’ meanings :  ‘ why ’ people need a product rather than ‘ what ’ they need in a product . As Verganti 
( 2009 ) argues , people use things for profound emotional , 
psychological and sociocultural reasons as well as utilitarian ones , and this understanding is most important in creating successful sustainable innovations for business . This
deep understanding of consumers also lays the ground for
transforming business models and creating for example sustainable product-service systems to fulfil the
actual needs behind product use in a less materialistic
way ( e . g . Armstrong et al . 2015 )  . 
Innovations for sustainable business in the textile and
fashion sector can be driven by technological improvements or technological innovations ( like digital technology )  , 
economic changes ( new sustainable business thinking and a
systems approach ) or legislation . With regard to legislation , 
new regulations for extended producer responsibility ( EPR )  , 
for example , can change the logic in the fashion system , 
and preventing and / or recycling waste might be one future
business model if EPR begins to cover the textile and
fashion business . Innovation can also be driven by more
abstract value issues , e . g . safeguarding the corporate or
brand value from a bad reputation . 
Succeeding in innovation in the sustainability context
always needs a new kind of business logic . Driving sustainable innovation , whether to a more radical or incremental path , needs experimental and creative thinking , and
this experimentation can get support from lead users before
presenting these ideas to all customers . Furthermore , it is
important to create networks of sustainable-oriented companies . These networks can support a company ’ s own
values-based practices and offer help in reaching their goals . 
Future-oriented thinking and collaboration with customers
New kinds of relationships with the customer create new
kinds of value in the business . Through a deeper relationship with the customer , a company can create a long-term
dialogue with the end-user and through this dialogue create new business opportunities , new understanding of the
customer ’ s true needs and desires and robust understanding of the customer ’ s readiness to change consumption
habits . Simultaneously , the company can communicate its
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 4 of 11
values and practices to customers and thereby create trust
and customer loyalty towards the brand . 
Through this approach , the company ’ s focus moves from
a single transaction and short-term economic thinking to
long-term sustainable strategic planning and future-oriented
thinking . Customer satisfaction and customer value will be
at the core of the company ’ s practices . Traditional marketing
focuses on profit and revenues . Sustainable marketing also
concentrates on psychographic aspects like consumer satisfaction and consumers ’ interest to stay loyal to the brand 
( Belz and Peattie 2011 )  . 
New business approaches are possible , but they require
radical business thinking , focus on the consumer side and
the garment ’ s use phase and , most of all , consumer satisfaction issues . According to Manzini ( 1994 )  , to change the
system towards sustainability , it is not enough to redesign
existing products and make some eco-efficiency improvements in manufacturing processes if the aim is to reach a
more sustainable future . Eco-efficiency aims to decrease
the environmental impact of industry while simultaneously
using less material while manufacturing more products
and resulting in less waste . The eco-efficiency approach
also means savings in material , energy and chemical costs
and waste disposal costs ( Niinimäki 2011 )  . 
On the other hand , by taking consumer-based ecoefficiency into account , it is possible to open up opportunities for the fashion business that aim for sustainable
consumption patterns . Hence , consumer-based eco-efficiency
thinking in business can transform the fashion system
towards re-directive practices that aim for deeper consumer satisfaction and therefore sustainable consumption
patterns . Consumer-based eco-efficiency focuses not only
on the environmental impact of the use phase but also on
product quality and consumer satisfaction issues ( Park
and Tahara 2008 ; Niinimäki 2014 )  . Through the satisfaction approach , value can be created for the consumer , the
company and even the environment . Satisfied customers
use products longer , and this is an opportunity to decrease
the amount of purchased clothing and slow down
consumption . This is a value opportunity from the environmental viewpoint . Satisfied consumers are loyal customers , and they repeat their purchase behaviour and
continue buying brands that can provide them with
product satisfaction on many levels , and this is a value
opportunity for sustainable business ( Niinimäki 2014 )  . 
Ethicality in production and CSR
In today ’ s reality in the fashion field , more and more
garments are manufactured in other countries , very
often on the other side of the globe . About 80%
of clothing exports are shipped from undeveloped
countries to developed economies . For example , in
Finland , about 90% of sold garments are imported
from Asian and Far East countries , about 5% from
European Union ( EU ) and other countries , and only about
5% are manufactured in Finland . In this fragmented and
globalised supply network , the main issue is risk management . From the recent accidents and fires in Bangladeshi
textile factories , we know that the lack of awareness
about the weak points in the supply chain creates a reputational risk , at the very least . CSR tackles these issues : 
i . e . what enterprises ’ responsibilities are regarding their
impacts on society . Additionally , corporations should integrate social , environmental , ethical human rights and consumer concerns into their strategy in cooperation with
their stakeholders . Corporate social responsibility is used
in parallel with the terms corporate citizenship , corporate
responsibility and corporate sustainability ( Niinimäki
2013 )  . 
If the producer wants to address sustainability issues in
the supply chain to a greater extent , it is important to select subcontractors well and demand good practices . The
code of conduct principles help companies in this process , 
and standards like SA 8000 , ISO 14001 and Eco-Management and Audit Scheme ( EMAS ) help when considering
environmental and social aspects in design and manufacturing practices . Additionally , the UN has defined ten
principles called the ‘ Global Compact ’ to set standards for
subcontractors ( theGC / thetenprinciples / index . html )  . These principles take
account of issues from human rights , labour issues , environment initiatives and issues in anti-corruption . Several
companies have voluntarily accepted these principles and
follow them in their own subcontracting arrangements , 
for example , Puma , GAP and Nike . Checklists exist where
producers can pick requirements for their subcontractors 
( e . g .  )  . 
Better than just giving the code of conduct list to manufacturers is to work in collaboration to improve the situation . Working with subcontractors and establishing a tight
relationship , mutual understanding and trust take time . 
The producer ’ s goals and requirements in sustainability
have to be well communicated and preferably based on
mutual motivation . Furthermore , to build motivation , it
is uplifting to show successful examples of how to work
with sustainability in the fashion field ( Kruger et al . 2012 )  . 
Companies can benefit and gain great advantages by
using charity or donation in their CSR strategies . The
charity work should be rooted in the companies ’ actions
strategically so that it engenders long-term business opportunities and ‘ improves the competitive surroundings
through charity… ’  ( Porter and Kramer 2006 , as cited by
Kruger et al . 2012 , p . 15 )  . It is important to realise that
acting responsibly and promoting CSR do not necessarily
mean direct revenues to the company . The motivation to
act responsibly is based on values other than economic
but actions might also be ( or should be ) economically successful in the long run . 
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 5 of 11
The sustainability strategies should also be included at
all levels inside the company . All departments should
commit to sustainability practices , and all processes and
products should include sustainability principles . Furthermore , the sustainability of business is the most important , 
so the business must be profitable . It is also important to
understand that sustainability and CSR needs constant
evaluation ; therefore , it is a constant commitment and
learning process for the company ( van Dyk 2008 )  . 
EPR extended producer responsibility
Recently , the approach of extended producer responsibility ( EPR ) has gained a lot of attention and discussion in
the EU . Extended producer responsibility requires the
original manufacturer or producer to take back the product after its use . In EPR , the goal is that already in the design phase producers think about and plan how they can
reduce environmental impact of the product after its use . 
This post-consumer waste should be reused , redesigned or
recycled . In this concept , companies are forced to have a
waste management system and preferably take-back systems based on closed or open loop thinking , or , if not , pay
waste treatment costs . Closed loop thinking means that
all off-cuts , waste and products after their use time are
treated inside the factory ’ s own processes , and open loop
means that leftovers are handled by some other outside
partner ( Niinimäki 2013 ; Belz and Peattie 2011 )  . The
principle is familiar in , e . g . electronic products but not
yet in textiles . 
EPR does not yet cover the fashion and textile field
but it soon might , and this would change fashion companies ’ action logic , as old garments mean extra cost
through waste treatment . EU policy aims for waste prevention , closing landfills and effective material recycling
systems already in year 2016 . This would also cover textiles
and fashion . Right now , textile waste ends up in landfills or
as energy waste in most European countries . France is one
exception . There producers , distributors and importers of
clothes , linen and footwear have had to take back old products since 2008 . A company has to have a take-back system
itself or it can join a scheme , which is accredited by the
French government , and pay into it ( right now EcoTLC )  
( Tojo et al . 2012 )  . 
Extended producer responsibility is a good example
how to transform the business and industry and how to
include the environmental values in the business logic . It
is an example of environmental ethics : how we should take
responsibility of our actions and take account the consequences of our industrial manufacturing and business
logic . 
Animal ethics and ethical luxury
Animal ethics are largely discussed in the fashion field , 
yet the issue is controversial . This discussion needs
philosophical foundation . The moral discussion , whether
it is morally right or wrong to mistreat animals , has a long
history in environmental ethics , longer than any other ethical discussion . Already , Immanuel Kant and St . Thomas
Aquinas in the eighteenth century argued that it is morally
wrong to harm animals , simultaneously arguing that animals deserve moral recognition ( Light and Rolston 2003 )  . 
Contemporary philosophy ‘ Animal Rights View Ethics ’  
( also known as intentional ethics ) points out that each
individual ( human or animal ) has rights that should not
be violated , and therefore ,  ‘ living creatures must never be
used exclusively as a means to others ’ satisfaction ’  ( Kruger
et al . 2012 , 133 )  . On the other hand ,  ‘ necessary ethics ’ or
 ‘ utilitarian ethics ’ emphasises that there has to be a balance in the sum of individual ’ s utility / happiness / quality of
life , and therefore , animals can be used in industrial
production but the animals ’ living situation has to be
evaluated based on the aforementioned balance also in
the industrial production ( ibid .  )  . In the code of conduct
by the Trade Association Dansk Fashion and Textile is
stated following :  ‘ in businesses where animals are used
in labour and / or in the production ( fur , wool , etc .  )  , such
animals must be fed and treated with dignity and respect
and no animal must deliberately be harmed nor exposed
to pain in their lifespan ’  ( Kruger et al . 2012 , 135 )  . 
Animal products are used in wool , silk , feather , leather
and fur production . Large-scale industrial production causes
ethical problems through animals ’ living condition and , 
e . g . while plucking feathers from live ducks and killing
silkworms during silk production . Wool is a renewable
material and therefore good for the environment , but
practices in the wool production cause ethical problems , 
e . g .  ‘ mulesing ’  , practised in Australia , causes unnecessary
pain for sheep . In ‘ mulesing ’  , some skin is removed from
the sheep ’ s tail and breech to prevent ‘ flystrike ’  ( Black
2011 , 136 )  . 
Some animal materials such as leather come as leftovers from food production , and this can be seen as a
valuable and sustainable resource in the fashion industry . On the other hand , fur farms are considered as unethical practices in many countries , and they raise much
discussion and counterreactions among stakeholders because of the animal welfare . Even though circumstances
on the fur farms are improved , discussion on ethics and
animal rights is continuing . Nevertheless , clothes made
from fur are expensive , valuable , durable and long-lasting , 
and they need little maintenance during use . Very often , 
fur coats are passed on for generations , which make these
items connect with fond memories , and emotional attachment may easily form to these kinds of special possessions . 
It is also possible to redesign old fur clothes with highquality manufacturing processes so they look new . Therefore , durable and long-lasting fur is a potentially sustainable alternative ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 6 of 11
WILD Concept by Marita Huurinainen offers one sustainable way to find other fur resources than farmed ones . 
WILD Concept ’ s furs come from animals that have been
hunted in the wilderness . In Finland , many thousands of animals need to be shot every year to maintain balance in the
ecosystem , especially to protect other animal populations , 
and normally , these carcasses are disposed of as waste . The
important issue is that no extra pain is caused to animals
during the hunting ( e . g . avoiding foot-hold traps )  . The fur
used for WILD Concept is bought directly from registered
Finnish hunters who hunt the animals within the quotas
allowed by the government . The wild origin of the furs is assured by the Wild Finnish Fur label . Together with the Wild
Finnish Fur Association ( Luonnonturkisyhdistys )  , designer
Huurinainen has developed this alternative fur concept in
order to prevent hunted animal carcasses ending up as
waste . It can be guaranteed that the animals used for the
WILD concept have not suffered to become a clothing item . 
What makes WILD unique is that it offers an ethical and responsible way to wear fur , as fur of farmed animals is not
used . The end result is ethical luxury ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
Ethical luxury can be defined to mean something which is
produced according to sustainable and ethical principles , 
which has a high environmental , intrinsic and aesthetic
value , it is high quality , durable and long lasting . Ethical
luxury is produced in slower processes and in small quantities , ending up in unique pieces or limited edition . Its high
aesthetic and monetary value makes it valuable and long
lasting , something to fall in love with ; maintain it well , perhaps update it and pass on for the next generation . 
Ethical and transparent
Since global manufacturing systems are complex , transparency is an important issue in the sustainable fashion
field . Publishing all information from the supply chain , 
the names and locations of the suppliers and subcontracting partners sends a positive message ; and therefore , 
transparency can build consumers ’ trust . An encouraging
example of this practice is the company Patagonia , which
has been a leader in supply chain transparency for many
years . Patagonia has set sustainability principles as a core
in their strategy . The company offers not only information
about all its manufacturing locations worldwide but also
background information about the factories they are
collaborating with , as well as general environmental and
social information about global manufacturing . Consumers
can find all this information in Patagonia ’ s webpages . 
In the global fashion business , it has become challenging
to identify the origin of a product since production
processes are fragmented into several countries , and
supply chains are complex . Yet , this information is valuable for consumers , and more transparency is demanded
especially in clothing manufacturing . The ‘ Made by ’ label
is based in the Netherlands , and its goal is transparency in
clothing manufacturing . Through ‘ Made by ’ system , it is
possible to trace the manufacturer of a garment through a
code and the use of the internet ( Fletcher 2008 , 68 )  . 
According to the principles of transparency , a company
can inform its sustainable and ethical actions , yet all information has to be true and objective , even the negative
aspects should be informed or which efforts have not
yet ended in good results . Transparency should not be
only positive marketing message , or it changes to
marketing ethos only and easily turns to greenwashing . 
Greenwashing
Because Western consumers ’ environmental interest is rising , companies may be tempted to use sustainable and
environmental arguments merely to increase sales . And
because environmental and sustainability issues are complex , it is also easy to mislead consumers . Companies can
use sustainability as a “ marketing ploy ”  ( Goworek et al . 
2013 , 388 ) - something that can be seen as greenwashing . 
To avoid greenwashing , too narrow a focus on environmental issues should be avoided and a more holistic understanding is needed . For example , if a fast-fashion
company uses eco-labels on some of its products or one
product line , it does not truly change the fashion system
or the economic logic behind it ; the company ’ s environmental load is still huge since it produces too much stuff
in extremely fast cycles . A similar example is where a fastfashion company uses paper bags instead of plastic ones . 
The business logic does not change with this small detail . 
The company ’ s values have to be grounded deeply in
sustainability , and its principles should be included and
implemented substantially at all levels and functions . 
The other aspect to consider is that all information about
the environmental benefits of the product has to be proven . 
In this regard , standardised eco-labels are much better than
the company ’ s own environmental statements . Eco-labels 
( certificates ) are based on an independent organisation ’ s
tests and evaluation criteria and are thus more objective
and reliable than the company ’ s own information . All irrelevant or confusing information should also be avoided . 
Ethical consumption
One of the most important factors in the environmental impact during the use phase is the garment ’ s
lifetime . Currently , garments are far cheaper compared to household incomes than a few decades ago 
( Niinimäki 2011 )  . According to Jackson and Shaw 
( 2009 , 146 )  , in the 1950s in the UK , 30% of a household ’ s income went to clothing purchases ; currently , 
that figure is 12% , with a higher amount of consumed
items . At the beginning of the twenty-first century , e . g . 
in the UK , fashion consumption increased by one third 
( Allwood et al . 2006 , 11 )  , and this was a tendency in all
Western countries especially between years 1995 and
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 7 of 11
2005 ( Niinimäki 2011 )  . It is also estimated that even if
the total amount of textile and clothing purchasing is
growing , clothing will form a decreasing proportion of
households ’ total spending because of falling prices . 
Due to these low prices and households ’ high incomes , 
the consumption of extremely cheap and disposable fashion with a very short life span has increased ( Jackson and
Shaw 2009 )  . Textile and clothing prices have fallen , and
currently , the consumer possesses more and more impulsebuy cheap garments and low-quality textiles ( Niinimäki
2011 )  . These kinds of low-quality and cheap garments are
easy to discard . Therefore , extending the life span of garments is one of the most critical issues for sustainable
development . 
In the UK , a study showed that almost half of people ’ s
clothes have sat in a closet without being used during
the last twelve-month period . It is estimated that this
means 2 . 4 billion items in the UK alone . And most of
these unused clothes are owned by young consumers
aged 25 to 34 years ( Belz and Peattie 2011 , p . 125 )  . Another study from the Netherlands showed that the average
piece of clothing is owned for 3 years and 5 months . During that time , it is worn for only 44 days ( Uitdenbogerd
1998 , as cited by Fletcher 2008 )  . These figures show that
all Western consumers pose too many clothing items and
use them too seldom before disposing them . 
Contrary to the current system , product durability and
long-term use are prerequisites for sustainable consumption ( Cooper 2005 )  . To slow down consumption , it is important to invest in high quality and durability as well as
in aesthetically ageing materials , high design and lasting
style . In this regard , services that aim to extend how
long garments are used offer value in the sustainable development context ( Niinimäki 2014 )  . One challenge in the
current system is how to design products added with
services that encourage consumers to adopt a more environmentally responsible behaviour . 
When focusing on ethical and sustainable use and consumption , the following issues should be considered 
( Niinimäki 2013 )  : 
– −Purchasing fewer garments
– −Investing in meaningful garments ( promoting
emotional bonding ) 
– −Investing in durable garments , more classical style
and high quality
– −Investing in eco-materials and eco-labels
– −Extending garments ’ owning time and using them
more frequently
– −Washing less , letting garments rest and air
between use
– −Maintaining garments , also repairing
– −Using services to intensify use and to extend the
use time ( e . g . repair , upgrading )  ( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
Consumption and consumerism lie at the core of Western
societies . Consumption is an important function in
people ’ s everyday life . Current consumption patterns are
strongly connected to industrial manufacturing systems , 
economic systems and the underlying economic values
supporting this unsustainable system . Consumption and
purchasing situations often involve a strong emotional experience for consumers . Therefore , we should also create
systems that offer other kinds of emotional experiences
and satisfaction than from buying new fashion items . This
could happen for example through strategically sustainable design that includes services ( Niinimäki 2011 )  . 
Designing value
Ehrenfeld ( 2015 ) points out that conventional actions in
sustainable fashion can at best only slow down the destruction , not save the Earth . According to him , current
actions in the industry do not create sustainability , they
only reduce unsustainability . He claims that concentrating in , e . g . technical eco-efficiency improvements , CSR
or eco-materials only fool the designers , manufacturers
and consumers into believing that they are doing all it
takes to create sustainability-as-flourishing ( ibid .  , 59 )  . 
Ehrenfeld ( 2015 ) defines sustainability-as-flourishing to
mean a normative approach to sustain human beings and
ecosystems on the planet forever . In this approach , it
should be named what has to sustain . Without naming
the elements to be sustained , sustainability is an empty
word according to him . To be more influential , sustainable
fashion industry has to focus on transforming underlying
beliefs and values that currently maintain unsustainable
practices in the system level . Design system has to change
the beliefs on caring , instead of needing in sustainabilityas-flourishing approach . In here , the project ‘ Local Wisdom ’ which concentrates on the use phase of clothing and
the craft of use is a good example . The project collects
user experiences : tending , fixing and satisfying the use
of garments in a long term , and it frames the design and
use as a single whole and uses the use practices into design thinking , bringing the creative use practices into designers ’ reality ( Flecther 2015 )  . As Fletcher ( 2008 ) argues
in a more holistic approach to sustainability , the design
aesthetic has to be grounded on long-term sustainability
and values in it . 
Design forms an integral part of our culture and values
within . This means that sustainable design should not only
take into account environmental values but cultural , social , ethical and economic values should also be included
in the sustainable design process ( e . g . Tischner and Charter
2001 )  . Designing could change and become a more proactive and participatory process aiming for aesthetic
sustainability ( Niemelä 2010 , 60 )  . To this ambition , it can
be added that sustainable design can also be a proactive
process that aims to transform consumption patterns
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 8 of 11
towards more sustainable ones , and therefore , it includes future-oriented thinking and future-oriented
value ( Niinimäki 2011 )  . It is important to understand
how the current design , manufacturing and business
practices affect unsustainable consumption patterns . 
Products actually configure consumers ’ needs and use
patterns , and hence , design can be said to be ‘ practiceoriented ’  , which leads to certain everyday consumption
habits ( Shove et al . 2007 , 134–136 )  . Therefore , designers , 
manufacturers and companies are responsible not only
for the environmental impacts of the fashion industry but
also for the unsustainable consumption behaviour of
consumers and the increase of waste streams . 
Designers can even destroy the value of the product by
creating fast-changing trends that quickly outdate the
products and render them valueless . The product itself may
destroy something valuable , such as a craft skill or local
knowledge ( Fry 2009 )  , something we already have seen
in the area of fashion : manufacturing locations are far
from end markets , and local manufacturing skills have
diminished or disappeared . At the same time , only few
consumers can repair their own garments or have skills
to create garments themselves ; many do not even own
a sewing machine ( Niinimäki 2011 ; Armstrong et al . 2015 )  . 
Thinking about what we design and produce and why , 
as well as what consequences our design may bring , forms
the basis of ethical thinking and future-oriented value
creation . 
Future-oriented value creation as an approach guides
designers and manufacturers towards far-sighted products
and far-sighted business thinking , transforming current
practices towards more sustainable societies . Each design
and manufacturing decision has to include consideration
of the future : how the product will be used , how it will
age , how it will be disposed of and what environmental
impact the product will have ( during manufacturing , use
and after use )  . Furthermore , the business model and its
influence on consumption practices are included in this
evaluation process ( e . g . a slow system versus a fast system )  . 
What consequences do the product and its manufacturing
have with regard to environmental , societal and cultural
values ? All these aspects have to be considered before the
product is designed or manufactured . And is there the
possibility to completely avoid materialistic consumption and do business differently ? Radical thinking ( e . g . a
PSS approach to fulfil consumers ’ needs in a de-materialistic
way ) is needed to create a new value creation process in sustainable fashion ( Armstrong et al . 2015 )  . 
At best , a new kind of sustainable fashion system can
create value for people , planet and profit ( see Figure 1 )  . 
For people , the system can create a safe environment
through the use of fewer chemicals in production , i . e . 
safe products for end-users . This system can also promote
greater product satisfaction through better quality and
longer-lasting products . It can promote well-being and
happiness through less materialistic consumption , e . g . 
by offering experiences through sharing , swapping , lending , updating or do-it-yourself fashion . We can learn to invest in higher quality and more expensive products , use
them longer , own less and take good care of our possessions . Furthermore , such a system can mean more social
justice and better working conditions for textile factory
workers , while through slowing the system , it is possible
to increase the end price of the product and invest in
Figure 1 Sustainable fashion system can create value to people , environment and business ( Niinimäki , 2013 , 35 ) nn . 
Niinimäki Textiles and Clothing Sustainability ( 2015 ) 1 : 3 Page 9 of 11
better factories . For the environment , through cleaner
production and perhaps even less industrial production
and waste , the benefits for slower cycles are clear . For
business , new models to make profit in an environmentally beneficial way have to be created . New system thinking and these radical business models can afford new
business opportunities through , e . g . a service approach , 
to encourage less materialistic industrial manufacturing 
( Niinimäki 2013 )  . 
Conclusions
This text provided an overview for ethics in the sustainable fashion field . It was grounded on environmental
ethics and value discussion in it . As Ehrenfeld ( 2015 , 61 , 
based on Rittel and Webber 1973 ) argues ‘ solutions for
wicked problems are not true-or-false but good-or-bad ’  , 
which grounds the discussion in sustainable design on
ethics , moral and values . Moreover , he points out that
each ‘ implemented solution to a wicked problem has
consequences ’  . Sustainable fashion is a wicked problem : 
there is no simple truth how to make things better or
right , but only different approaches to improve the current
situation . Values and ethics are fundamental grounds also
for sustainable fashion , and they might help to widen the
discussion and seeing problem areas more holistically and
further to include the ethical dimension more tightly to
discussion . Ethics is the ground for making choices in the
sustainable design and manufacturing and even while considering the business models and profit-making options . It
is worthwhile to investigate the value base in sustainable
fashion and further to consider the consequences of our
design and industrial manufacturing processes for the environment , human health and for societies . 
Based on environmental ethics , first , we have to consider
the system level change , what is right for the ecosystem , 
societies and community as a whole in the context of
sustainable development . Secondly , we should consider
the human health issues in production and also in the
use situation and the use of chemicals in the textile
production . Finally , we have to take into account the
sustainable use of resources ; emphasising renewable
and recyclable materials , considering efficient or sufficient
principles and further creating a slower and closed-looksystem for the fashion industry . 
Even though ethical consideration might be a complicated and hard task to do for companies , it can open new
business possibilities , while consumers are more than ever
interested on environmental values . Products have to offer
those values that are important to consumers . If the value
offering of the new product is an answer to a consumer ’ s
value seeking , there is a business opportunity ( Niinimäki
2011 )  . If a consumer ’ s deep inner needs are understood , a
new sustainable fashion business can be done in a less
materialistic way , e . g . offering services to fulfil the need
for appearance change instead of new products or offer
emotional experiences without purchasing . Moreover , 
in the future , in a sustainable economy , producers and
consumers begin to be partners in co-producing value
in a closed loop industrial system where all materials , even
old clothes , are valuable raw material for the industrial
system . 
The values behind the product and company create
the foundation upon which a good design is built : a design
that is grounded on ethical consideration , which has a low
environmental impact and which is also easy to fall in
love with . This is the way to do sustainable fashion in the
future . 