sustainable 
fashion:
New approaches
Kirsi Niinimäki (ed.)
Aalto University publication series
Art + Design + Architecture 9/2013
Aalto ARTS Books
Helsinki, Finland
books.aalto.fi
ISBN 978-952-5572-5
ISBN 978-952-60-5573-2 (pdf)
ISSN-L 1799-4853
ISSN 1799-4853
ISSN 1799-4861 (pdf)
This book is produced in cooperation between Aalto University’s School 
of Arts, Design and Architecture and the Baltic Fashion partnership. The 
publication is produced with the assistance of the European Union. Its 
content is the sole responsibility of the authors and can in no way be taken 
to reflect the views of the European Union.
© The authors and Aalto University
Graphic design: Anja-Lisa Hirscher
Paper: Munken Lynx 120 g
Typeface: Brandon grotesque
Printed in Unigrafia
Helsinki, Finland 2013
sustainable 
fashion:
New approaches
Kirsi Niinimäki (ed.)
Table of content
Table of content
SUSTAINABLE FASHION
Kirsi Niinimäki
Tenents of Sustainable Fashion 12
ETHICS AND AESTHETICS
Kirsi Niinimäki 
Values and Green Aesthetics 32
Maarit Aakko 
What is the Role of Aesthetics in Sustainability? 38
Kirsi Niinimäki 
Ethical Design 44
Maarit Aakko 
Artisanal and Slow : The Case of Anna Ruohonen 56
Maarit Aakko & Kirsi Niinimäki 
Experimenting with Zero-Waste Fashion 68
CRITICAL AND SOCIAL DESIGN
Kirsi Niinimäki 
Design Activism: Critical and Social 82
Anu Corin 
Getting Critical
 “Why should I create anything?” 86
Kati Reijonen & Mari Krappala 
Changing the World with Fashion 92
4
Table of content 5
PRODUCT SERVICE SYSTEM
Cosette Armstrong 
Product-Service Systems Design Thinking for Sustainable Fashion 102
Essi Karell 
Planned Continuity – Multi-life Garments through 
Modular Structures & Supplemental Services 110
INNOVATION FOR GREEN BUSINESS 
Kirsi Niinimäki 
New Values – New Business Opportunities 126
Anika Kozlowski 
Sustainability Driven Innovation and Fashion Design 134
Lisbeth Svengren Holm 
Innovative Fashion Concepts and the Communication of Sustainability 146
COLLABORATION
Kirsi Niinimäki 
Open Collaboration 160
Dilys Williams 
The Making of a Social Object: Collaboration between 
Nike and Centre for Sustainable Fashion 164
Anja-Lisa Hirscher & Alastair Fuad-Luke 
Open Participatory Designing for an Alternative Fashion Economy 174 
AT THE END: ENVISIONING THE FUTURE
Kirsi Niinimäki 198
WRITERS 200 
 

The idea for this publication emerged while organising the international seminar and exhibition 
“Sustainable and Innovative Fashion” in Aalto 
University, Finland, on 2–3 October, 2013. The 
event was part of the Baltic Fashion project, 
where Aalto University focused strongly on producing new knowledge on the sustainable fashion field. The book sets out some of the themes 
presented in the seminar and exhibition. Additionally it focuses on new sustainable design and 
business thinking while opening views on experimental design and green business approaches 
through real-life cases. 
This publication is intended to be used as 
a source of inspiration for designers and companies, and all stakeholders whose interest lies 
in the area of sustainable fashion. While the 
strategies for sustainability are complex and 
approaches are many, this publication presents 
only a few ways to approach sustainable fashion. 
I hope the publication offers inspiration on how 
to make positive change in current practices and 
how to effect new mindsets, creating transformative fashion.
Theoretical texts and the individual design 
cases and real-life business examples presented 
in this book show that a change in mindset is 
possible. They illustrate how we can challenge 
our traditional thinking and make manifest new 
ways to frame the problem and seek creative solutions. Moreover when problem areas are seen 
as opportunities where design thinking can help 
create successful outcomes, the chapters offer 
examples of how to do fashion and business differently. Even the wildest design experimentations are beneficial and meaningful if they open 
new kinds of thinking or even question the current fashion system.
This book presents sustainable fashion as 
an approach that encompasses future-oriented 
In Tuusula, Finland
December 2013
Kirsi Niinimäki
value, as transformative and re-directive design 
envisioning the future, as design and business 
strategy, as change agent experimentation, and 
as reframing business thinking. The content is divided into six themes: the basics of sustainable 
fashion, ethics and aesthetics, critical and social 
design, product-service systems, innovation for 
green business and collaboration.
I wish to thank all writers, researchers, designers and companies who contributed to this 
publication with their best knowledge, writing, 
visuals and photos, and brave experimentations 
in the field of fashion. 
And before you start this literary journey I 
want to emphasise that sustainable fashion is a 
creative process where design, quality, value, collaboration and networks form the core, not fashionable appearance and cheap prices. Enjoy the 
experimental journey! 
foreword
foreword 7
BSR Baltic See Region
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CSF Centre for Sustainable Fashion
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
C2C Consumer to Consumer
DfE Design for Environment
DIT Do-it-Together
DIY Do-it-Yourself
DPC Designer-Producer-Consumer
EMAS Eco-Management and Audit Schme
EPR Extended Producer Responsibility
LCA Life Cycle Analysis
MSI Material Sustainability Index
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
PSS Product-Service System
SAC Sustainable Apparel Coalition
SME Small and Medium-sized Companies 
ZWF Zero Waste Fashion
ZWPC Zero Waste Pattern Cutting
Abbreviations
8 abbreviations
Despite dramatic changes within the last decade 
resulting in a loss of a third of its volume and jobs, 
the fashion sector still plays a highly important role 
throughout the Baltic Sea Region (BSR): not only 
that it is characterised by a high number of small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and female 
employees, but it is also an important source for 
creativity and identity-building throughout the 
region. Recent innovations and transnational cooperation as well as trends towards sustainable consumption offer important opportunities for Baltic 
fashion designers and companies. 
Against this background, the Baltic Fashion 
project partnership, composed of representatives from government, industry and education, 
explored possibilities for transnational cooperation in Baltic fashion support. As part of the Baltic 
Fashion project, they: 
•	 analysed innovations within the industry, 
which are of relevance to Baltic fashion SMEs 
in view of offering them unique selling points, 
lowering production costs and/or expanding 
to new target groups, 
•	 strengthened business cooperation in the 
BSR by compiling a comprehensive mapping 
of local production sites and organising BSRwide business cooperation events. Based on 
current trends as well as strengths and weaknesses of each country, an analysis on possible scenarios for local production in the BSR 
countries was developed, 
•	 collected information on the current support 
offer for fashion businesses and conducted 
direct surveys with fashion SMEs to enquire 
about their needs. Based on the results, they 
developed and tested fashion business support 
measures as well as training, 
•	 organised roundtables with national stakeholders to discuss actions to further support 
the Baltic fashion industry in the future, and
•	 explored how cooperation within the Baltic Fashion project could be continued in 
the future. 
All information, either collected or generated in the 
project, was fed into the Baltic Fashion Information 
Portal, the first-ever comprehensive web platform 
on Baltic fashion, accessible at www.balticfashion.eu. 
The Baltic Fashion project was supported by 
the ERDF-financed Baltic Sea Region Programme 
2007–2013 under the priority “innovation”. It 
was implemented between December 2010 and 
December 2013.
Acknowledgements 
This publication was made possible through the 
support and contributions provided by the Baltic 
Fashion partnership.
The Baltic Fashion project 
foreword 9
sustainable
fashion
Walker, S. (2007). Sustainable by Design Explorations in 
Theory and Practice. London: Earthscan.
Contemporary aesthetic norms are based in capitalintensive, highly automated, unsustainable proce -
d u r e s . T h e s e p r o c e d u r e s t e n d t o r e d u c e t h e p o t e n t i a l 
f o r f u l f i l l i n g e m p l o y m e n t a n d o f t e n i g n o r e s o c i a l a n d 
environmental losses. (Walker 2007, 76.)
Tenents of 
Sustainable 
fashion
Kirsi Niinimäki
To unpack some of the complexity surrounding 
the sustainability issues in the fashion field, this 
chapter briefly discusses some of the principles 
behind sustainable fashion. The chapter begins 
with manufacturing and consumption, moves to 
design principles, discusses the use phase and 
CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) issues, 
and finally moves to new technologies. 
The environmental impact of garments can be 
decreased during:
•	 fibre production, finishing, dyeing and printing processes
•	 global logistics during manufacturing and 
sales
•	 the use and the maintenance of the product
•	 disposal of the product.
Introduction
In all these phases there are myriad possibilities to lessen environmental impact. Recently 
ethical and sustainability issues have entered the 
discussion and have received a lot of attention, 
as fashion manufacturing has moved to lower 
cost and mainly Asian and Far East countries 
during the last 25 years. 
Current design and manufacturing systems 
as well as economic models lead to unsustainable 
fashion consumption. The whole situation can be 
seen as a complex problem that needs creative 
problem solving, brave design thinking, questioning of current practices, and open collaboration between different industrial and marketing 
partners. 
14 sustainable Fashion
The fashion industry and 
garment consumption
To understand the scale of the problem in the 
current fashion system, the following paragraphs 
will give some key figures on the global textile and 
fashion industry. The textile and fashion industry 
is one of the biggest and oldest industrial sectors 
in the world. It uses more water in its processes 
than any other industry except agriculture, and 
it releases huge amounts of toxic chemicals into 
the environment. The total volume of textile and 
fashion production at the global level is estimated to be more than 30 million tons annually, 
and therefore the environmental impacts of this 
industry are remarkable (Chen & Burns 2006). 
The textile and clothing industry has moved 
with increasing speed and volume into low-cost 
Asian and Far East countries during the last 25 
years. For example in Finland the watershed year 
was 1987, when textiles and clothing export figures were bigger than import rates for the last 
time; in the following year these figures reversed 
(Moilala 2013). Today it is estimated that in Finland, for example, about 95% of sold garments 
are imported; this figure is by and large the same 
in all Western countries (mostly between 90-
95%). And production has not only moved into 
long logistic chains, but it also has grown and is 
still growing. It is estimated that the global textile industry grew 25% between 2002 and 2010 
(Economy Watch 29.6.2010). Yet this tendency 
started already in the 1980s: industry growth 
at the global level stood at 143% between the 
years 1979–1990 and the Far East had the highest textile export growth of 430% during that 
period (Lim 2003). 
On the consumption side rapid growth is also 
evident. For example in the UK the consumption 
of fashion has increased by 37% between 2001 
and 2005 (the amount of clothes purchased per 
capita) (Allwood et al.2006). In Sweden the 
amount of clothes and home textiles released 
on the market rose by 40% between the years 
2000 and 2009 (Carlsson et al. 2011 in Tojo et 
al. 2012). In Finland the total volume of clothes 
sold in 2010 was 70 212 tons (Tojo et al. 2012), 
which, for a population of 5 426 674, equals 
an average of 13 kg of textiles per person. This 
Western overconsumption causes environmental and social problems on the other side of the 
globe, where the fibres are cultivated, fabrics are 
woven, dyed and finished with chemicals, and 
sewn into garments in poor working conditions. 
Efficient mass manufacturing in lower cost 
countries has brought about low end-prices of 
garments. Cheap product prices lead consumers to impulse purchases and unsustainable 
consumption behaviour: overconsumption, very 
short use time of products and premature disposal of the product (Niinimäki 2011). Growing 
consumption also leads to increasing textile waste 
streams. The American consumer disposes of 31 
kilograms of textiles and clothing each year, most 
of which ends up in landfill (about 85%), and it 
is estimated that in the UK over 900 000 million items of clothing are disposed of each year 
(Brown 2010). Finnish consumers discard nearly 
17 kilograms of textiles and clothing a year, 75% 
of which ends up in landfill (Moisala 2013).
Fashion markets are oversaturated and because of the extremely effective mass manufacturing system, the world is full of not only new 
fashion items and fashion shops but also unsold 
clothing. Discount sales in fashion shops seem to 
be a permanent phenomenon. In addition not all 
new garments even enter the market; some go to 
landfill directly from the factory, because of imperfect quality. Furthermore some garments are 
never sold to consumers from the shop because 
there are too many offerings on the market, 
which is oversaturated. No one actually seems 
to know the amounts of these unsold garments, 
which end up in landfill. It is estimated that these 
unsold garments may account for even 5-10% of 
the whole fashion production. Fashion companies try to maintain their brands’ reputations in 
this risky business and would rather destroy the 
unsold garments than discount them and release 
them onto the market in too big quantities. 
Sustainable Fashion 15
Some fashion companies are trying to build 
a positive reputation by working together with 
designers in a new way with these unsold garments. In some cases young designers are invited 
to create unique fashion collections made of unsold clothing. These redesigned collections are presented at social events with the help of the media. 
One example of this phenomenon was the second 
ReUse Republic event in Helsinki (8–9 April 2011), 
where thirteen young designers sold their unique 
fashion made from fashion brand donations, preconsumer garments made into new apparel. 
ReUse Republic event in Kamppi shopping centre in 
Helsinki, Finland (Photo: Kirsi Niinimäki)
16 sustainable Fashion
Textile and clothing consumption is estimated to 
comprise about 5% of the environmental impact 
and carbon emissions of households. Even if that 
figure is relatively low, textile and clothing consumption is ever increasing (e.g. Spangenberg 
2001), and the more recent shortening of the 
life spans of especially fast fashion items increases the environmental burden of the industry: all 
those resources are wasted if the garments are 
worn for only a very short time or even not at 
all. Furthermore textile waste is growing problems in all Western countries and additionally 
the chemical burden of textile manufacturing is 
a huge problem in Asian countries. 
In landfills most textiles do not decompose 
(polyester not at all while some natural materials do but often too slowly), and the problem is 
that they are not planned to be suitable for composting. Fibres include many toxic chemicals, 
colours and finishings, and most garments are 
made of blended materials unsuitable for composting. Composting is also problematic from 
the environmental viewpoint as it produces a lot 
of methane, which contributes to greater greenhouse gas emissions and global warming. 
Many consumers donate their old garments 
to charity shops, where some garments are resold to consumers and some are transported to 
other destinations like Africa. In Africa this invasion of Western garments has largely destroyed 
local textile and garment production. In this way 
Western consumers have moved their consumption problems to the developing world and simultaneously helped to destroy the cultural value of 
local production and local textile traditions.
Sustainable design
In the 1970s, when environmental thinking started, 
the focus was more narrowly on solving waste problems caused by industrial production; currently sustainable thinking looks for ways to find sustainable 
balance in the use of economic, social and environmental resources while simultaneously taking care 
not to destroy the ability of future generations to 
fulfil their needs in a sustainable way. The notion 
of the triple bottom line means taking into consideration all three areas: people, planet and profit in a 
sustainable manner. Additionally sustainable design 
and business strategies today include ethical and 
value-based thinking. While true sustainable thinking is rather wide and needs a holistic understanding 
and approach on many levels, it is more common to 
focus on one narrower approach to eco-design and 
sustainability, for example focusing on the environmental impacts of manufacturing, substituting 
materials with eco-materials, or focusing on ethical 
issues in manufacturing (e.g. CSR, corporate social 
responsibility). This same kind of narrow thinking is 
also seen in the use of eco-labels. Even though all 
these aforementioned approaches are important, 
and it is positive that companies are interested in 
eco- and sustainable fashion, according to holistic 
thinking these strategies are limited and very often 
do not face the real problem areas. Such narrow 
approaches alone therefore cannot solve the actual 
problem, the overproduction and overconsumption 
Sustainable Fashion 17
of clothing. The fashion discipline is far behind for 
example industrial design in producing scientific 
environmental knowledge for designers’ use, trying 
new design methods to solve problems in more creative ways (Thomas 2008), or engaging consumers in 
sustainable transformation processes. We need more 
creative thinking in designing, manufacturing, consuming and doing business in the sustainable context. 
By definition eco-design and design for the 
environment (DfE) include environmental consideration and especially life cycle thinking. The 
sustainable design approach adds to the aforementioned the ethical and social dimensions of 
the product, in its manufacturing, use and disposal 
phases (Tischner & Charter 2001, p. 120). Environmental consideration means that we use all 
renewable resources in a manner where the use 
does not jeopardise the resources’ ability to renew: 
there has to be a balance. The use of non-renewable materials should be minimised, all materials 
should be recycled effectively, waste should be 
avoided, and any waste that is produced should 
be treated appropriately without environmental 
risk. Social sustainability involves considering the 
well-being of individuals, communities and societies at large. Finally, since the triple bottom line 
approach includes environmental, social and economic approaches to sustainability, financial feasibility is accordingly an important aspect (Elkington 
1994). This notion is also known as “People, Planet & 
Profit” (alternative prosperity) (Visser et al. 2008). 
The European Commission has defined principles 
of environmental design as follows:
•	 Use low-impact materials whenever it is 
possible: non-toxic, sustainably produced or 
recycled materials which require little or no 
natural resources (such as energy and water) 
to transport and process, and whose use does 
not threaten bio-diversity
•	 Focus on resource efficiency: create manufacturing processes, services and products 
that consume as few natural resources as 
possible
•	 Invest in high quality and durability: longer 
lasting and better functioning products, 
which age aesthetically and therefore reduce 
the impact of product replacement
•	 Reuse, recycle and renew: design products 
that can be reused, recycled or composted 
(SEC 2009, p. 21). 
Sustainable fashion should include life cycle 
thinking, which takes into account all phases: 
design, manufacturing, logistics, retail, use and disposal. It is said that it is better to design life cycles 
instead of products; sustainable design includes 
consideration of the use phase and end-of-life 
thinking. At best the product has the possibility to 
have several life cycles: it should be designed how 
the product can be used after the first life cycle 
is over. From the environmental point of view it 
is best to use the product as it is, the second best 
option is to redesign a new product from it (e.g. 
through minor modifications), and the third option 
is to recycle the materials. 
In the fashion field several guidelines and checklists have been created in recent years. Sandy Black 
(2011, pp. 46–47) gives the following guidelines for 
a sustainable fashion designer: design for the entire 
garment’s life cycle (including use and disposal) 
•	 reuse waste materials
•	 recycle
•	 upcycle
•	 repair and remodel garments
•	 recreate (e.g. existing design concepts)
•	 reduce (use of resources and creation of 
waste)
•	 use ecological materials
•	 use mono materials 
•	 use new technologies
•	 create longer lasting products
•	 design multifunctional clothes
•	 design for delight.
18 sustainable Fashion
Cradle-to-cradle Redesign
The cradle-to-cradle principle was originally 
suggested by Stahel in the 1970s (Lovins 2008, 
p.38) and again at the beginning of the new millennium by McDonough and Braungart (2002). 
According to this principle a product is designed 
and manufactured in such a manner that multiple 
life cycles of the product or materials are possible. The cradle-to-cradle principle counsels that 
after the use phase the product will continue in 
technical or biological life cycles, meaning it will 
be recycled into a new material or it will be composted. This means that materials, dyes, chemicals and auxiliaries have to be suitable either for 
recycling or composting (i.e. be biodegradable). 
This is a challenging task since, for instance, only 
few textile colours or chemicals in the fibres can 
be composted without environmental problems.
The redesign of old materials into new fashion products has become popular at the beginning of the 21st century. Reuse and redesign is 
sometimes called an eco-efficiency approach 
(Fletcher 2008) even though these strategies 
do not address the real problem: the increase in 
production and consumption. Reuse and redesign 
need no changes in current consumer practices, 
so it is easy to accept. And since we have huge 
amounts of textile and clothing waste, redesign 
has begun to be a popular and trendy fashion 
design approach. In the redesign approach it is 
beneficial to remember that all textile materials are not designed for clothing purposes, which 
might make them feel uncomfortable in use and 
even unsuitable to wear against the skin.
Recycling
Recycling means that the product is recycled into new 
material or fibres. Recycling can mean downcycling or 
upcycling. In downcycling processes we lose some of the 
value of the material and the quality is lower than in the 
original material. Therefore downcycled material is mainly 
used for filling purposes. Upcycling, in contrast, aims 
to keep the product’s quality high and it can even mean 
increasing the value of the material e.g. through design.
The recycling approach needs mono materials, 
which means that the whole garment is made from one 
material only (including threads, buttons, zipper etc.). 
This makes it easy to recycle as one piece and one material (e.g. as with Patagonia’s products). Another possibility is that all parts are easy to disassemble and products 
have to designed in this manner. But this is complicated 
to realise in clothing where disassembling would be too 
time-consuming and costly. Mono-materials in fashion 
items are also not very common and nearly all garments 
are made of fibre blends that are complicated or impossible to recycle. 
If we accept the current consumption practices as 
they are, and the concomitant huge amount of textile and clothing waste, we have to invest in a recycling 
economy; then polyester is our choice. Polyester can be 
melt-spun and this results in high quality material. Even 
though we see savings in e.g. energy, the process still 
needs a certain amount of virgin polyester material, and 
this approach locks us into polyester production and the 
accompanying oil production.
Sustainable Fashion 19
Materials
We do have more and more environmental information about textiles’ impacts during cultivation, manufacturing processes and the use phase. 
While a full compendium of this information is 
out of the scope of this publication, a short summary of materials’ environmental impact is given 
below, as choosing materials for garments is one 
of the most problematic phases in the sustainable fashion design process. 
Even though new materials are entering the 
field of fashion, the most commercially important fibres used in the fashion industry are cotton and polyester, together accounting for over 
80% of all fibres, and the use of polyester has 
grown each year. Fibre consumption figures for 
the year 2005 are shown in Table 1. 
Fibres used worldwide in 2005 (million tons)
Total
NATURAL FIBRES
Cotton
Wool
Silk
24.4
1.23
0.13
Total 25.76
2.53
2.63
3.92
24.70
Total 33.78
59.54
MANUFACTURED FIBRES
Cellulosics
Synthetics 
 Acrylic
 Nylon
 Polyester
Table 1. Fibre use (Simpson 2006)
20 sustainable Fashion
Because diversity is an important value in sustainable development it is important to have 
variety in textile fibres. Accordingly the current 
predominance of cotton and polyester can be 
seen as a problem from the viewpoint of diversity. More recently hemp, which is considered 
a more environmentally friendly alternative to 
cotton, has increased its share in sustainable 
fashion markets. Hemp grows fast, produces 
long fibres and needs little pesticide. It even improves the soil structure and can be cultivated in 
colder climates. Environmental friendly enzymes 
can also be used in hemp processes. A similar fibre 
is flax (linen).
It is not possible to say which fibres are more 
environmentally friendly, natural fibres or manufactured fibres. Each fibre has its own environment burden. Production of acrylic, viscose and 
cotton into fibres needs a lot of water, and acrylic, polyester, viscose and cotton need a lot of 
energy in the production process. The land area 
used to cultivate natural fibres might be better 
used in food production, and some natural fibres 
have a big environmental impact during cultivation, e.g. the water and pesticide use in cotton 
cultivation. In this regard organic cotton is a better choice; its cultivation uses fewer chemicals 
(pesticides and fertilisers). 
Many synthetic fibres are by-products from 
petroleum production and they are not renewable; on the other hand they can be recycled 
more easily into good quality material (e.g. polyester) while cotton is mainly downcycled. Nonetheless high quality and recycled cotton has recently entered the market.
New fibres are being developed and bio-based 
plastics, for example, offer future potential also 
in the fashion field. These fibres can be produced 
from e.g. corn or soybean protein. Milk (casein) 
can also be used for fibre production. The best 
situation would be that all these new materials 
are by-products from agriculture, should be biodegradable, and from renewable sources.
The ecological viscose Tencel (lyocell) is 
made from wood pulp and from trees specifically 
cultivated for this purpose. Tencel processing 
has been developed to have low environmental 
impact and the material is biodegradable and renewable. (Chen & Burns 2006)
Bamboo is a contradictory material: while it 
is marketed as an ecological choice (fast growing and renewable), in reality, its viscose process 
from fibre to yarn has a rather large environmental impact. However it is also possible to process 
bamboo fibre in a more environmentally friendly 
way, not in a viscose process but as a normal fibre process. This environmentally better bamboo 
fibre has been developed in Switzerland (Steffen 
at al. 2013).
Some synthetic fibres have bigger environmental impact because they induce more sweating during use and need to be washed more often 
than garments made of natural fibres. Recent 
research has pointed out new problem areas in 
the use of, for example, polyester. Microplastics 
from washing machine wastewater are polluting 
beaches and marine environments. These tiny 
particles come loose when clothes made from 
synthetic fibres, like polyester, acrylic and polyamide, are being washed. (Browne et al. 2011.) 
Frequently laundered polyester sport clothing 
especially causes this problem.
The organisation Made By has categorised 
textile materials according to their environmental impact (see Table 2). Class A consists of fibres that have the lowest environmental impact 
(according to Made By). 
Sustainable Fashion 21
CLASS A
Recycled cotton
Recycled nylon
Recycled polyester
Organic hemp
Organic flax (linen)
CLASS B
Tencel® (Lenzing lyocell 
product)
Organic cotton
In conversion cotton
CLASS C
Conventional hemp
Ramie
PLA
Conventional flax (linen)
UNCLASSIFIED
Silk
Organic wool
Leather
Elasthan
Acetate
Cashmere wool
Mohair wool
Fibre-based bamboo, etc.
CLASS E
Conventional cotton
Virgin nylon
Rayon
Bamboo viscose
Wool
Generic viscose
CLASS D
Virgin polyester
Poly-acrylic
Lenzing Modal® (viscose 
product)
Table 2. Textile materials’ environmental impact (Made by http://www.made-by.org/benchmarks/environmental) When choosing materials for garments, the 
material’s attributes and how they suit the particular wearing practices have to be considered 
carefully. It is also important to evaluate the 
material’s aging process so the material does 
not look old too fast. Studies have shown that 
materials that are considered to age aesthetically 
include high quality wool and leather (Niinimäki 
2010). In contrast materials like acrylic look 
old after a rather short use time, as pilling will 
occur. This is also seen with commonly used soft 
fleece-type polyester. 
22 sustainable Fashion
The use phase
Textile maintenance uses much energy and water, in 
washing, drying and ironing. We know that only 7.5% 
of laundry is actually heavily soiled. The majority is 
washed more for cultural or behavioural reasons 
(Catton 2007). Garments frequently washed have 
the highest environmental impact. By optimising 
the best textile materials, fit and colours for each 
purpose and use, the designer as well as the consumer can minimise the number of washes.
Garments and workwear textiles have a large 
relative environmental impact during use, compared 
to their impact during production and disposal which 
is estimated to have a small relative impact (Fletcher 
2008). Depending on the material and its need to be 
washed frequently, the impact of consumer care can 
e.g. be as high as 75–80% of the total environmental 
impact of a cotton shirt (Lewis & Gertsakis 2001). In 
this case eco-material choices do not actually offer 
much improvement to the environmental footprint in 
the total LCA (Life Cycle Analysis).
While the goal in EU energy efficiency policy 
is to decrease the use of energy, new problems are 
arising also in clothing care. The EU demands that 
all new laundering machines have a 20°C temperature washing programme. Washing garments in cold 
water saves energy but on the other hand stronger 
chemicals are needed to get all dirt away from the 
fibres. This causes a new environmental problem 
because strong chemicals stay in the wastewater. 
Furthermore the use of stronger chemicals in laundering might stimulate allergic reactions. Therefore 
it might be better to use higher laundering temperatures instead of lower temperatures with stronger 
washing powders. (Vaatteiden Kylmäpesu Voi Lisätä 
Kemikaalien Käyttöä 2013)
Chemical use in general is an increasing problem 
in the textile and fashion industry. Production processes might include a lot of chemicals which are a 
risk not only for textile factories’ workers but also for 
the end-users. Lately we have seen several product 
recalls where garments have contained too many 
harmful chemicals. In the EU the REACH chemical regulation tightly restricts chemical leftovers in 
textiles and garments as well as chemical waste in the 
textile industry. Therefore if the garment is made in 
EU countries, it has a higher guarantee that it is safe 
for the end-user.
One of the most important factors in the environmental impact during the use phase is the garment’s lifetime. Currently garments are far cheaper 
compared to household incomes than a few decades 
ago. Textile and clothing prices have fallen, and 
currently the consumer possesses more and more 
impulse-buy cheap garments and low quality textiles. These kinds of low quality and cheap garments 
are easy to discard. Extending the life span of garments is one of the most critical issues for sustainable development. 
In the UK a study showed that almost half of 
people’s clothes have sat in a closet without being 
used during the last twelve-month period. It is estimated that this means 2.4 billion items in the UK 
alone. And most of these unused clothes are owned 
by young consumers aged 25–34. (Belz & Peattie 
2011, p. 125) Another study from the Netherlands 
showed that the average piece of clothing is owned 
for three years and five months. During that time it 
is worn for only 44 days and laundered after being 
used for 2.4 to 3.1 days. (Uitdenbogerd 1998, as 
cited by Fletcher 2008)
Contrary to the current system, product 
durability and long-term use are prerequisites for 
sustainable consumption (Cooper 2005). To slow 
down consumption it is important to invest in 
good quality and durability as well as in aesthetically aging materials, high design and lasting style. 
In this regard services that aim to extend how long 
garments are used offer value in the sustainable 
development context. One challenge in the current system is how to design products added with 
services that encourage consumers to adopt more 
environmentally responsible behaviour.
When focusing on ethical and sustainable use 
and consumption, the following issues should 
be considered:
Sustainable Fashion 23
•	 Purchasing fewer garments 
•	 Investing in meaningful garments 
(promoting emotional bonding)
•	 Investing in durable garments, more classical 
style and high quality
•	 Investing in eco-materials and eco-labels
•	 Extending garments’ owning time 
and using them more frequently
•	 Washing less, letting garments rest 
and air between use times 
•	 Maintaining garments, also repairing
•	 Using services to intensify use and to extend 
the use time (e.g. repair, upgrading).
Consumption and consumerism lie at the core 
of Western societies. Consumption is an important function in people’s everyday life. Current 
consumption patterns are strongly connected to 
industrial manufacturing systems, economic systems and the underlying economic values supporting this unsustainable system. Consumption 
and purchasing situations often involve a strong 
emotional experience for consumers. Therefore we 
should also create systems that offer other kinds of 
emotional experiences and satisfaction than from 
buying new stuff. This could happen for example through strategically sustainable design that 
includes services (Niinimäki 2011).
CSR and subcontracting 
In today’s reality in the fashion field more and 
more garments are manufactured in other countries, very often on the other side of the globe. 
Globally about 80% of clothing exports are 
shipped from undeveloped countries to developed economies. For example in Finland about 
90% of sold garments are imported from Asian 
and Far East countries, about 5% from EU and 
other countries, and only about 5% are manufactured in Finland. In this fragmented and globalised supply network the main issue is risk management. From the recent accidents and fires in 
Bangladeshi textile factories we know that lack 
of awareness about the weak points in the supply 
chain create a reputational risk, at the very least. 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) tackles these issues: i.e. what enterprises’ responsibilities are regarding their impacts on society. Additionally corporations should integrate 
social, environmental, ethical human rights and 
consumer concerns into their strategy in cooperation with their stakeholders. Corporate Social 
Responsibility is used in parallel with the terms 
Corporate Citizenship, Corporate Responsibility 
and Corporate Sustainability.
If the producer wants to address sustainability issues in the supply chain to a greater extent, 
it is important to select subcontractors well 
and demand good practices. Code of Conduct 
principles help companies in this process, and 
standards like SA 8000, ISO 14001 and EMAS 
help when considering environmental and social 
aspects in design and manufacturing practices. 
Additionally the UN has defined ten principles 
called the “Global Compact” to set standards 
for subcontractors (http://www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/). These principles take 
account of issues from human rights, labour 
issues, environment initiatives and issues in anticorruption. Several companies have voluntarily 
accepted these principles and follow them in their 
own subcontracting arrangements, for example 
Puma, GAP and Nike. Checklists exist where producers can pick requirements for their subcontractors (e.g. http://www.csrcompass.com/).
Better than just giving the code of conduct 
list to manufacturers is to work in collaboration 
to improve the situation. Working with subcontractors and establishing good and tight relationships, mutual understanding and trust takes 
time. The producer’s goals and requirements in 
sustainability have to be well communicated and 
preferably based on mutual motivation. Furthermore to build motivation it is good to show good 
successful examples of how to work with sustainability in the fashion field. (Kruger et al. 2012)
Companies can benefit and gain great advantages by using charity or donation in their CSR 
24 sustainable Fashion
strategies. The charity work should be rooted in 
the companies’ actions strategically so that it 
engenders long-term business opportunities and 
“improves the competitive surroundings through 
charity…”. (Porter & Kramer 2006, as cited by 
Kruger et al. 2012, p. 15) It is important to realise 
that acting responsibly and promoting CSR do 
not necessary mean direct revenues to the company. The motivation to act responsibly is based 
on values other than economic but actions might 
also be (or should be) economically successful in 
the long run.
The sustainability strategies should also be 
included at all levels inside the company. All 
departments should commit to sustainability 
practices and all processes and products should 
include sustainability principles. Furthermore 
the sustainability of business is most important so the business must be profitable. It is 
also important to understand that sustainability 
and CSR needs constant evaluation; therefore it 
is a constant commitment and learning process 
(van Dyk 2008). 
Transparency is important in the fashion field, 
and all actions should be opened up to build consumers’ trust. This can also mean publishing all 
information about the supply chain, the names 
and locations of the suppliers and sub-contracting partners. A good example of this practice 
is the company Patagonia, which has been a 
leader in supply chain transparency for many 
years. Patagonia has set sustainability principles 
as a core in their strategy. The company offers 
information not only about all its manufacturing 
locations worldwide, but also background information about the factories they are collaborating 
with, as well as general environmental and social 
information about global manufacturing. Consumers can find all this information in Patagonia’s webpages.
In the global fashion business it has become 
challenging to identify the origin of a product 
since production processes are fragmented into 
several countries and supply chains are complex. 
Yet this information is valuable for consumers, 
and more transparency is demanded especially in 
clothing manufacturing. The “Made by” label is 
based in the Netherlands, and its goal is transparency in clothing manufacturing. For a consumer it is possible to trace the manufacturer of 
a garment through a code and use of the internet. 
(Fletcher 2008, p. 68)
Local production
Some companies have chosen the strategy to 
produce locally and even in their own factories 
to prevent risk in subcontracting. One example 
is the company American Apparel, which doesn’t 
outsource any of its operations. All products and 
all processes, e.g. dyeing, cutting and even packing, are done in its own factories; the company 
employs 5000 workers in southern California. 
According to the company their workers earn the 
highest pay worldwide in the textile and apparel 
field. They say that through this strategy they gain 
better and more consistent quality, environmentally better processes (following regulations) and 
stronger employee morale. (Briefing: supply chain 
2012) While the use of global supply chains creates risks, keeping or returning manufacturing to 
the local level lessens risks and ensures quality in 
the manufacturing. It is also good to remember 
that environmental regulations and laws are tight 
in EU countries while the situation is totally different in many Asian countries, which causes risk 
from the environmental point of view. Moreover 
many chemicals that are banned in EU countries are 
largely still used in textile factories in undeveloped 
countries, which causes risks to the workers, the 
environment as well as for the product’s end-user.
Another example of local production is the 
Finnish M.A.S.I Company, which produces 
jeans in its own factories in Keitele, Finland, and 
Sustainable Fashion 25
Extended producer 
responsibility (EPR)
Recently the approach of extended producer 
responsibility has gained a lot of attention and 
discussion in the EU. Extended producer responsibility (EPR) requires the original manufacturer 
or producer to take back the product after its 
use. In EPR the goal is that already in the design 
phase producers think about and plan how they 
can reduce environmental impact of the product 
after its use. 
This post-consumer waste should be reused, 
redesigned or recycled. In this concept companies are forced to have a waste management system and preferably take-back systems based on 
closed or open loop thinking, or, if not, pay waste 
treatment costs. Closed loop thinking means 
that all off-cuts, waste and products after their 
use time are treated inside the factory’s own 
processes and open loop means that leftovers 
are handled by some other outside partner. The 
principle is familiar in e.g. electronic products 
but not yet in textiles. 
EPR doesn’t yet cover the fashion and textile field but it soon might, and this would change 
fashion companies’ action logic, as old garments 
mean extra cost through waste treatment. EU 
policy aims for waste prevention, closing landfills and effective material recycling systems. 
This would also cover textiles and fashion. Right 
now textile waste ends up in landfills or as energy 
Estonia, for, for example, the brand Lee Cooper. 
This allows the company to easily control production, working conditions and the quality of the 
product. M.A.S.I does not do any sand-blasting of 
jeans, which is most harmful for workers and lowers the quality of the denim, weakening it. They 
also invest in better fit for consumers, by developing their own standards: i.e. measuring 250 
consumers to create better fitting jeans measurements and focusing on styles that highlight 
the behind. (Moilala 2013.) Good fit is the most 
important design aspect in jeans design.
waste in most European countries. France is one 
exception. There producers, distributors and 
importers of clothes, linen and footwear have 
had to take back old products since 2008. A 
company has to have a take-back system itself or 
it can join a scheme, which is accredited by the 
French government, and pay into it (right now 
EcoTLC). (Tojo et al. 2012.)
26 sustainable Fashion
Greenwash New technologies
Because Western consumers’ environmental 
interest is rising, companies may be tempted to 
use sustainable and environmental arguments 
merely to increase sales. And because environmental and sustainability issues are complex it 
is also easy to mislead consumers. Companies 
can use sustainability as a “marketing ploy” 
(Goworek et al. 2013, p. 388) – something that 
can be seen as greenwashing. 
To prevent greenwashing too narrow a focus 
on environmental issues should be avoided and a 
more holistic understanding is needed. For example if a fast fashion company uses eco-labels on 
some of its products or one product line, it doesn’t 
truly change the fashion system or the economic 
logic behind it; the company’s environmental load is still huge since it produces too much 
stuff in extremely fast cycles. A similar example 
is where a fast fashion company uses paper bags 
instead of plastic ones. The business logic does 
not change with this small detail. The company’s 
values have to be grounded deeply in sustainability 
and its principles should be included and implemented substantially at all levels and functions.
The other aspect to consider is that all information about the environmental benefits of the 
product has to be proven. In this regard eco-labels 
are much better than the company’s own environmental statements. Eco-labels (certificates) 
are based on an independent organisation’s tests 
and evaluation criteria and are thus more objective and reliable than the company’s own information. All irrelevant or confusing information 
should also be avoided. 
New digital technologies offer the possibility to 
produce locally and with lower environmental 
impact than traditional industrial mass manufacturing. New digital machines are not big investments and make it easier to start production 
locally. With digital technologies, like textile 
printing and 3D knitting, it is possible to produce 
smaller quantities, avoid surplus production, and 
even produce according to orders only. Moreover digital manufacturing allows individual and 
unique designs to be produced. And garments 
that are produced locally and close to end markets can also represent huge savings in logistics.
Digital textile printing offers the chance to 
do things differently. It brings the opportunity to 
produce locally, to produce only limited amounts 
or according to orders only, and to produce based 
on customization and unique design. Conventional 
printing systems use large quantities of chemicals, 
dyes and fabric. For example the industrial rotation printing technique needs several metres at 
the beginning of the print process before the print 
quality and colours are adjusted to look as they 
should (the imperfect pre-printing can take even 
15–20 metres). Digital textile printing thus offers 
environmental benefits in comparison. 
Sustainable Fashion 27
The environmental benefits of digital textile 
printing compared to rotation printing are as follows (Digital inkjet textile finishing 2013, p. 35):
•	 savings on energy up to 60%
•	 savings on water up to 80%
•	 savings on inks up to 90%
•	 savings on colour waste up to 90%
•	 reduced stock up to 70%. 
The amount of dye applied on fabric is precisely 
controlled in digital printing and this saves on 
the use of dyes. It is also possible to print only 
according to need or according to orders and 
therefore surplus production is avoided. Furthermore it is possible to print small amount of fabrics or even inside the garment’s patterns. This 
saves dye as well as fabric. 
Miu’s digital printed fashion (Photo:Otto Nieminen)
28 sustainable Fashi
o
n
Miu’s digital printed fashion (Photo: Otto Nieminen)
Sustainable Fashion 29
References
Allwood, J.M., Laursen, S.E., de Rodrigues, C.M. & Bocken, N.M.P. (2006). Well Dressed? The 
Present and Future Sustainability of Clothing and Textiles in the United Kingdom. Cambridge: University 
of Cambridge, Institute of Manufacturing. 
Black, S. (2011). Eco-Chick: The Fashion Paradox. London: Black Dog.
Belz, F.M. & Peattie, K. (2011). Sustainability Marketing, a Global Perspective. London: John Wiley 
and Sons.
Briefing: supply chain (2012). Ethical Corporation. October 2012.
Browne, M.A., Crump, P., & Niven, S.J. et al. (2011). Accumulation of Microplastics on Shorelines 
Worldwide: Sources and Sinks. Environmental Science & Technology. Vol. 45, pp. 9175–9179.
Catton, G. (2007). Sustainable Cleaning, Fast, Affordable and Sustainable Fashion. ASBCI Conference proceedings, 17th May 2007.
Chen, H. & Burns, L.D. (2006). Environmental Analysis of Textile Products. Clothing and Textile 
Research Journal. Vol. 24:3, pp. 248–261. 
Cooper, T. (2005). Slower Consumption: Reflections on Products’ Life Spans and the ‘Throwaway 
Society’. Journal of Industrial Ecology. Vol. 9:1–2, pp. 51–67. 
Digital Inkjet Textile Finishing (2013). Ecotextile News, Vol. 56 (August/September), p. 35.
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable Fashion & Textiles. London: Earthscan. 
Kruger, H., Himmestrup Dahl, E., Hjort, T. & Planthinn, D. (2012). Guide Lines II: A Handbook on 
Sustainability in Fashion. Copenhagen: Sustainable Solution Design Association, SSDA. 
Lewis, H. & Gertsakis, J. (2001). Design+Environment, a Global Guide to Designing Greener Goods.
Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf.
Lim, M. (2003). The Development Pattern of the Global Textile Industry and Trade: Part I: Evidence 
from Textile Exports of the EC, the Far East, and Emerging Textile Exporting Countries in the 
1980s. Journal of the Textile Institute. Vol. 94:1, pp. 32–52.
Moilala, S. (2013). Tappajafarkut ja Muita Vastuuttomia Vaatteita. Helsinki: Into.
Niinimäki, K. (2011). From Disposable to Sustainable. The Complex Interplay between Design and 
Consumption of Textiles and Clothing. Doctoral dissertation. Helsinki: Aalto University. 
Niinimäki, K. (2010). Forming Sustainable Attachment to Clothes. 7th International conference on 
D&E conference in IIT, 4–7 October 2010, Chicago, USA.
Simpson, P. (2006). Global Trends in Fibre Prices, Production and Consumption. Textiles Outlook 
International. Vol. 125, pp. 82–106.
SEC (2009). Design as a Driver of User-centred Innovation. Commission staff working document. 
Brussels, 7.4.2009, Commission of the European Communities.
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/innovation/files/design_swd_sec501_en.pdf
Spangenberg, J. (2001). Sustainable Development. From Batchwords to benchmarks and Operational Concepts. In: M. Charter & U. Tischner (eds.). Sustainable Solutions, Developing Products and 
Services for the Future. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf, pp. 24–47.
Steffen, D., Marin, A.W. & Müggler, I.R. (2013). Bamboo: A Holistic Approach to a
Renewable Fibre for Textile Design. Crafting the future conference. 10th European Academy of 
Design Conferences 17–19 April 2013. University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
Tischner, U. & Charter, M. (2001). Sustainable Product Design. In: M. Charter & U. Tischner (eds.). 
Sustainable Solutions, Developing Products and Services for the Future. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf, pp. 
118–138.
Thomas, S. (2008). The ”Green Blur” to Ecofashion: Fashioning an Eco-lexicon. Fashion Theory. Vol. 
12:4, pp. 525–540.
Tojo, N., Kogg, B., Kiørboe, N., Kjær, B. & Aalto, K. (2012). Prevention of Textile Waste: Material 
Flows of Textile in Three Nordic Countries and Suggestions on Policy Instruments. Copenhagen: Nordic 
Council of Ministers.
Vaatteiden Kylmäpesu Voi Lisätä Kemikaalien Käyttöä (2013) Helsingin Sanomat 1.12.2013.
Van Dyk, L. (2008). Developing Strategies for a Typology of Sustainable Fashion Design. In: J. 
Hethorn & C. Ulasewicz. Sustainable Fashion. Why Now? New York: Fairchild Books, pp. 233–263.
Visser, W., Matten, D., Manfred, P. & Tolhurst, N. (2008). The A to Z of Corporate Social Responsibility. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Online references
CSR Compasset. http://www.csrcompass.com/
Economy Watch 29.6.2010. Textile Industry. 
http://www.economywatch.com/world-industries/textile-industry.html
Made by. http://www.made-by.org/benchmarks/environmental
United Nations Global Compact. http://www.unglobalcompact.org/AboutTheGC/
ETHICS AND 
AESTHETICS
Sherin, A. (2013). Sustainable Thinking. Ethical Approaches 
to Design and Design Management. New York: Bloomsbury.
This relationship between personal values and profes -
s i o n a l p r a c t i c e h a s i n s p i r e d a n e w t y p e o f d e s i g n e r , 
o n e w h o i s a s t r a t e g i c t h i n k e r , a s u c c e s s f u l c r e a t i v e 
m a k e r , a n d a n e x p e r i e n c e d c o m m u n i c a t o r d r i v e n b y 
values-based decision making (Sherin 2013, 6).
Values 
and
green 
aesthetics
Kirsi Niinimäki
Values and ethics are fundamental grounds for 
sustainable fashion. It would be fruitful for designers to consider whose values are included in 
the design process and on what basis. It is also 
good to remember that there isn’t any valuefree design. We should design and construct 
a new system and basis for value creation, to 
help us face future challenges in the sustainable 
fashion discipline. Such a system could serve to 
evaluate design proposals and their benefits for 
sustainable development. Furthermore manufacturing processes, business models and marketing could be included in this value evaluation 
process. However we need novel knowledge on 
how to embed the dimension of environmental 
value and future-oriented thinking into the current fashion system. 
Our human values are based on ethics. While 
in fashion aesthetic experiences and evaluation 
are usually the most important, this chapter not 
only discusses values but also green aesthetics. 
Green aesthetics is an approach that combines 
aesthetic experiences and evaluation with sustainable values, and it offers an opportunity to 
mature our aesthetic experiences in the context 
of fashion.
Introduction
34 ethics and aesthetics
Value creation
Design forms an integral part of our culture and 
values within. This means that sustainable design 
should not only take into account economic values, 
but cultural, social, ethical and environmental values should also be included in the sustainable design 
process (e.g. Tischner & Charter 2001). Designing 
could change and become a more proactive and participatory process aiming for aesthetic sustainability 
(Niemelä 2010, 60). To this ambition it can be added 
that sustainable design can also be a proactive process that aims to transform consumption patterns 
towards more sustainable ones and therefore it includes future-oriented thinking (Niinimäki 2011). It is 
important to understand how current design, manufacturing and business practices effect unsustainable 
consumption patterns. Products actually configure 
consumers’ needs and use patterns and hence design 
can be said to be “practice-oriented”, which leads to 
certain everyday consumption habits (Shove et al. 
2007, pp. 134–136). Therefore designers, manufacturers and companies are responsible not only for the 
environmental impacts of the fashion industry but 
also for the unsustainable consumption behaviour of 
consumers and the increase of waste streams.
Designers can even destroy the value of the 
product by creating fast-changing trends that quickly 
outdate the products and render them valueless. 
The product itself may destroy something valuable, 
such as a craft skill or local knowledge (Fry 2009), 
something we already have seen in the area of fashion: manufacturing locations are far from end markets 
and local manufacturing skills have diminished or disappeared. At the same time only few consumers can 
repair their own garments or have skills to create garments themselves; many do not even own a sewing 
machine. Thinking about what we design and produce, 
and why, as well as what consequences our design may 
bring forms the basis of ethical thinking and futureoriented value creation.
Future-oriented value creation as an approach 
guides designers and manufacturers towards farsighted products and far-sighted business thinking, 
transforming current practices towards more sustainable societies. Figure 1 presents a way to evaluate future-oriented value in the fashion system. Each design 
and manufacturing decision has to include consideration of the future: how the product will be used, how 
it will age, how it will be disposed of, and what environmental impact the product will have (during manufacturing, use and after use). Furthermore the business 
model and its influence on consumption practices are 
included in this evaluation process (e.g. a slow system 
versus a fast system). What consequences do the 
product and its manufacturing have with regard to 
environmental, societal and cultural values? All these 
aspects have to be considered before the product is 
designed or manufactured. And is there the possibility 
Benefits for environment
sustai
nable futures
Design 
Manufacturing
Consumption
Economics
Society
Culture
Product evaluation
Figure 1. Future-oriented product value evaluation (based on Niinimäki 2011, 62)
ethics and aesthetics 35
to completely avoid materialistic consumption and do 
business differently? Radical thinking (e.g. a PSS approach to fulfil consumers’ needs in a dematerialistic 
way) is needed to create a new value creation process 
in sustainable fashion.
At best, a new kind of sustainable fashion system 
can create value for people, planet and profit (see 
Figure 2). For people the system can create a safe 
environment through the use of fewer chemicals in 
production, i.e. safe products for end-users. This system can also promote greater product satisfaction 
through better quality and longer lasting products. It 
can promote well-being and happiness through less 
materialistic consumption. We can learn to invest in 
higher quality and more expensive products, use them 
longer, own less and take good care of our possessions. 
Furthermore such a system can mean more social justice and better working conditions for textile factories’ 
workers, while through slowing the system it is possible to increase the end price of the product and invest in better factories. For the environment, through 
cleaner production and perhaps even less industrial 
production and waste, the benefits for slower cycles 
are clear. For business new models to make profit in 
an environmentally beneficial way have to be created. New systems thinking and these radical green 
business models can afford new business opportunities through e.g. a service approach, to encourage less 
materialistic industrial manufacturing. Figure 2. Sustainable fashion system can create value for people, planet and business.
PEOPLE
 
product safety
product satisfaction
safety working condition
PLANET
cleaner production, less impact
less industrial production
less waste
PROFIT
new business models
profit with less manufacturing
NEW
SUSTAINABLE
FASHION
SYSTEM
36 ethics and aesthetics
environmental values (Saito 2007). We already 
know that personal ideologies, such as environmental concerns, affect the aesthetic appreciation of products (e.g. Niinimäki 2010; 2011). 
Green aesthetic evaluation means a deeper evaluation process, which includes critically examining qualities of the product as well as the ethics 
and morality behind a product or a company. 
Having knowledge about an artefact affects the 
way observers see, experience and respond to 
the object (Walker 2009) and by feeding new 
knowledge into an aesthetic experience, it is 
possible to rethink and re-evaluate the aesthetic 
qualities of a product in a sustainable context 
(Brady 2002).
We thus have to evaluate a product’s beauty 
according to certain information: its environmental impact during manufacturing, logistics, 
use and disposal. We also have to evaluate how 
the product is manufactured: in what kind of environmental and working conditions and where. 
Moreover information about the company behind the product is important: does the company have a sustainable value base? Based on 
this background knowledge it is possible to argue 
that fast fashion, for instance, is not beautiful or 
aesthetic in the context of sustainability. 
Green aesthetics is a profoundly new way 
to align a design-for-sustainability value base 
with aesthetic evaluation in our understanding 
of material culture and its consequences. It expands and deepens our understanding of how our 
consumption patterns impact the environment. 
Green aesthetics is normative, and it enables us 
to cultivate our aesthetic preferences according 
to sustainable values. Furthermore it extends our 
possibilities to evaluate design objects and commodities on the ground of aesthetics. 
Green aesthetics 
Beauty and aesthetic dimensions are the most 
significant when consumers are choosing clothing 
and designers are creating new garments. Nevertheless current consumption as well as our aesthetic preferences are on unsustainable ground, 
and a new ethical consumer culture and radical 
changes towards sustainability are needed. Green 
aesthetics offers the possibility to combine environmental values with aesthetic experiences.
Aesthetics is the most important consideration when designers are creating fashion items. 
It is even more important when consumers are 
forming attachments to their clothing and longterm commitment (Niinimäki 2011). What do we 
then understand about fashion aesthetics? The 
aesthetical aspects in fashion include beauty, 
style, colour, fit and positive tactile experiences 
(e.g. comfort). Additionally the beauty experience is emotional and individual, while connected to time, culture and acceptance of others, 
and therefore aesthetic perception is never only 
a pure physical or psychological experience.
Green aesthetics is grounded on environmental values. We should evaluate products not 
only based on functionality and appearances 
but also based on the values products embed. 
We should redirect our aesthetic preferences 
towards better environmental solutions, and we 
should educate our aesthetic taste to appreciate 
ethics and aesthetics 37
conclusion
Sustainable fashion must fundamentally be based 
on values and ethics. The whole understanding of 
value and how it is created in the current fashion 
system simply must change. This is a challenging 
process and needs new awareness, a lot of information, and wide and open collaboration with 
various partners. More future-oriented thinking might help us in this process of planning and 
gauging how our design will affect consumption 
and the environment – tomorrow and even further.
We need to create both new knowledge 
and understanding on values, ethics and green 
aesthetics and educate designers, manufacturers, companies and also consumers if we are to 
change the system. Our decisions today do lead 
us to some kind of future – hopefully a more 
sustainable one.
References
Brady, E. (2002). Aesthetics, Ethics and the Natural Environment. In: A. Berleant (ed.) Environment and the Arts: Perspectives on Environmental Aesthetics. Burlington: Ashgate, pp. 113–126.
Fry, T. (2009). Design Futuring: Sustainability, Ethics and New Practice. Oxford: Berg.
Niemelä, M. (2010). Kestävää Muotoilua Mallintamassa. Tulkitseva Käsitetutkimus Taideteollisen 
Muotoilun Näkökulmasta. Doctoral dissertation. Helsinki: Aalto University School of Art and Design. 
Niinimäki, K. (2010). Eco-Clothing, Consumer Identity and Ideology. Journal of Sustainable Development. Vol. 18:3, pp. 150–162.
Niinimäki, K. (2011). From Disposable to Sustainable. The Complex Interplay between Design and 
Consumption of Textiles and Clothing. Doctoral dissertation. Helsinki: Aalto University.
Saito, Y. (2007). Everyday Aesthetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shove, E., Watson, M., Hand, M. & Ingram, J. (2007). The Design of Everyday Life. Oxford: Berg. 
Tischner, U. & Charter, M. (2001). Sustainable Product Design. In: M. Charter & U. Tischner (eds.). 
Sustainable Solutions: Developing Products and Services for the Future. Sheffield: Greenleaf, pp. 118–138.
Walker, S. (2009). After Taste – The Power and Prejudice of Product Appearance. The Design 
Journal. Vol.12:1, pp. 25–40.
What is 
the role of 
aesthetics in 
sustainability?
Maarit Aakko
On a functional level, we wear garments primarily to cover our bodies and stay warm. We may 
have to wear particular clothes for professional 
or cultural reasons. Or we may want to dress in a 
certain way to support our identity or as a sign of 
belonging to a certain group. There are numerous 
reasons for what we choose to wear, but in many 
cases – perhaps most – choices are guided by the 
look that clothing creates, the aesthetics. 
Today, there is certainly no lack of choice in 
clothing. Many fashion chains offer good-looking garments at very affordable prices, and for 
example Zara (www.zara.com) brings new items 
into the stores every week. At the same time, 
through the joint effort of researchers, media and 
activists, the awareness of the problematic environmental and ethical issues in the clothing and 
textile industry has risen, such as pollution and 
unfair working conditions to mention only two. 
Introduction
Therefore, even companies usually seen as fast 
fashion, are increasingly including sustainability in their agendas. For example, H&M (www.
hm.com) is committed to “provide fashion for 
conscious customers” and “use natural resources 
responsibly” with its Conscious line. However, as 
in H&M’s case, the speed of change that is being 
promoted by suspiciously cheap clothing, constantly new products, frequent sales, and excessive marketing is anything but sustainable.
Slowing consumption is one approach to ensuring more sustainability in fashion. As aesthetics play 
such an important role in clothing choice, it matters equally in the context of sustainability. In 
terms of developing attachment to clothing and 
therefore lengthening their lifespans, the aesthetic dimension is significant. An aesthetically 
successful garment that is also of high quality is a 
more likely candidate for longevity.
40 ethics and aesthetics
Aesthetics 
and fashion
The environmental impacts of textile and clothing production, such as energy consumption, use 
of toxic chemicals and high volumes of waste, 
both in the manufacturing phase and in the disposal of products, are serious concerns. In addition, social aspects such as working conditions 
with regard to safety, child labour, working hours 
and wages are other problematic issues in this 
sector (Allwood et al. 2006, p.2, p.14). Addressing these and many more difficult questions in 
this industry has led to a quest for more sustainable production and consumption of clothing, 
typically referred to as ‘sustainable fashion’. 
Reusing, repairing and reconditioning garments are some of the most sustainable choices 
(Fletcher 2008, pp.99–103), but when talking 
about new production, practically grounded solutions, for example regarding fibres, fabrics and 
production methods, are key to lessening environmental impact in fashion. Even so, making 
garments that only aim to comply with sustainability principles does not necessarily create a 
desirable product.
Viktor Papanek, who discussed environmental 
issues in design already in the 1970s, regarded aesthetics as an inseparable aspect of functional design. 
Nonetheless we know that aesthetics is a tool, one 
of the most important ones in the repertory of the designer, a tool that helps in shaping his forms and colors 
into entities that move us, please us, and are beautiful, exciting, filled with delight, meaningful (Papanek 
1971/1984, p.22).
However, if aesthetics can be a tool in design, 
its rather abstract nature is hard to describe. 
Along the lines of Papanek, aesthetics is something we can delight in and that can provide us 
pleasure in life. In general, aesthetics often deals 
with beauty, but it does not equate to beauty 
(Welsch 1996, pp.8–9).
Aesthetics is related to perception, for example, what we can see or hear, and to sensation, 
the emotional reaction evoked by perception 
(Welsch 1996, pp.8–9). In clothing, aesthetics 
is comprised of different elements such as form, 
colour and texture; details such as buttons, darts 
and stitching; and the ensemble they create. Another level of aesthetics emerges when the garments are worn; each person’s own appearance 
makes the garment look different. An aesthetic 
experience of clothing can be expanded to how 
one feels when wearing certain clothing, for example, the touch of the fabric and the weight of 
the garment, like it was our second skin. (Kupfer 
1994, pp.97–100.)
Similar to aesthetics, the concept of “fashion” is not easy to define. In everyday use the 
words “fashion” and “clothing” do not have such 
clear boundaries and are used even interchangeably, but they are different concepts. From a 
sociological point of view, clothing is a material object while fashion is something immaterial. 
They are very much connected, though; fashion 
can be regarded an immaterial concept that is 
manifested through clothing. Thus clothing is the 
generic raw material that one wears, and fashion 
is a symbolic product, “the invisible elements included in clothing”. (Kawamura 2005, pp.1–4.)
Change is central to fashion. The socially 
constructed system of fashion provides the 
means by which fashion keeps changing. Novelty 
is another significant characteristic. The fashion 
system encourages changes in style, which simultaneously creates a sense of novelty. Fashion 
changes have been ever-present throughout history. (Kawamura 2005, pp.5–6.) We can therefore presume that change will not cease, neither 
will the desire for novelty. By accepting change, 
and embracing novelty and aesthetics as elements of fashion people are generally drawn to, 
it is still possible to affect the speed of change 
and focus on slowing down and on longevity.
ethics and aesthetics 41
Aesthetics 
matter
In a world of abject want, a preoccupation with only 
making things pretty is a crime against humanity. 
But to design things that work well but fail otherwise is an equally fundamental error (Papanek 
1971/1984, p.327). Thus, successful design couples function with aesthetics. We can assume 
that even if a piece of clothing was made according to all known sustainability principles but was 
not aesthetically appealing, it wouldn’t serve the 
multiple meanings that clothing does. Without these meanings and their various roles, i.e. 
if clothing only delivered the function of covering the naked body and protecting from the 
weather, most likely we wouldn’t be facing the 
problems resulting from the incessant desire for 
new things. 
In fact, many consumers regard aesthetic 
qualities as more dominant factors than ethical principles when purchasing clothes. Even if 
ethical and environmental values are important 
to some consumers and guide their choices, all 
consumers consider aspects of quality and aesthetics as highly important. (Niinimäki 2010, 
p.150, p.166.)
The aesthetic dimension is also fundamental when people form attachments to clothing. 
According to Niinimäki and Koskinen (2011) the 
most important attributes associated with longterm use of clothing and textiles are quality, the 
aesthetic dimension and functionality. Aesthetic 
attributes such as beauty, style, colour and fit 
have an emotional effect on the wearer, which 
can be created by a personal experience of how 
one feels when wearing it as well as developed in 
social situations. These emotional bonds are central to product attachment and satisfaction, which 
in turn play a role in long-term product relationships. (Niinimäki & Koskinen 2011, pp.254–258.) 
Yuriko Saito (2007) argues that regarding 
animals, people are more inclined to protect and 
take care of aesthetically appealing creatures 
versus aesthetically unattractive ones. This principle can be applied to the aesthetics of everyday 
objects, and people act more responsibly toward 
artefacts when they feel an aesthetic attraction 
to them (Saito 2007, pp.58–60). In the same 
sense it can be assumed that we will take better 
care of our clothing if it is aesthetically appealing.
42 ethics and aesthetics
and conventional appearances, suggesting that 
products should embody their environmental values, yet through a somewhat familiar aesthetic 
appearance. As favourable “green aesthetics” 
Saito includes minimalism, durability and longevity, fittingness and site-specificity, perceivability 
of nature’s function, health, care and a sensitive 
attitude (Saito 2007, pp.88–96). These qualities 
may promote sustainability in fashion; however, 
aside from minimalism, they are actually mainly 
associated with functional details, not aesthetic. 
Instructing on how to design the aesthetics of 
longevity remains quite a difficult task. Also, 
methods considered more sustainable than conventional ones may impose limitations, and this 
challenge leaves a designer balancing between 
her aesthetic visions and sustainable methods 
(see Aakko & Niinimäki 2013).
On the contrary, mere aestheticisation of 
products does not promote sustainability. As 
Welsch points out, […] aesthetics renders even the 
unsellable sellable. […]The aesthetic aura is then the 
consumer’s primary acquisition with the article merely 
coming alongside (Welsch 1996, p.3). The first 
appearance, the aesthetic aura, blinds the majority 
of consumers instantly so that considering quality, 
functionality or anything beyond the look is easily 
forgotten. This also explains so fittingly why today, 
we have mountains of discarded clothing.
Conclusion
What people wear is connected to the cultural and 
sub-cultural surroundings, as well as to the current 
time, the zeitgeist. Clothing serves many functions 
from covering the body to building identity, and aesthetics play a significant role.
However, the textile and clothing industry has 
a huge environmental impact and faces numerous 
ethical issues. The high volumes of waste, both in the 
manufacturing phase and in the disposal of products, 
indicate that slowing down clothing consumption and 
cultivating the longevity of clothing is essential if we 
want more sustainable practices in the field of fashion.
Although practically grounded solutions such as 
sustainable production methods bring tangible benefit, aesthetics must be taken into account in order 
to create clothing that people want to wear. The aesthetic dimension is also fundamental for people forming attachments to clothing, valuing and taking care of 
it, thus lengthening its lifespan, cultivating longevity, 
and promoting the ideals of sustainability. In the end 
if clothing is made in an ecologically sound way but 
does not appeal to many, the change towards a more 
ecological system remains equally small. Although 
aesthetics itself seems to be an abstract concept, at 
the same time it is a concrete tool that can always be 
considered together with other methods. Therefore it 
is important that both issues, the practical methods 
and aesthetics, are addressed together to meet sustainability goals in fashion. 
What kind 
of aesthetics?
The aesthetic quality of an object, clothing in this 
case, cannot be measured and judged in an objective way. As Kupfer (1994) explains, in terms of a 
piece of clothing, its aesthetics are composed of 
details but the aesthetic experience of it resides 
in its entirety (Kupfer 1994, p.97). Naturally, in 
the context of sustainability, we face questions 
about what aesthetics may better ensure longevity and whether any such guidelines can be given.
Discussing everyday aesthetics, Saito (2007) 
notes that some qualities of artefacts, for example the production process, usage and disposal, 
are not visible or sensed and therefore these 
issues would not be known to a consumer through 
the mere object. Furthermore Saito claims that …
most of the time we don’t know who the designer of 
the object is, let alone her state of mind at the time of 
designing, her intention, or her oeuvre (Saito 2007, 
p.209). As a result, the object itself, entailing its 
design features, will be judged as it is. Similarly, in 
the case of sustainable fashion design, the question whether sustainable practices were applied in 
the design and production processes or not will 
not be visible in the garment, unless the designer 
somehow embeds these attributes visually or 
explains them on the tag.
Saito (2007) calls for the linking of environmental values and aesthetics in artefacts. She 
balances between reflecting ecological values 
ethics and aesthetics 43
References
Aakko, M. & Niinimäki, K. 2013. 0 % Waste, 100 % Aesthetics. Proceedings of “Crafting the Future” 
The 10th European Academy of Design Conference. Gothenburg. April 17–19, 2013.
Allwood, J.M., Laursen, S.E., de Rodriguez, C.M. & Bocken, N.M.P. (2006). Well Dressed? The 
Present and Future Sustainability of Clothing and Textiles in the UK. Cambridge: University of Cambridge Institute for Manufacturing.
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable Fashion and Textiles: Design Journeys. London: Earthscan.
Kawamura, Y. (2005). Fashion-ology. An Introduction to Fashion Studies. New York: Berg.
Kupfer, J. (1994). Clothing and Aesthetic Experience. In M. Revell DeLong & A. M. Fiore (eds.) 
Aesthetics of Textiles and Clothing: Advancing Multi-Disciplinary Perspectives. ITAA Special Publication 
# 7. Monument: International Textile and Apparel Association, pp. 97–104.
Niinimäki, K. (2010). Eco-Clothing, Consumer Identity and Ideology. Journal of Sustainable Development, Vol. 18:3, pp. 150–162.
Niinimäki, K. & Koskinen, I. (2011). I Love This Dress, It Makes Me Feel Beautiful! Empathic 
Knowledge in Sustainable Design. The Design Journal, Vol. 14:2, pp. 165–186. 
Papanek, V. (1971/1984). Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change. (2nd ed. 
revised). Chicago: Academy Chicago Publishers.
Saito, Y. (2007). Everyday Aesthetics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Welsch, W. (1996). Aestheticization Processes. Phenomena, Distinctions and Prospects. Theory, 
Culture & Society, Vol. 13:1, pp. 1–24.
Online references
Zara. www.zara.com
H&M. www.hm.com
Ethical 
design
Kirsi Niinimäki
As today it seems the possibilities to make ecological and ethical choices are limited, designers 
and producers do what they can, a situation that 
can be described as realistic thinking. This kind 
of value-based, yet realistic, approach to sustainable fashion is the most common approach 
currently existing in the business. Best practice can be defined to mean that designers and 
companies choose the best environmental and 
social solution that exists. Especially small- and 
medium-sized companies have to make their 
choices from limited possibilities. Finding suitable eco-materials that can be ordered in small 
amounts, to give only one example, can be 
most challenging for small companies. What an 
entrepreneur can do is thus limited and defined 
by the resources available. Accordingly available resources create the action framework for 
sustainable-oriented designers: i.e. what kinds of 
design and production choices they can make. 
The bigger the fashion company, the more power 
and possibilities they have to influence sustainable practices in the field.
This chapter talks about ethics in sustainable fashion through designers’ choices and design examples.
Introduction
46 ethics and aesthetics
Ethical design
Despite these limitations, it is important that 
designers and companies identify their own value 
base, act accordingly, and inform their customers about their values and ethical actions. One 
good example of ethical design is the company 
FRENN. FRENN clothes are designed for urban 
working men. The design goal is to create new 
kind of relaxed yet official appearance for men 
working in office surroundings. Every article of 
FRENN clothing aims to symbolise respect for 
the people that made it and for the natural world. 
The premium materials, craftwork, and iconoclastic style have strong roots. The orange button thread in the suit’s sleeve is a sign that this 
is a garment worth holding onto. This small detail 
is designed by designer Antti Laitinen; it informs 
the consumer of the best quality and classic tailoring and works as a designer’s signature. The 
clothes feel comfortable from the moment the 
customer first put them on and they never lose 
their shape, which creates long-lasting and durable aesthetics. Considering how products age 
aesthetically is one of the most important design 
tasks when aiming for long clothing lifetimes.
FRENN owners Antti Laitinen and Jarkko 
Kallio believe it is possible to meld credibility, 
comfort and individuality in men’s workwear. The 
line consists of relaxed, stylish, easy-to-combine blazers, trousers, button-down shirts and 
knits. Outerwear is also part of the collection. 
The premises behind every FRENN design are 
a perfect fit, interesting detailing and materials 
that stand out and feel good. Traditional denim, 
nubby linen and luxurious wool only get better 
with wear, and bamboo caresses the skin like silk. 
FRENN arose from a desire to create pieces that 
people would cherish for years, if not decades.
The company actualises as far-reaching ecological and ethical thinking as possible through 
each design choice. FRENN clothes are manufactured in nearby Estonia under monitored conditions. The company owners know the subcontractors and have visited each factory. The line’s 
fabrics come from EU countries such as Italy, 
Portugal and Lithuania, and 80% have been 
granted the international Öko-Tex 100 certificate, a guarantee that the material is safe for the 
environment and the wearer alike. 
The company states that their values are 
humanity, responsibility and individuality, and 
the owners say that these values reflect themselves too. They maintain that many people are 
tired of the “evilness” and extremely hectic reputation of the fashion business, and they want to 
change this state of affairs by offering friendliness instead (the company’s name comes from 
the word ‘friendliness’). This also means respecting the client in a new way and offering deeper 
product satisfaction through high quality design, 
good fit and good manufacturing quality. This 
approach offers the possibility to extend the time 
clothing is used. The company invests in good fit 
through high quality tailoring, which according 
to designer Antti Laitinen has been forgotten 
and has disappeared by and large in industrial 
mass manufacturing. [1] 
[1] This description is based on the company’s webpage and its poster displayed in the Sustainable and Innovative Fashion 
exhibition in Aalto University, autumn 2013. 
ethics and aesthetics 47
Ethical fashion from FRENN (Photo: Aino Huovio)
48 ethics and aesthetics
Jeans from NURMI Design (Photo: Antti Ahtiluoto)
ethics and aesthetics 49
[2] This description is based on the company’s webpage and personal information from Anniina Nurmi (10 December 2013).
Ethical and 
transparent
Since global manufacturing systems are complex, 
transparency is important in the sustainable fashion 
field and all actions should be opened not only towards consumers but all stakeholders to build trust. 
Publishing all information from the supply chain, 
the names and locations of the suppliers and subcontracting partners, sends a positive message. For 
example in Finland Finatex has published a guidebook on corporate sustainable responsibility issues, 
which gives good guidance on how to implement 
these principles in business.
One good example of ethical and transparent 
actions is Nurmi Design. With Nurmi jeans, for example, all principles for design and further details 
about the production processes and locations are 
clearly described in the company’s website. Designer Anniina Nurmi is behind the brand. In her 
jeans collection, she uses denim consisting of 
55% hemp, cultivated in China, and 45% organic 
cotton from Turkey, and the material is woven 
in China. Low-impact dyeing processes are used 
and environmentally-friendly enzymes improve 
the smoothness and strength of the material. 
Other denim used in the Nurmi Design collection is recycled cotton, made of pre-consumer 
waste. The textiles company Pure Waste produces this material from waste and off-cuts from 
clothing factories.
Nurmi strongly emphasises local production. 
Cutting, sewing and finishing is done in Keitele, 
Finland. The jeans’ leather label is made of vegetable tanned leather from Denmark and its finishing and laser cutting is done in Helsinki. (Anniina Nurmi 15.10.2012) In future Nurmi Design 
is substituting the leather label material with recycled car tyres. [2] 
50 ethics and aesthetics
[3] This description is based on the company’s webpage and its poster in the Sustainable and Innovative Fashion exhibition in 
Aalto University, autumn 2013.
ecosystem, especially to protect other animal populations, and normally these carcasses are disposed 
of as waste. The fur used for the WILD Concept 
is bought directly from registered Finnish hunters 
who hunt the animals within the quotas allowed by 
the government. The wild origin of the furs is assured by the Wild Finnish Fur label. Together with 
the Wild Finnish Fur Association (Luonnonturkisyhdistys) designer Huurinainen has developed this 
alternative fur concept in order to prevent hunted 
animal carcasses ending up as waste. It can be guaranteed that the animals used for the WILD concept 
have not suffered to become a clothing item. What 
makes WILD unique is that it offers an ethical and 
responsible way to wear fur, as fur of farmed animals is not used.
By focusing on smaller and lighter clothing 
items – such as gloves, hats, scarves, vests and 
capes – WILD is consciously taking a different 
style approach from conventional fur fashion. The 
WILD accessories are beautiful and elegant pieces 
with the primary aim to look and feel good. The idea 
behind most pieces is that they are an accessory 
to other clothing items, like evening dresses, and 
give the entire outfit as well as the person wearing 
it a distinct character. Depending on the purpose 
of the item the fur used is either wild marten, fox, 
raccoon dog or mink. In terms of colour the items 
come in natural and/or black.[3] 
Ethical fur 
Animal ethics are largely discussed in the fashion field, 
yet the issue is controversial. Animal products are 
used in wool, silk, feather, leather and fur production. Some animal materials such as leather come 
as leftovers from food production, and this can be 
seen as a valuable and sustainable resource in the 
fashion industry. On the other hand fur farms are 
considered as unethical practices in many countries and they raise much discussion and counter-reactions among stakeholders because of the 
animal welfare. Even though circumstances on the 
fur farms are improved, discussion on ethics and 
animal rights is continuing. Nevertheless clothes 
made from fur are expensive, valuable, durable 
and long-lasting, and they need little maintenance 
during use. Very often fur coats are passed on for 
generations, which makes these items connect with 
fond memories and emotional attachment may 
easily form to these kinds of special possessions. 
It is also possible to redesign old fur clothes with 
high quality manufacturing processes so they look 
like new. Therefore durable and long lasting fur is a 
potentially sustainable alternative.
WILD Concept by Marita Huurinainen offers 
one sustainable way to find other fur resources 
than farmed ones. WILD Concept’s furs come 
from animals that have been hunted in the wilderness. In Finland, many thousands of animals need 
to be shot every year to maintain balance in the 
Ethical fur, designed by Marita Huurinainen, WILD 
(Photo: Courtesy of Marita Huurinainen)

52 ethics and aesthetics
The aim of the project was to seek solutions 
where the environmental values and the craft traditions of the nomadic peoples of the Arctic areas are 
applied in our urban culture. These values are made 
tangible in the form of a quirky, practical product.
Kanirukka mittens are designed to keep their 
bearer’s hands warm, whilst representing important sustainable design values. Local production, 
use of locally sourced waste material and practicing traditional trades with skilled handicraft 
and careful design are important factors in the 
production of these mittens. The designer herself states that, The Kanirukka concept encourages 
people to rethink their consumer choices and examine the effect their choices have on the environment 
more carefully. [4] 
Ethical luxury
Another ethical fur example comes from designer Laura Merz, who uses the skins of ‘city bunnies’ (Oryctolagus cuniculus), an invasive animal 
species in Finnish nature. The wild rabbit is not an 
indigenous species in Finland and they are seen 
as a threat to the city environment. The species 
was first discovered in the wild in the mid-1980s 
in Helsinki, and since then it has caused much 
damage in city park areas. Because this animal 
has no natural enemies in Finnish nature the 
population has grown alarmingly large, and Helsinki city tries to control the population by hunting these wild rabbits. Hundreds of rabbits are 
killed as pest control by the city council every 
year. Laura Merz has developed a design concept 
called Kanirukka, a collection of mittens made of 
recycled leather and wild rabbits’ fur from those 
caught in the Helsinki area. Wild rabbits’ skins 
often have faults and tears, but thanks to the 
unique style of the Kanirukka mittens, fur that is 
not suitable for the commercial fur industry can 
be used to create beautiful luxury accessories. 
Each mitten is handmade from start to finish and 
each pair is different in its cut and colour.
This project returns to the roots of Finnish 
folklore in search of inspiration for a more environmentally, economically and socially responsible 
approach to design.
[4] This description is based on the company’s webpage and its poster in the Sustainable and Innovative Fashion exhibition in 
Aalto University, autumn 2013.
Mittens designed by Laura Merz (Photo: Aino Huovio)
ethics and aesthetics
54 ethics and aesthetics
Conclusion
As designers’ and companies’ reality today is that 
they have to make their choices from the limited 
possibilities and offerings that exist on the current market, the end design result is not always 
the ideal or perfect one. Yet we need strong and 
brave designers and companies who question 
today’s practices and examine how to do things 
differently. Moreover these change-makers can 
demand sustainable change from their suppliers, 
subcontractors or manufacturers and through 
this pressure create change in the fashion industry. Bit by bit the change is happening. These 
designers’ own value base is a strong driver for 
fashion change.
The design examples presented in this chapter show that good and aesthetical design is a 
crucial aspect also in sustainable and ethical 
fashion. The values behind the product and company create the foundation upon which good design is built: design that is also easy to fall in love 
with. This – we strongly argue – is the way to do 
sustainable fashion in practice in future.
ethics and aesthetics 55
References
Online references
FRENN. http://www.frenncompany.com
Laura Merz. http://www.designallsorts.com
Anniina Nurmi. 15.10.2012. The Story of Nurmi Jeans 
http://www.nurmiclothing.com/collections-page/nurmi-jeans-2 
WILD. http://www.maritahuurinainen.com
Artisanal 
and slow:
the case of 
Anna 
Ruohonen
Maarit Aakko
Fashion connotes novelty and change (Kawamura 
2005, pp.5–6), and it currently operates at 
an accelerated pace, with continuously shifting trends, fast manufacturing, endless shopping opportunities not bounded to time or place, 
coupled with cheap prices keeping today’s consumers easily in vogue. Although clothes offer us 
much more than just function – they may bring 
us emotional satisfaction, confidence, a feeling of 
belonging or simply beauty – at some point the 
more we buy the less we are assured of feeling 
satisfied. Current consumption patterns of buying 
too much and keeping too little, of throwaway fast 
fashion, deplete natural resources and negatively 
impact the environment and the society at large.
Fortunately, there are alternatives to the 
current flood of mass-produced, disposable garments. Slow fashion and artisanal fashion are two 
such alternatives. Labels based on these ideas 
have different emphasis in their ways of working. 
While utilising some of the elements that fashion celebrates, such as newness and change, they 
operate with a different, anti-mass-market mindset and at slower speed.
Introduction
Slow fashion, which stresses especially traditional skills, small-scale and local production, 
and a search for balance in the fashion system 
together with economic, social, and ecological 
systems, is often associated with a more sustainable system of fashion (see e.g. Clark 2008; 
Fletcher 2010). The concept of slow fashion is 
derived from the philosophy of slow food that 
cultivates especially taste, quality and a rich variety of food (www.slowfood.com). Today, artisanal
is also often associated with food, from bread 
and cheese to coffee and chocolate. It denotes 
the making process, typically handcrafted and 
based on traditional methods or recipes, which 
are fairly easy to understand in terms of cooking 
and baking. Artisanal is also paired with fashion
to signify a certain type of fashion [1] similar in 
spirit to other artisanal products and thus referring to handcrafted, non-industrial, traditional 
and small-batch production. However, the 
term artisanal fashion has not been discussed in 
the academic context and does not have a precise definition. The concept of artisanal fashion 
is obviously close to that of slow fashion, and 
sometimes an artisanal type of fashion production is included as an element of slow fashion. 
One distinctive feature of artisanal fashion is 
that it highlights the fashion designer’s skills.
Paris-based fashion designer Anna Ruohonen seems to embody both approaches to fashion, slow and artisanal. This case study looks at 
Anna Ruohonen’s design philosophy and strategies in these two contexts [2]. Based on existing 
definitions, the case explains and illustrates the 
concept of slow fashion. Since artisanal fashion is 
not well defined, this study explores the concept 
and aims to outline some of its central elements 
with the help of the Anna Ruohonen case [3]. 
This case study does not intend to provide 
an explicit definition of artisanal fashion; instead 
it suggests what basic elements could form and 
contribute to it. With the concepts of slow and 
artisanal fashion, the aim is also to search for 
more considerate ways to produce and consume 
garments and thus examine their potential to 
advance more environmental and ethical practices in the field of fashion.
[1] For example, fashion designer Maison Martin Margiela established the fashion line “0”, also called “Artisanal”, already in 1988, which consists of unique pieces reworked entirely by hand 
from used garments and objects (Motwary 2010). Additionally, an Internet forum dedicated to men’s fashion, StyleZeitgeist (stylezeitgeist.com), has discussions about ”artisanal fashion”.
[2] The data includes interviews with the designer Anna Ruohonen and with a staff member of the company, visits to the atelier in Paris and the showroom in Helsinki, a fashion show, newspaper 
articles and the company’s website.
[3] This case study is a small contribution exploring the fields of artisanal and slow fashion. Acknowledging that one case is not substantial for generating explicit definitions or theories – more 
comparative data and case studies would be needed for such work – for the purposes of this chapter this particular case is opened up as an initial exploration and to show part of a work-inprocess. Outlining the elements of artisanal fashion has been conducted following inductive reasoning, approaching the subject only with general knowledge and not on the basis of preconceived 
theories. This allows significant incidents and salient themes to emerge from the data itself, which may further be compared to other incidents within other cases. Exceptionally, using abductive 
reasoning, a dictionary definition is included in the analysis. (See Glaser & Strauss 1967; Timmermans & Tavory 2012.)
58 ethics and aesthetics
The case of 
Anna Ruohonen
Anna Ruohonen [4] is a Finnish Paris-based fashion designer and founder of her own eponymous clothing label. 
The line, founded in 1999, consists of women’s and men’s 
wear and has been located in Paris from the outset.
Ruohonen’s label operates in a similar way to the 
traditional Parisian fashion houses – the designer herself designs and makes patterns; the rest, samples and 
production, is done by her in-house team. Almost everything is produced at her atelier and only knitwear is 
outsourced to a knitwear studio in Paris. Ruohonen’s 
fashion house is a small-scale business: the atelier has 
six full-time employees and occasional interns in Paris 
and one full-time and one part-time employee in Helsinki, Finland.
Everything in Ruohonen’s line is made-to-measure, 
as it was in traditional haute couture maisons. The designer has two showrooms, one in Paris and one in Helsinki. 
The customer may choose the style and fabric amongst 
the available choices, and the order is produced according 
to her measurements taken at the showroom. The orders 
placed in Paris are delivered in approximately 3–10 days; 
orders placed in the showroom in Helsinki are produced 
in Paris and delivered in approximately three weeks. 
The main showroom and atelier operate in the same 
building in the 14th arrondissement in Paris. The building consists of six floors: the ground floor and basement 
operate as the showroom and the floors above house 
manufacturing, patternmaking, the design studio, the office and a staff’s area. 
The concept of Ruohonen’s label is quite unique 
in the contemporary fashion world. The label consists of two lines, White Label and Black Classics. The 
White Label is a seasonal collection, which follows the 
regular fashion cycle of spring/summer and autumn/
winter. In contrast, the Black Classics line is a “timeless collection” in which the pieces stay unchanged 
season after season; currently the oldest piece has 
been produced for twelve years. The Black Classics 
collection is on continuous display in the showrooms 
and online in their web store and can be ordered 
throughout the year. All the sample garments in this 
collection are black, but they can be made in different 
colours and fabrics depending on the season’s selection. Otherwise the production process and the quality of garments of the Black Classics line is the same 
as it is for the White Label.
Although Ruohonen shows the White Label collection twice a year, she does not follow the traditional fashion calendar. She shows men’s and women’s 
collections together twice a year both in Paris and 
in Helsinki on her own schedule, not in conjunction 
with Paris’s fashion weeks [5] when most of the other 
fashion labels show their collections. Compared to 
typical fashion retail, in Ruohonen’s system one step, 
the store buyers, is absent. The clients basically replace them, as they are the audience of her fashion 
shows and place orders directly with the company.
[4] Interviewed on 28 June 2013.
[5] For example, women’s fashion week in Paris for the SS14 collections was in September 2013 (Mode à Paris); 
Anna Ruohonen showed her SS14 collection in November 2013.
Slow approach 
to fashion
Fashion can be seen as a concept that is immaterial itself but is manifested through clothing. 
Although from a sociological point of view, clothing/garments and fashion are different concepts, 
in everyday language they are used as synonyms. 
Fashion can be used to refer to the material 
aspect, to clothing, especially when examining 
fabrics, patternmaking and production. However, 
sometimes the same word signifies the symbolic 
aspects of fashion, especially when discussing 
emotional values associated with clothes, as well 
as trends and other aspects of the fashion cycle. 
(Kawamura 2005, pp.1–2) When adding the attributes fast or slow to fashion, it denotes both the 
material but even more so the symbolic aspects 
of fashion.
Slow fashion stands in opposition to everything 
that fast fashion represents – it moves at a 
slower pace, disregards trends, is concerned 
with a classic or “signature” look, and stresses 
the importance of artisanal production and 
emotions attached to the clothes we own. 
Since fashion connotes change, fast/slow 
fashion could be read as clothing that is consumed 
fast/slow. Even so, as Fletcher (2010) explains, the 
terms signify more than just the tempo of production and consumption. Fast does not only involve 
ethics and aesthetics 59
[6] http://www.slowfood.com/filemanager/Convivium%20Leader%20Area/Manifesto_ENG.pdf
[7] It is common practice that some fashion companies create similar garments to what other more well-known ready-to-wear 
fashion companies have presented in their biannual collections (see e.g. Rissanen 2012).
speed, but also producing and selling garments in 
large quantities; slow is a symbol for a worldview 
that emphasises small-scale production, quality 
and traditional craftsmanship (Fletcher 2010, 
pp.260–264).
The slow approach to fashion has its origins 
in the Slow Food movement, which began in the 
1980s as a reaction to fast food. As the Slow Food 
manifesto [6] from 1989 declares: In the name of 
productivity, the 'fast life' has changed our lifestyle 
and now threatens our environment and our land 
(and city) scapes. The core idea of Slow Food is to 
link the pleasure of good food with a commitment 
to community and the environment. Taste, quality 
and a rich variety of food are cultivated through 
local cuisines and old-fashioned food traditions. 
(www.slowfood.com)
Embracing this philosophy, slow fashion 
favours small-scale production, traditional craft 
techniques, local materials and local markets. At 
the core of slow fashion is the search for a balance 
in the fashion system together with economic, 
social, and ecological systems. Altogether, slow 
fashion represents a different worldview, in terms 
of economic logic, values and goals, from the current fast fashion model. The focus of fast fashion 
companies is on achieving continual economic 
growth, which they achieve with the help of lowcost materials and labour, short lead times and 
large volume production. Instead of mass manufacturing and globalised trends, slow fashion promotes artisanal production and diversity of style, 
and instead of quantity, it emphasises quality. The 
slow approach to fashion carefully considers the 
design and production process and its impacts on 
society and the environment. (Fletcher 2010, 
pp.260–265.)
Common to the zeitgeist, the fashion industry emphasises newness and enables quickly 
changing trends through efficient capturing of 
new looks [7], followed by rapid production, 
low prices and pervasive marketing. Such a 
system supports consumerism and high turnover of garments. Contrary to this fast fashion 
mentality, the slow approach to fashion champions long-lasting products. 
This is also seen in Anna Ruohonen’s ethos, 
alongside other ideas of slow fashion embodied 
in her fashion line. The seasonal trends are not 
my driving force. My clothing is neither in nor out 
of fashion, Ruohonen states. According to the 
slow fashion philosophy, different tempos, fast 
and slow, can be used in a balanced way in the 
fashion system (Fletcher 2010, p.265). In Anna 
Ruohonen’s case different tempos are utilised 
in the two collections, the seasonal White Label 
and the permanent Black Classics. Although the 
aim of the latter is to offer timeless pieces, in her 
opinion, the concept of classic has to be seen as 
broad enough: A classic does not equal boring. [A 
garment’s] aesthetics can be unique and interesting 
and at the same time long lasting.
The Black Classics consists of the designer’s 
own favourite pieces that she has created over the 
years and that clients appreciate and want to reorder. In this way, the best pieces from the White 
Label may find an afterlife in the Black Classics 
collection. In Ruohonen’s view, a successful design 
endures over time, as she states on her website: In 
a beautiful final product every tiny detail has found 
its place. It seems that the piece has always existed.
(annaruohonen.com)
The mindset of slow fashion in Anna Ruohonen’s collection is also reflected in terms of quality. The concept of quality is not easy to define but 
it can be examined from many angles, for example 
with regards to the garments themselves, the 
process of making them and service. The quality 
of the garments may be assessed from the perspectives of style, fit, features, material, design 
and technique (Koskennurmi-Sivonen & Pietarila 
2005). In Ruohonen’s collection, high quality is 
evident in fabrics and construction. She uses only 
European fabrics made from natural fibres such as 
wool, linen, silk, cashmere and mohair. The quality 
60 ethics and aesthetics
Design by Anna Ruohonen: Cleopatra Dress, Brooklyn dress (textile design by Johanna Gullichsen), Nutria Dress (Photo: Victor Matussiere)
ethics and aesthetics 61
of the garments is ensured through the in-house 
production: it is done by two carefully selected 
professionals, and the designer can easily monitor the entire production process and make corrections if needed. For Ruohonen, quality is also a 
personal matter that is related to emotional bonds 
with garments: I am so passionate about clothing 
that I wouldn’t want anything to break; it is really 
annoying if something you like breaks. I have garments 
that are ten years old, and I still wear them actively.
Since everything is made according to one’s 
size, the company is able to provide well-fitting 
clothes to everyone. According to Ruohonen, 
this is an appreciated quality of the product and 
service, since the common, standardised sizes do 
not necessarily provide the right fit and nowadays 
it is increasingly rare in the West to have clothes 
tailor-made.
Time plays a role in Anna Ruohonen’s concept 
of fashion, making it also literally slow: since all 
the garments are samples, there are no actual garments to buy on the spot in the showroom unless 
one wants to buy a sample piece. Production starts 
only after placing an order and thus the customer 
has to be ready to wait for the garment for up to 
a couple of weeks. Determining whether this system affects people’s overall buying habits or not is 
impossible to say, because the decision-making can 
happen just as spontaneously. Nevertheless, one 
has to invest a little more effort in the purchasing 
decision by first selecting the details of the garment and then be willing to wait for it.
Ruohonen’s system of producing on demand 
does not lead to any surplus of unsold garments, 
which is beneficial both to the environment and 
to business. As Ruohonen points out, the system 
allows a quick reaction to customers’ demands, 
which are ever changing and hard to predict. It 
saves resources in the making phase, and it creates 
no wasted garments. Moreover, unused fabric is still 
valuable and can be reserved for any future garment.
In Ruohonen’s case, production is done either 
in-house or locally, and this is essential to Ruohonen’s concept since clothes are made individually per order; this allows any number of pieces to 
be made per style. Although producing in Paris is 
not the most cost-effective choice, as the cost of 
labour is currently one of the highest in Europe 
(Pelli 2013), Ruohonen insists on keeping the production local. The company’s values are not based 
primarily on growth but on doing great work and 
offering quality products. Making clothes in-house 
also ensures fair labour practices in terms of working hours, conditions and wages, which is important 
to Ruohonen.
Some level of transparency in the production 
system and more collaboration between designer, 
producer and customer are also suggested as being 
part of the slow approach to fashion (Clark 2008, 
p.435). Similar ideas are behind Anna Ruohonen’s 
label and are embedded even in the architecture of 
the company’s building: besides being a showroom 
and a store, all the procedures, from design to production, are located in the same house. Big windows 
facing the street display tailors at their work, similarly to how an open kitchen in a restaurant lets customers see where their food is being made. Since 
the designer and the production team work just 
upstairs from the store, the customer has a chance 
to see them working and even observe the making 
of his/her own order. The designer herself is also 
reachable: besides her two annual fashion shows, 
where she welcomes guests at the door herself, 
Ruohonen also invites clients to the showroom to 
meet with her over a glass of sparkling wine a couple 
of times a year.
The concept itself embodies respect towards 
the clients: the customer never has to walk out of 
the store because her size wasn’t available, she didn’t 
like the colour of a particular style, or because she 
came to the shop too late in the season and was 
left with the last, unwanted pieces. Although the 
designer creates the styles and decides on the seasonal selection of fabrics, the client gets to design 
her own combination of style, colour and fit, or even 
order a winter coat in the middle of the summer.
62 ethics and aesthetics
Skills behind 
artisanal fashion
The adjective artisanal comes from the word artisan, which according to the Merriam-Webster 
dictionary is (1) a person who is skilled at making 
things by hand. Additionally an artisan is (2) one 
that produces something (as cheese or wine) in limited quantities often using traditional methods or 
(3) a worker who practices a trade or handicraft: 
craftsperson. The synonym for artisan, craftsman
(or craftsperson), has a similar definition: (1) a 
person who makes beautiful objects by hand and 
(2) a person who is very skilled at doing something. 
The first known use of the word artisan dates to 
1538. Its Italian origin, artigiano, derives from 
the Latin word ars (art), which means skill. (Merriam-Webster dictionary; Oxford Dictionaries.)
The word fashion paired with artisanal is used 
in the same way as in slow fashion: often as a synonym for clothing and garments but also to signify the symbolic aspects of fashion, such as the 
emotional values associated with clothes. 
Artisanal itself connotes handcrafted objects 
but when used in conjunction with fashion, it 
seems to be elevated from a mere handmade 
or handcrafted garment to something symbolically different 
– as Kawamura (2005, pp.1–4) puts it, fashion 
provides the invisible elements included in clothing.
Looking at the first definition of the word artisan, skill is one of its major elements. In fashion 
design essential skills are related to the design 
process itself, such as sketching or draping the 
form of the garment, choosing fabric, and creating its character, as well as the ability to execute the garment successfully with the skills of 
patternmaking and garment construction. It is 
possible, and also common today, to work as a 
fashion designer who only envisions and sketches 
clothes but does not partake in the making process. In this way, patternmaking and garment 
construction can be separated from the design 
process and be considered the craft of fashion. 
However, a fashion designer may master both 
skills – those of the creator of form and of the 
skilful maker – and integrate them in her work. 
In the case of Anna Ruohonen, she is the one 
who sketches or drapes the garment forms and 
draws the initial patterns. Later, a tailor develops 
the patterns further if necessary. Earlier Ruohonen also used to make samples herself; now, tailors do the task but she is much involved in the 
process. Notably she is skilled in sample-making 
and understands the process thoroughly.
Another element of the first definition mentioned above is making things by hand. Related to 
the second definition of the word artisan, production is done in limited quantities and some 
traditional techniques are used. This differs from 
industrial production where products are made 
particularly using machinery and in factories 
that employ large personnel (Merriam-Webster 
dictionary). On the industrial scale, patterns are 
mostly made with the help of computer-aided 
design programs and garments are cut using machinery, which allows many garments be cut at 
once. In contrast, in small-scale fashion production, patterns may be drawn entirely by hand and 
all garments may be cut by hand either individually or only a few pieces at a time.
It can be noted that by and large in garment 
making, some machinery is always used both in 
industrial and small-scale production, such as 
sewing machines and sergers, and thus making 
things entirely by hand does not literally apply 
to garment production. At the same time, some 
procedures are mostly done by hand, such as assembling the garment together and trimming 
the extra threads after sewing. Therefore, artisanal production in fashion does not imply that 
machines are not used at all.
ethics and aesthetics 63
In Anna Ruohonen’s fashion house, patterns 
are made in the traditional way, by hand, and 
the garment pieces are cut individually and not 
by machine. The garments are constructed from 
start to finish by two tailors, which also includes 
handcrafted details such as assembling knits, 
sewing buttons and finishing hemlines, especially 
in garments made of silk.
All garments at the Anna Ruohonen fashion 
house are made-to-measure from selected styles 
only based on customers’ orders – the method of 
semi couture [8], as Ruohonen calls it. Entirely 
unique pieces are also made on request. Madeto-measure pieces are far away from standardised 
ready-to-wear pieces produced on a mass scale, 
but such a system of production is even more time 
consuming than just small-scale production, since 
every garment is crafted individually.
Anna Ruohonen’s local and mostly in-house 
production allows the designer to have control 
over the whole production process, to inspect 
quality and easily revise the process if anything 
needs to be changed. The designer works closely 
with her team and the in-house production enables frequent communication with the team 
members. As Ruohonen says, We communicate all 
the time; everyday, we discuss the garment finishing, 
[8] Although garments at Anna Ruohonen’s fashion house are made-to-measure and thus individual, and include also some 
unique pieces, the method can be called semi couture. It should be noted that semi couture differs from haute couture, which 
defines a certain kind of fashion production strictly controlled by Fédération Française de la Couture du Prêt-à-Porter des 
Couturiers and Créateurs de Mode and based on criteria first established in 1868 in Paris (Mode à Paris).
fabric choices, improvements, problems and potential changes. This is literally teamwork. Although 
certain people do certain steps of the garment 
design and production, the designer is very much 
involved in the whole process. As the designer, 
she creates the aesthetics of the clothing and 
makes the final decisions on the garment construction after considering the suggestions from 
the team members. In this way the designer has 
a holistic role in the company as the key person 
in designing and decision-making.
64 ethics and aesthetics
Design by Anna Ruohonen: Best Top, Maitresse Dress, Morning Light Dress (Photo: Victor Matussiere)
ethics and aesthetics 65
Discussion
The case of Anna Ruohonen can certainly be 
viewed through a slow fashion lens: it embodies 
many elements of the slow approach, such as 
small-scale and local production, long-lasting 
products, cultivating classics and utilising different 
tempos of fast and slow. Ruohonen’s work also 
emphasises quality in terms of materials, garment construction and fit, and customer service. 
The company produces almost everything inhouse, which enables some transparency in the 
production process. Ethical and environmental considerations are also embedded in Anna 
Ruohonen’s company values. 
Ruohonen’s design practice also illustrates aspects of artisanal fashion. The concept of artisanal 
fashion sketched here is not conclusive, but this 
case study, together with dictionary definitions, 
indicates some basic features of artisanal in the 
context of fashion as a hypothesis. This analysis 
suggests that the integration of the skills of design 
and craftsmanship is one of the main distinctive 
features of an artisanal fashion designer. Artisanal 
fashion also refers to a process that involves making garments not by industrial means but either 
individually or in small quantities, employing 
traditional and handcraft methods. The production is done in-house or locally, so the designer 
can have control over the process. The role of 
the designer is holistic; she is strongly involved 
throughout the design and production processes 
but she also works closely with her team.
What makes the defining of artisanal fashion
challenging is that most of its potential elements 
cannot be measured precisely, such as the amount 
of handcrafted details necessary to denote artisanal or the quantities indicating small-batch 
production, and therefore it can be difficult to 
create strict guidelines for artisanal production. 
Many of these elements are qualitative, such as 
skill or the role of the designer, and cannot be 
described explicitly. Thus, the framework can 
only be suggestive.
Artisanal fashion shares many aspects with 
slow fashion. According to the dictionary definition and this case study, the artisanal approach 
to fashion has a strong focus on the designer’s 
skill and her/his holistic role in the making processes, whereas slow fashion does not address 
these questions and is therefore a more general 
concept. These approaches can also be applied at 
the same time, as in the Anna Ruohonen case. In 
fact, traditional craftsmanship, synonymous with 
artisanal making (cf. Merriam-Webster dictionary), is often mentioned as one of the methods 
within slow fashion (Fletcher 2010).
Slow fashion has been explored in the context of sustainability as a means to systematically 
change the mindset of fast fashion that has many 
environmental and ethical implications. While 
the efficiency and large-scale production of fast 
fashion may not in themselves necessarily cause 
these negative issues, the fast fashion business 
model provides grounds for accelerated fashion 
production, use and disposal, which in turn generate more impact on the environment and play 
a part in unfair working conditions (Fletcher 
2010, pp.260–264). Artisanal fashion may not 
be directly associated with sustainability in fashion, but as it operates in a similar way to slow 
fashion it carries the same potential.
As Ruohonen says, All of us working in the 
fashion sector have to consider if we want to produce more clothing into this world. In her company’s case, more garments are produced but 
environmental and ethical issues are taken into 
consideration through the system in which the 
company operates. On the environmental side, 
the garments are crafted individually and made 
according to the customer’s request, with the 
emphasis on high quality. These efforts support 
not only material durability but also emotional values, such as appreciation and attachment, which 
may help lengthen the garments’ life span (Aakko 
& Koskennnurmi-Sivonen 2013; Niinimäki 2010, 
195–199). Ethical issues are addressed especially through the small-scale and local, mostly 
in-house, production. Working closely with the 
66 ethics and aesthetics
Figure 1. Artisanal approach to fashion in Anna Ruohonen’s company
DESIGNER
•	 holistic role
•	 integrated skills: design 
and craftsmanship
•	 involved in all processes
•	 control over the 
processes and the 
products
•	 frequent communication with team 
members
process
•	 in-house/local
•	 small scale/individually 
crafted/unique
•	 traditional methods
•	 handcraft methods
•	 teamwork
POTENTIAL
OUTCOME
•	 product satisfaction
•	 high quality
•	 durability
•	 good fit
•	 customer-oriented 
service
•	 lower environment 
impact
•	 ethically sound 
production
team and having control over the process enables 
monitoring and providing fair working conditions.
Manzini (2009, p.5) suggests that sustainability should be the meta-object of all design research and not a separate, specialised sector. Along 
the same lines, to enhance sustainability in fashion 
consumption and production, fashion companies 
should address environmental and ethical issues as 
a meta-object at the core level. As shown through 
the Anna Ruohonen case, and the concepts of 
slow and artisanal fashion, taking control over the 
process and the product frees up the possibility to 
make a difference in what kinds of garments are offered and how they are produced.
ethics and aesthetics 67
References
Aakko, M. & Koskennurmi-Sivonen, R. (2013). Designing Sustainable Fashion: Possibilities and 
Challenges. Research Journal of Textile and Apparel. Vol. 17:1, pp. 13–22.
Ahola, S. (2013). Pikku muotitalon emäntä. Helsingin Sanomat, 29 June 2013.
Clark, H. (2008). Slow + Fashion – an Oxymoron – or a Promise for the Future…? Fashion Theory. 
Vol. 12:4, pp. 427–446. 
Fletcher, K. (2010). Slow Fashion: An Invitation for Systems Change. Fashion Practice. Vol. 2:2, pp. 
559–566.
Glaser, B. & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research. 
Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company.
Kawamura, Y. (2005). Fashion-ology: An Introduction to Fashion Studies. Oxford: Berg.
Koskennurmi-Sivonen, R. & Pietarila, P. (2005). Quality Clothes – An Outline of a Model for 
Assessing the Quality of Customized Clothing. In: In the Making. Copenhagen: Nordes. Available at: 
nordes.org/data/uploads/papers/ 57.pdf
Manzini, E. (2009). New Design Knowledge. Design Studies. Vol. 30:1, pp. 4–12.
Motwary, F. (2010). Interview: Maison Martin Margiela in conversation with Filep Motwary. A blog 
post at Un Nouveau Ideal, on 29 June 2010. Available at: http://www.filepmotwary.com/motwary/2010/06/interview-maison-martin-margiela-in-a-conversation-with-filep-motwary.html
Niinimäki, K. (2010). Forming Sustainable Attachment to Clothing. In: Niinimäki, K. (2011). From 
Disposable to Sustainable. The Complex Interplay between Design and Consumption of Textiles and 
Clothing. Helsinki: Aalto University.
Pelli, P. (2013). Ranska kohentaa kilpailukykyään kovin keinoin. Helsingin Sanomat, 20 Oct 2013.
Rissanen, T. (2012). Bcc: A Blog post on 20 Oct 2012. Available at: http://timorissanen.com/
Timmermans, S. & Tavory, I. (2012). Theory Construction in Qualitative Research: From Grounded 
Theory to Abductive Analysis. Sociological Theory 30:3, pp. 167–186.
Interviews:
Anna Ruohonen: 28 June 2013; Paris, France
A staff member of Anna Ruohonen’s company: 23 Feb 2012; Helsinki, Finland
Online:
Anna Ruohonen: http://annaruohonen.com/
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary: http://www.merriam-webster.com/
Mode à Paris: http://modeaparis.com/en
Oxford Dictionaries: www.oxforddictionaries.com/
Slow Food: http://www.slowfood.com/
StyleZeitgeist.com: http://stylezeitgeist.com/ 
EXPERIMENTING 
WITH ZERO-WASTE
FASHION DESIGN
Maarit Aakko & Kirsi Niinimäki
Zero-waste fashion design offers ways to eliminate the textile waste that occurs in garment 
production. As a design method within a larger 
philosophy of zero-waste fashion, a fashion system that creates no waste (Rissanen 2013, p. 2), 
it provides new perspectives for fashion design 
practice in the context of sustainability. 
To spread practical knowledge on zero-waste 
fashion design, fashion designer and researcher 
Holly McQuillan ran a workshop on zero-waste 
pattern cutting (ZWPC) at Aalto University 
(Helsinki, Finland), in August 2012. This workshop could be described as hands-on experimentation with sustainable fashion. The workshop 
was funded by and jointly organised with the Baltic Fashion Network and included participants 
such as teaching faculty, students and designers 
associated with the partnering organisations. This 
chapter examines zero-waste fashion through the 
workshop learning processes and outcomes.
Introduction
70 ethics and aesthetics
Growing mountains 
of textile waste
The ever-growing production and consumption 
of fashion has led to an equally increased use of 
resources, especially fabrics. Textile fibre consumption has grown from 3.7 kg in 1950 to 11.1 
kg in 2007 per capita worldwide, and it is estimated that textile fibre use increased 35% between the years 2000 and 2007 alone (FAO
and ICAC 2011). This increase is especially connected to current ‘fast fashion’ practices, which 
include extremely efficient garment production 
processes, growth in clothing consumption and 
very short use time of garments. The tendency is 
the same in all Western countries: clothing production, consumption and thus textile waste are 
soaring and fast fashion practices play a part in 
this rise (Niinimäki 2011).
The amount of textiles used in the clothing industry today is remarkable because of the 
current practice of designing garments in short, 
trend-driven cycles by means of mass manufacturing and also because of the size of the industry. Besides the large amount of resources 
needed in such big scale production, another 
significant problem is the quantity of pre-consumer textile waste created, particularly fabric 
off-cuts. According to some studies, traditional 
garment production using “cut and sew” techniques—cutting the garment pieces from fabric 
according to patterns and sewing them together 
into a garment—yields approximately 15% fabric waste; the estimated percentage of waste 
varies between 10–20% depending on the garment style (Cooklin 1997/2012, p. 16; see also 
Rissanen 2013, pp. 4–5). In general, wasting fabric in the manufacturing stage means wasting all 
resources, such as fibres, dyes, chemicals as well 
as water and energy that are used in producing the 
raw fabric. Granted, the leftover fabric can be utilised in other products or as scraps, but it can be 
argued that this is not a sufficient way to manage 
the fabric. It is also easy to agree with the idea 
that it is better to avoid waste than to fill the planet 
with things made from it (Rissanen 2005). 
Zero-waste fashion design provides an approach 
to creating garments without generating fabric 
waste. This method enables the usage of one complete piece of fabric for a predetermined purpose, 
e.g. for cutting out one or multiple garments. The 
possibility to eliminate fabric waste from garment 
production lies within the stages of pattern making and fashion design. More precisely, to realise 
zero-fabric waste garments, pattern making must be 
considered as an integral part of the design process. 
(Rissanen 2013.)
Towards zero-waste 
fashion
The idea of zero-waste fashion is not new, even 
though the approach was not named as such until 
recently. Garments have long been made with 
the same philosophy of using a complete piece 
of fabric for one, or more, garments. The design 
researchers who brought this approach to light 
again, and began to refine it, include Timo Rissanen and Holly McQuillan. As Rissanen (2013, 
p. 46) sums up, the himation, chiton and peplon 
of ancient Greece, the Indian sari and the Japanese kimono are traditional garments that were 
constructed using the entire fabric. In modern 
Europe, the Parisian couturier Madeleine Vionnet made use of this idea in some of her creations, 
such as a dress made out of four squares. 
Today, the name “zero waste” suggests a 
particular focus on not creating waste, whereas 
previously, the main concern was to fully utilise 
the expensive fabrics. Against the backdrop of 
increased clothing production, consumption and 
associated resource use, both issues are relevant. 
Within the context of sustainability, zero-waste 
fashion design can be a tool for eliminating fabric 
waste, namely off-cuts, and increasing the efficiency of fabric use in garment production.
Zero-waste fashion design refers to methods 
that particularly aim to eliminate fabric waste from 
garment production through design. Crucial to this 
approach is the integration of pattern making and 
ethics and aesthetics 71
Experiments with 
zero-waste pattern
cutting
The ZWPC workshop at Aalto University covered the basic concepts and methods of creating zero-waste garments. The zero-waste pattern 
cutting techniques introduced at the ZWPCworkshop included:
1) “Planned Chaos”, in which garment blocks are 
used as fixed guidelines;
2) “Geo Cut”, which is based on using geometrical shapes such as squares, triangles and circles; 
and
3) “Cut and Drape”, a combination of random, 
fluid cutting and draping. 
(See also McQuillan/ZWPC.)
Based on the experiments during the workshop, 
the zero-waste pattern cutting methods could be 
used to create any type of garment. For example, the method of “Planned Chaos”, i.e. utilising garment blocks as the initial guideline, was 
applied to create a coat (Figure 1). Both “Geo 
Cut” and “Planned Chaos” were used in designing a jumpsuit (Figure 2). The “Cut and Drape” 
method and geometrical shapes were utilised in 
making a skirt and a top from the same piece of 
fabric (Figure 3).
fashion design processes, in contrast to conventional practice where pattern making typically 
follows a predetermined design. Garments created through zero-waste fashion design methods 
contain all of the fabric needed for that garment 
and thus leave literally zero fabric waste. In its 
larger sense, the concept of zero-waste fashion 
refers to a fashion system where waste is eliminated through all stages of garment design, production chain and the use phase (Rissanen 2013).
As noted by McQuillan (2011, pp. 87–96) 
and Rissanen (2013, pp. 45–57) there are several ways to approach the aim of zero-waste 
fashion design through pattern making. The 
zero-waste pattern making process is initially 
guided by the size of the fabric and the type of 
garment one is planning to make. It can be further directed using a fixed area, e.g. using garment blocks to ensure a certain garment form. 
Geometric shapes such as squares and triangles 
are accessible pattern pieces because they can 
interlock like a puzzle. A key to understanding 
the consequences of cutting the fabric is to see 
that a cut will create not just the one piece you 
intended, but also another piece along with it. 
(McQuillan 2011, p. 93)
Zero-waste fashion design can also be connected 
with textile design methods to deepen the creative process. For example, Varvara Zhemchuzhnikova experimented with combining zero-waste 
fashion design and hand-printed fabrics resulting 
in unique aesthetics. First, she used the “Geo 
Cut” method, different geometrical shapes, for 
designing the garment pattern. After transferring the pattern onto the fabric, and before cutting the pattern pieces out, she hand-printed 
the fabric. Zhemchuzhnikova used leftover inks 
to keep the process more sustainable and connected to the zero-waste philosophy. Although 
she had designed the garment before printing it, 
the finished look of the garment was not clearly 
planned (Figures 4–6); instead, she “sketched” 
the motif by printing it directly onto the fabric. As Zhemchuzhnikova describes, the whole 
process was an intuitive and creative adventure 
with the risk of an unknown result. She explains:
I started a project ‘Ready to’ where I connect the 
processes of art and slow fashion: I use around one 
meter of fabric and print it spontaneously by hand. 
Then I cut and sew it without creating waste. The 
patterns and print is inspired by an art work.
72 ethics and aesthetics
Figure 1 . ZWPC Coat by Mara Binde (Photo: Katja Tähjä) Figure 2. “Geo Cut” and “Planned Chaos” methods were utilised in design by Petra Leino. (Photo: Katja Tähjä)
ethics and aesthetics 73
Figure 3. A shirt and a top were designed from one piece of fabric. Design by Andrej Subarew. (Photo: Katja Tähjä)
74 ethi
c
s and aestheti
c
s
Figure 4
–6. Varvara Zhemchuzhnikova’s unique aesthetics with experimental printing and 
zero-waste fashion. (Photo: Katja Tähjä)
ethics and aesthetics 75
Reflections on the 
workshop outcomes
The methods of zero-waste pattern cutting are 
somewhat different from traditional pattern 
making; in fact, conventional knowledge of pattern making is not necessarily needed in this way 
of designing. For many, this can be liberating. 
Taking distance from the common rules of pattern making allows experimental and creative 
design processes. Partly for the same reason, 
learning zero-waste pattern cutting can be challenging. The common way of designing through 
sketching and draping, in which pattern making is mainly a subsequent, technical step after 
creating the form of a garment, is not feasible in 
zero-waste fashion design. Conversely, it is the 
simultaneous processes of pattern making and 
fashion design that enable the complete usage of 
the fabric: design decisions are made throughout 
the process of pattern making.
Nevertheless, as some workshop participants suggested, having skills in fashion design 
and pattern making is advantageous to learning 
zero-waste pattern cutting, as it enables a more 
thorough understanding of the techniques and 
the opportunity to use them in a flexible way. For 
many, learning zero-waste pattern cutting deepened their existing skills. With this approach, you 
have to go into the depth of this craft, one participant noted. 
As the design process is guided by the aim of 
zero waste— all the fabric must be used in the garment —it might set some limits to the garment’s 
aesthetic. Since every pattern piece borders 
another piece, each cut must create a shape that 
is utilisable and fits the function and form of the 
garment. Precisely designed forms are therefore 
challenging to realise with this method. Nevertheless, this character of zero-waste pattern cutting could also be embraced as a way of designing. 
Through the unexpected forms that emerged from 
the design process, a few workshop participants 
found multifunctional use for their garments; such 
adaptability of use may also inspire the wearer’s 
creativity and even increase the life span of the garment. As one participant says, [The evolving design 
process] reveals a range of creative design options 
from which further ideas emerge.
The method is best suited to small studios, 
unique fashion design and production, and design 
experimentations. Nonetheless it is possible to 
adapt the system also to the larger scale and 
even industrial scale production, for example 
by creating a system based on fewer different 
sizes in production (e.g. S, M, L). Furthermore 
it is possible to regulate sizes through different size trimming mechanisms in the garment 
itself. Therefore the wearer could make her own 
adjustments and modifications in the garment to 
make it better fit her body and individual measurements or even changes in her body size. This 
approach would make the garment longer lasting, 
as the wearer could make small size adjustments 
herself according to individual preferences or 
body changes. (Jane Palmu, Personal communication, 5.11.2012.) Experimenting with zerowaste pattern cutting methods can thereby help 
foster original, creative and more sustainable 
solutions in all fashion design practices.
76 ethics and aesthetics
ethics and aesthetics 77
Zero-waste pattern cutting workshop (Photo: Katja Tähjä)
78 ethics and aesthetics
Holly McQuillan’s inspiration for these experimental outfits has been the letters from Aalto and “Geo Cut” method. 
(Photo: Katja Tähjä)
ethics and aesthetics 79
conclusion
Zero-waste fashion design challenges traditional 
ways of designing while facilitating innovative 
ways to design and fresh aesthetics to emerge. 
Zero-waste fashion design can also lead fashion 
designers to consider and apply other sustainable practices. As one of the workshop participant pointed out, This method can be a catalyst to 
improving material use in the future.
Zero-waste fashion design serves as a compelling example of how to merge the skills of 
fashion design and pattern making while also 
bearing in mind sustainability—and aesthetics. 
As one designer stated, Zero-waste fashion creates aesthetics with the help of ethics. Merging 
both enables one of the most satisfying outcomes 
in terms of contemporary fashion design (ZWCP 
workshop/works). Zero-waste pattern cutting is 
a practical and experimental method by which to 
advance sustainable fashion. It can also be combined with other textile design methods, such 
as printing, or any forms of experimental sustainable fashion. Most of all zero-waste fashion 
design can change fashion designers’ attitudes 
towards more respectful resource use.
References
Carlsson, A., Hemström, K., Edborg, P., Stenmarck, Å. & Sörme, L. (2011). Kartläggning av 
Mängder och Flöden av Textilavfall [Mapping of Quantity and Flow of Textile Waste, in Swedish]. SMED 
Rapport Nr 46 2011. Norrköping: Sveriges Meteorologiska och Hydrologiska Institut.
S. Hayes, J. McLoughlin & D. Fairclough. (2012/1997). Cooklin’s Garment Technology for Fashion 
Designers. (2nd edition.). UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations and International Cotton Advisory 
Committee (FAO and ICAC) (2011). A Summary of the World Apparel Fiber Consumption Survey 
2005-2008. http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/est/COMM_MARKETS_MONITORING/
Cotton/Documents/World_Apparel_Fiber_Consumption_Survey_2011_-_Summary_English.pdf 
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable Fashion and Textiles: Design Journeys. London: Earthscan.
Gwilt, A. & Rissanen, T. (eds.) (2011). Shaping Sustainable Fashion. London. Earthscan.
Niinimäki, K. (2011). From Disposable to Sustainable. The Complex Interplay between Design and 
Consumption of Textiles and Clothing. Doctoral dissertation. Helsinki: Aalto University.
McDonough, W. & Braungart, M. (2008). Cradle to Cradle. London: Jonathan Cape.
McQuillan, H. (2011). Zero-waste Design Practice: Strategies and Risk Taking for Garment Design. 
In: A. Gwilt & T. Rissanen (eds.). Shaping Sustainable Fashion. London: Earthscan, pp. 83–97.
Rissanen, T. (2008). Creating Fashion without the Creation of Fabric Waste. In: J. Hethorn & C. 
Ulasewicz (eds.). Sustainable Fashion: Why Now? A Conversation about Issues, Practices, and Possibilities. New York: Fairchild, pp. 184–206.
Rissanen, T. (2005). From 15% to 0: Investigating the Creation of Fashion without the Creation of 
Fabric Waste. http://www.scribd.com/doc/51833062/Timo-Rissanen 
Rissanen, T. (2013). Zero-waste Fashion Design: A Study at the Intersection of Cloth, Fashion Design 
and Pattern Cutting. Doctoral dissertation. Sydney: University of Technology.
Online references
McQuillan/ZWPC. http://hollymcquillan.com/zwpc-workshops/ 
ZWPC. workshop/works: http://zwpcworkshop.wordpress.com 
CRITICAL
AND 
SOCIAL
DESIGN
Sherin, A. (2013). Sustainable Thinking. Ethical Approaches 
to Design and Design Management. New York: Bloomsbury. 
O n e m a y a p p r o a c h s u s t a i n a b l e p r a c t i c e w i t h a f o c u s o n 
m a t e r i a l s , b y b u i l d i n g c o m m u n i t i e s , b y c h a n g i n g t h e 
w a y u s e r s i n t e r a c t w i t h p r o d u c t a n d s e r v i c e s , o r b y 
f o c u s i n g o n u s e , r e u s e , r e c y c l i n g . H o w e v e r , i t i s n o t 
n e c e s s a r y l i m i t e d t o t h e s e e x a m p l e s . S u s t a i n a b i l i t y 
can mean so many different things it challenges prac -
t i t i o n e r s t o b e v i s i o n a r y , a d a p t a b l e a n d i n n o v a t i v e . 
(Sherin 2013, 13.)
Design 
Activism: 
Critical 
and
social
Kirsi Niinimäki
This chapter offers a short introduction to design 
activism, critical design and social design. Design 
activism can be defined to mean design thinking, imagination and design practice that aims to 
question current practices or generate change 
(Fuad-Luke 2009). Alastair Fuad-Luke (2009, 
p.21) defines critical design as a speculative 
design proposal that can be a provocation or 
intervention. It can also be a place for discussion; a design can be a catalyst for thoughts and 
shared discussion, an opportunity to open new 
views and understanding or critically raise comments or notions about some problem areas. In 
design activism and the critical approach, the 
designer works beyond a product; critical design 
is often against how design supports the current 
consumer culture (Koskinen et al. 2011). 
A critical designer can show his/her work in 
the art context but more often it appears in the 
design context: i.e. even though the design is based 
on a critical approach it is still a wearable garment. 
One example of critical design is a garment collection designed by Patrik Prusak, where he based his 
concept on companies’ greenwash practices.
Another approach to design activism is 
known as social design. User-friendliness and 
product safety benefit all users but especially 
underprivileged, vulnerable or minority users, 
like elderly or disabled consumers, who are not 
typically the main focus group for garments or 
fashion. Companies and designers who take the 
diversity of consumers into account are socially 
responsible. Furthermore they may benefit from 
these disregarded users and gain new business 
opportunities and market potential. (SEC 2009.)
Inclusive design or “design for all” means 
that all members of the society can enjoy design. 
Every person’s needs and even limitations are 
included in the design process. In fashion this has 
mainly meant small collections for special focus 
groups (like elderly consumers). 
The social design approach differs from the 
mainstream design system, which mainly focuses 
on design for markets and for average consumers. In social design the goal can be to improve 
people’s lives and well-being and the focus is on 
fulfilling human needs and facing real problem 
areas in garments. This could mean designing 
garments for individuals who have special needs, 
like wheelchair users. The role of the social 
designer warrants the capability to deeply listen 
to other people and their needs and holistically 
explore the problem areas and opportunities 
(Fuad-Luke 2009). This means a big change in 
what designers focus on, which traditionally has 
mainly been fashion aesthetics and trendy and 
commercial aspects in fashion. 
84 critical and so cial design
critical and so cial design 85
Critical design by Patrik Prusak (Photo: Paavo Lehtinen)
References
Fuad-Luke, A. (2009). Design Activism: Beautiful Strangeness for a Sustainable World. London: 
Earthscan.
Koskinen, I., Zimmerman, J., Binder, T., Redström, J. & Wensveen, S. (2011). Design Research 
through Practice. From the Lab, Field and Showroom. Waltham USA: Morgan Kaufman.
SEC (2009). Design as a Driver of User-centred Innovation. Brussels, 7.4.2009, Commission of the 
European Communities. 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/innovatin/files/design_swd_sec501_en.pdf
Getting critical
 “Why should I
create anything?” 
Anu Corin
We know the fashion industry is full of problems, and being in the middle of an economic 
crisis paints the future in an even darker shade 
in many people’s eyes. The solution to the recession appears to be to consume more, which 
seems confusing and simply absurd, having just 
learned that we are quickly using up resources 
that actually belong to our children. On top of 
this my jam-packed closet is constantly reminding me that I already have too much stuff. Landfills are also overflowing and we are shipping waste 
around the world. At the same time we are dealing 
with global warming, pollution and poverty. To consume more doesn’t feel like a particularly satisfactory solution to me. It is obvious we need to make 
enormous, drastic changes in every field, not only 
in fashion, and it feels like changes are made frustratingly slowly. 
We are accustomed to seeing designers as the 
ones creating more stuff or making things more 
attractive so consumers can keep on consuming. 
So as a designer, and as a citizen, for that matter, it’s easy to feel like we are not contributing 
enough to spurring these changes or that we are 
part of the problem instead of part of the solution. 
For me, reading and hearing about all these 
problems we are facing has simply resulted in 
a terrible feeling of guilt. I can’t help but think 
about who made the clothes I’m wearing and 
how much that person got paid. What happens 
to the clothes I’ve produced when they reach 
the end of their life cycle? When we already 
have too much stuff – isn’t it more sustainable 
not to add more to this pile of already obsolete 
stuff? If sustainability is about making less and 
using less – why should I create anything? Why 
is my design worth being produced or worth the 
resource use that could be directed to something 
more important? 
Making something sustainable is without a 
doubt the only way to move forward, but with 
all these questions in mind it is easier to see how 
fashion is unsustainable rather than how it ever 
could be sustainable. That sustainable fashion is 
a paradox in itself makes things even more confusing. How can fashion be sustainable when it is 
based on consumption and change? 
Sustainability became a forced way for me 
to try to justify my work and ease my feelings 
of guilt. I tried desperately to make a sustainable 
product by, for instance, using organic materials for my garments, but I was always disappointed when I realised the thing I had just made 
or the idea I’d just had isn’t really that sustainable. Changing the materials isn’t enough, and 
it doesn’t answer the question of why my product should exist in the first place. What is the 
point in making and putting a lot of effort into 
something that will just end up tucked away in a 
closet or in landfill a few years later? My desperate attempts didn’t ease my sense of guilt, and I 
wasn’t making the impacts I wanted to. I started 
to think that I wasn’t a good enough designer 
because I couldn’t make a sustainable product. 
At that point I felt I was at a crossroads: I could 
either quit and start doing something else or find 
a way to work in this field with a clear conscience. 
So I gave fashion one last chance and decided to 
recheck my compass to set a clear conscience as 
my new direction. This meant admitting that I 
don’t know everything, starting to ask questions 
out loud that I until now had only been thinking 
about, questioning conventions, and documenting a completely honest creative process while 
being able to give reasons for its every step. 
As I had been doubting the power of design, 
it felt natural to start my new course from the 
beginning by questioning what is design and why 
do I study it. The job of designer was created to 
meet the needs of industrialisation, but today 
we have completely different needs. Do we 
need designers today? Typically the designer’s 
job, not to mention the fashion designer’s job, is 
seen as quite superficial. And sure, aesthetics are 
important. Seeing gives us knowledge through 
experience and people make decisions based on 
these experiences. But without undervaluing 
88 critical and so cial design
the importance of aesthetics, could there be 
something more to fashion than just looks? Isn’t 
design fundamentally about problem solving and 
not about making more things? And aren’t problem solvers exactly what we need today? That 
means designers have a lot to work on and if I’m 
not going to do something – who will? Everyone 
knows that sitting around and waiting for someone else to do things for me is not going to work. 
If I want something done, I have to do it myself. 
And I can’t refuse to do something just because 
I can’t do everything. So instead of letting the 
problems run me over, I began to see them as a 
source of inspiration.
Getting this inspirational kick allowed me to 
research sustainability with a new-found enthusiasm and more critically than I had done before. 
Motivated to find out if fashion can be sustainable, I read about companies that call themselves 
sustainable and made a list of things they did 
that supposedly made their product sustainable. 
But I still felt that even if I could incorporate 
everything on that list in my product I couldn’t 
honestly call the product sustainable. And all 
of a sudden it hit me – I found the mistake I 
had been making for years. I used to think of 
sustainable fashion as a kind of synonym for a 
long-lasting, ecological and ethical fashion item, 
when I should have thought of it as a process, a 
development and an improvement. All the elements I had thought would make up a sustainable 
product were actually just examples of things I 
could do in a never-ending development process. 
A single product cannot be sustainable; a product 
in itself cannot create sustainability and I cannot 
create sustainability alone. The amount of work, 
or problems to solve, is too important and intimidating to be left only to designers. Sustainability 
is everyone’s responsibility. Realising this lifted a 
huge burden off my shoulders. 
Looking back at my question why should I create anything – I now think I have found a satisfying answer. Seeing sustainability as a continuous 
development process suggests that not creating 
anything would stop development, and I think 
that would be the most unsustainable thing there 
could be. Because change usually starts from the 
inside, it is important that dissatisfied designers 
stay inside the industry and realise their power to 
change things. Quitting is not a solution. Being 
frustrated isn’t necessarily a bad thing – it holds 
huge power to change and it is a driving force to 
speed up sustainability. 
But still everything does not deserve to be 
produced. If a product doesn’t make the world 
a better place, it’s not worth existing. When 
we already have too much stuff – a new way to 
develop could also be to grow in quality instead 
of quantity. For a designer this might mean adding more value to their work, and there are many 
different kinds of value, not only material value. I 
realised that by using small and expected things 
as inspiration, my work had become small and 
expected. By not valuing my work it had become 
meaningless, and if I’m afraid of failing, taking a 
risk or doing something unexpected – I will never 
come up with anything original. By speaking about 
things that are important to me I can create value 
in my work. And in design or in any other field – I 
make my work matter by making myself useful.
These thoughts were very much entwined with 
the development process of the collection Paradox 
– a conceptual collection consisting of two garments. In a way the collection spoke and I listened, 
and that is why I call the collection conceptual 
and the thoughts behind the collection are more 
important than what you see. The main materials for the pieces are discarded receipts, which are 
used as symbols of consumption, and since most 
receipts are made of thermal paper which often 
contains the endocrine disruptive chemical Bisfenol A, it is also used as a symbol of the chemicals 
in clothing. Through the choice of material the 
work tries to take action and ask questions like, 
how much stuff do we really need? How do we feel 
about having chemicals so close to our skin? And 
through calling the work a collection, even though 
criti
cal and
so cial design 89
it consists of only two pieces, it also tries to ques
-
tion collection sizes. Do we have to make huge 
collections just because we can? 
By drawing parallels to the problems in the 
fashion industry as well as in the wider society, 
the collection examines the fashion world through 
a holistic viewpoint and tries to realise how the 
designer can influence the fashion industry as 
well as how the industry relates to the world. This 
makes the collection a silent debate for a more 
sustainable future. With this in mind, the aim of 
Paradox is not to find answers but instead to ques
-
tion how we appreciate our clothes, our resources, 
our own work and the work of others. There aren’t 
any one-size-fits-all solutions to these problems. 
Because fashion always refers to the human 
body it is a great way to research how humans 
relate to the world. Fashion can therefore be a 
tool for communication and a way to take action. 
Being aware of what kinds of messages I’m sending 
through my design allows me to use it as a tool to 
make a difference. Ideas and thoughts are trans
-
ferred into products as seeds, and you never know 
who these seeds are going to inspire. Through 
starting to ask questions I realised my power, and 
today I study design because I want to make the 
world a better place; today I’m trying to design 
the future – not a product. 
90 critical and so cial design
Critical design by Anu Corin (Photo: Henrica Langh)
critical and so cial design 91
Critical design by Anu Corin (Photo: Aino Huovio)
CHANGING 
THE WORLD 
WITH FASHION
Kati Reijonen & Mari Krappala
The purpose of this piece of writing is to describe 
the background of the Fashion Empowerment 
project, a joint venture by the Novia University 
of Applied Sciences and the Estonian Art Academy, and part of Baltic Fashion EU project. It is 
also an attempt to make sense of a project that 
in many ways became a personal learning experience for both the students and the supervisors. 
Fashion Empowerment was an attempt to 
introduce the dimension of social design into 
fashion. The first question we wanted to address 
was: if fashion can entrap (as we know it can), 
can it also empower? 
As the process went on, it became apparent 
that answering this question would not be simple. 
Social design is a complex concept that can be 
approached from various angles. Ours is a combination of art, design thinking, spirituality and 
social sciences. However social design may be 
defined, at its core there is always the individual 
and her/his right to become heard and appreciated. This is what Fashion Empowerment, too, 
was all about. 
Introduction
94 critical and so cial design
Fashion Empowerment: 
How it all started 
The idea that led to the Fashion Empowerment 
project was born in October 2009, in Usedom, 
at the Baltic Fashion Gala. While watching yet 
another catwalk show with skinny, solemn models 
sporting imaginative collections by young talents, 
we started discussing at the dinner table: me 
(Kati Reijonen) and my Baltic Fashion colleagues, 
Tuula Bergqvist (Novia University of Applied Sciences) and Lilli Jahilo (Estonian Arts Academy). 
We shared the same feeling of slight frustration 
and, to be honest, boredom. Is this all there is to 
fashion? Are fashion awards just competitions on 
how far the concept of a piece of clothing can 
be stretched and still serve as fashion, instead of, 
say, a fine arts statement? Is the innovativeness 
of a garment measured by its craziness? Is the 
fashion business essentially show business? Do 
ordinary people have any voice in the industry?
It is a truism that high street fashion attracts 
most attention in the media and consumer market, while many “real-world” clothing problems 
remain unsolved. Elderly people and the disabled, 
for instance, struggle constantly to find clothes 
that are not only functional and practical, but 
also beautiful and empowering.
And then there is the issue of us ordinary 
women never really being up to stereotypical 
womanhood as outlined by the fashion gatekeepers, such as the glossy and bloated Vogue, 
where even the advertisements are serious fashion 
statements, carefully designed to create a fantasy 
world to which the rest of us have no access.
Fashion is such an obscure and strange construct, alluring and annoying at the same time, 
that it seems difficult to say anything truly meaningful about it. It is about clothes and outfits – but 
no, not really. It is about style. It is about habitus.
It is about making a distinction. It is about belonging to one reference group and not belonging to 
another. It is about looking cool according to the 
standards of those who decide what is cool in any 
given season. As Gick and Gick (2007) point out, 
the power of the media in this process, operating as an intermediary between the designers and 
consumers, cannot be underestimated. The novel 
The Devil Wears Prada (Weisberg 2003) provides 
us with a caricature of how fashion is constructed 
by Vogue, “the world’s most influential fashion 
magazine” (Weber 12.3.2006). 
At the dinner table in Usedom a decision was 
made to explore the empowering dimensions of 
fashion and see what could come out of this process. We felt that the time was right to open a 
new, more sustainable and human-centred perspective on the fashion industry, one that would 
involve the users in the design process in a meaningful way. 
Could fashion, instead of making the rest 
of us feel incomplete and imperfect, work 
the opposite way? Could it empower? 
We decided to start small, a pilot competition open only for the students of Novia and 
EAA. After all, the whole idea was to wake up 
our students to the possibilities the real world 
offered fashion designers. The students are seldom encouraged to address the needs of those 
who poorly fit the body image of the idealised 
norm. The paradox is that the majority of garments are designed for the minority of users, 
while a huge number of consumers stay in the 
margins. This means that only very few can ever 
find work as designers in the mainstream fashion 
market. And yet there is plenty of work in solving real-world clothing problems.
Design is, essentially, about problem solving 
and luckily in our world there is no lack of problems to be solved.
critical and so cial design 95
Background check: 
Social design, social art
The Fashion Empowerment project was based 
on the concept of social design. In this context, 
design is seen as a methodology of creative problem solving where the attributes of the design 
process are employed to facilitate social needs. 
In Papanek’s words, it is design for the “real 
world” (Papanek 1997).
Social design is inclusive, catering for the 
needs of all humanity and not only for the 
desires and excessive consumption of the affluent minority, as has been the case with marketoriented design. Many terms refer to social 
design, such as design-for-all, responsible design 
or ethical design, to name but a few. 
Bringing fashion design into the context of 
sustainability is like opening Pandora’s Box. As 
there are many phases to fashion from ideation, 
design, production, distribution, sale, consumption and ultimately disposal, there are many 
instances where decisions, made by designers, 
producers, retailers, and consumers, can reflect 
socially responsible views and sensibilities. Questions such as where the designs originate, what 
materials are used in the production (green 
materials, recycled, upcycled, repurposed), how 
and where fashion is produced and sold, how is 
it consumed in terms of use, care, disposal etc., 
reflect a dedication to or indifference to social 
responsibility and sustainability. 
While ecological sustainability has become 
a permanent topic in fashion discourse, questions of inclusion and design-for-all have been 
less addressed. The rise of social and ethical consciousness among designers in general has led 
to increased interest in the participatory, usercentred design methods commonly applied in 
Service Design to involve the user in the process, 
not as a participant but as a co-creator.
Co-creation calls for equal, non-hierarchical 
collaboration, which can be, and very often is, difficult in a situation where the Expert works with the 
Layman. Aristotle gave the name Mētis to designer 
knowledge – a combination of intuitive knowledge 
that comes from working with something as complex as design for a long time and of craftsmanship, 
the practical know-how. “In a sense Mētis lies in that 
large space between the realm of genius, to which 
no formula can apply, and the realm of codified 
knowledge, which can be learned by rote,” as J.C. 
Scott writes (1998).
The problem with Mētis is that it is inaccessible 
to others. It cannot be shared on a horizontal level. In 
spiritual terms one could say that it is Ego-centric. 
There are ways to tone Mētis down, to achieve 
more emphatic and meaningful co-design experiences, such as the now so fashionable Mindfulness. The roots of Mindfulness can be found in 
Eastern philosophies, more importantly in Buddhism, but since the 1970s it has been practiced 
in the Western world without any religious undercurrents, as a way to train the mind to stay in the 
Now and to accept life as it unfolds. The ancient 
practice of meditation is a method to achieve the 
desired state of awareness through stillness and 
quieting the restless mind. 
While mindfulness is not yet part of everyday 
design vocabulary, art is mindful by definition. A 
fulfilling art experience is all about presence and 
has, at its best, meditative dimensions. Marina 
Abramovic’s MOMA project The Artist is Present, where the artist sits on a chair and looks 
intensively into the eye of whoever happens to 
sit on the chair in front of her, is a great example 
of this. Abramovic’s intensive gaze provoked an 
unpredictable emotional reaction in the audience, 
anything from hysterical laughter to desperate 
crying. (Marina Abramovis. The artist is present.) 
Interestingly enough, Mindfulness is now 
breaking even into design discourse. In his posting to the “A better world by design” project 
website, Ylan Vo quotes Dr M.A. Greenstein’s 
notion of design not just as problem-solving but 
a process requiring that we build the capacity to 
listen, understand, and affirm the possibility of a 
better world (Vo 16.9.2011). 
In fashion design, subjected to the obscure 
notion of “fashion” as defined by rapidly chang-
96 critical and so cial design
ing trends, mass production, media hype, celebrity 
culture and obsession with distorted body images, 
co-creation, the interaction between the designer 
and customer, is more complex than in the other 
areas of design. Clothes can, still today, be custom made and tailored for individual users in atelier settings, and there is something of an upsurge 
of more interactive mass-market concepts such as 
Nomo, which provides a service for customising 
jeans. This kind of designer-consumer interaction, however, is possible for only the very few and 
affluent. Most users never get the chance to communicate their wishes and desires. It is their lot to 
adjust to what the others have designed.
Fashion as freedom? 
To empowerment and 
beyond.
The concept “empowerment” is much used today. 
Like innovation, it has become an empty buzzword. 
In the context of fashion, the question is whether we 
should empower users with or from fashion. 
Exploring fashion empowerment is like going 
down a spiral into the depths of the human experience of self and society. On the surface level there is 
the obvious – how fashion makes us feel. Sexy lingerie 
can make a person feel very sensual, no matter what 
she wears on top, something Arabic women certainly 
know a lot about. 
A blazer with shoulder pads or body-sculpting 
underwear can have an empowering impact on a person’s self-image on a very serious level. The popular 
BBC makeover reality show What Not To Wear, 
hosted by Trinny Woodall and Susannah Constantine, 
addressed this in an eloquent manner. The show was 
not so much about sporting fashion statements than 
feeling good about oneself by body-flattering clothing choices. It was empowerment with fashion. Similar 
initiatives are on the rise in the media today.
As the spiral goes down, one gets into the political dimensions of fashion. Burqha-wearing women 
are considered symbols of oppression in the West, 
but what about the H&M underwear advertisements, 
often the size of a football field, that expose more skin 
than many feel comfortable with? It was the burning 
of the bra that became the symbol of women’s liberation in the hippie movement of the 1960s. In her 
review on the Fashion as Empowerment exhibition at 
the Metropolitan Museum, Lisa Krichner writes: 
C’mon. Fashion is pretty nearly universally a symbol 
of entrapment. The high heels, the bras, etc. Sure, we can 
revel in being pretty and sexy and still be liberated, but by 
and large this is not how it works. Not that I blame the 
messenger; fashion is a construct, it’s not the mini skirt’s 
fault that butt cheeks graze public seating. (Krichner 
6.6.2010)
The exhibition at the MET intended to reveal 
how the American woman initiated style revolutions that 
mirrored her social, political and sexual emancipation
(American Women. Fashioning a national identity).
Empowering from fashion implies that, rather 
than becoming victims of fashion eccentricities, 
women should take control into their own hands. 
The negative impact of fashion extremes on women’s health and well-being was addressed already in 
Victorian England with the rise of the Rational dress 
society. Fashion empowerment is, therefore, not 
only about adjusting to or making the most of what 
is, but also and particularly about changing the way 
we perceive ourselves. 
In Finland, the photographer Miina Savolainen has 
coined the term empowering photography. Savolainen’s method is to involve the subjects of photographs 
in the creative process and in this way give a voice to 
the oppressed and silent. In her project “The Loveliest Girl in The World”, orphanage girls were given the 
critical and so cial design 97
Closing up 
Fashion Empowerment
possibility to design their own portraits the way they 
wanted to present themselves, celebrating the beauty 
and grace of girls who had endured hardship in their 
lives (Savolainen 2008). 
The Fashion Empowerment project got inspired 
by this. 
We wanted to give a voice to those never featured 
in fashion magazines – the too short and the too 
tall and the too big and the too small and those 
who just don’t fit in. 
We also wanted to remind designers of the fact 
that even the unfitting lot wants not only functional and comfortable clothes, they also want to 
look good and feel good about themselves. It might 
come as a surprise to many a “healthy” person (it 
did to me!) that someone with a “disability” might 
not want to hide the thing that makes her different 
in the eyes of others – but to celebrate it instead. 
The Japanese Wabi Sabi philosophy is about finding perfection in imperfection – it is the very crack 
in the pot that makes it perfect. A “disabled” user 
does not fit in the fashion scene the way an anorectic top model does – but both of them suffer 
from the distorted idea of perfection the fashion 
world is obsessed about.
Fashion empowerment is, as can be seen, a many 
splendoured thing, the complexity of which can 
only be scratched on the surface in an essay 
such as this. To give more depth to the matter 
one could for instance look at Nobel Laureate 
Amartya Sen’s concept of freedom, as the individual’s real possibility to pursue the kind of life 
she wants to live (Sen 1999). The key concept 
in Sen’s thinking is capability. The question is: 
could design provide the individual with means to 
transform functionings (e.g. availability of suitable clothes) into concrete capabilities (e.g. better self-esteem), leading to increased autonomy 
and freedom (Fukuda-Parr 2003)?
These questions need more time to be properly 
addressed. For the purpose of this chapter it is sufficient to just ask: did the Empowerment Project 
achieve its goals?
We believe it did. The result was a few collections of clothes designed for people with not only 
desires but practical needs, but the main thing 
was the process during which both the students 
and the coaches learned to look at the world 
from a different perspective, from the perspective of empathy and compassion.
The film made of the project by the talented 
Estonian team made both us and the public cry. 
To listen to a young man, defined for others by 
his cerebral palsy, excitedly talking about the 
outfit specially designed for him by one of the 
students, was not only a moving experience, it 
was spiritual. The project had managed to connect two people, the designer and the user, on a 
very personal and intimate level. The metis certainly was not there. Instead, we saw a genuine 
encounter between two human beings, made 
all the more significant by the fact that the 
designer was but a student, a novice, not yet a 
professional.
Maybe it was because of this that the project 
succeeded in the one thing that is meaningful: to 
make the user happy.
98 critical and so cial design
Performance art 
meets fashion design
Conclusion
Novia’s next innovative step considered the subject from the artistic point of view: it posed the 
question of how we understand social design and 
how we can get people to wake up to envisioning a more sustainable life in fashion. The performance was based on all the knowledge we 
gathered during the Baltic Fashion project on 
social, sustainable and responsible design and 
consumption. The main objective was to make 
a change in the minds of researchers, designers 
and consumers.
One can ponder the use and consumption 
of clothes by reframing their meaning. In her 
performance Redefining the Meaning Leena Kela 
explored sustainable design processes and our 
everyday consuming practices with the help of 
conceptual self-irony: what is the meaning of 
each piece of clothing for its user, how do they 
define the user, how can these definitions be 
changed or be played with, and what kinds of 
new meanings can be produced? In the performance, new ways to perceive the people behind 
the clothes were provoked. The artist put on one 
garment at the same time expressing the story 
behind that garment and the many levels of the 
garment’s meaning to herself. The process continued and garment by garment the story evolved 
until finally the artist was wearing 15 blouses at 
the same time. The project also wondered how it 
This essay explored the background of the Fashion Empowerment project. It opened our views 
on social design in fashion and explained how art 
can help us to approach differently the many 
meanings of fashion and clothing. Through this 
project and design experimentations we gained 
new knowledge on how fashion can empower. 
We will not stop believing that change is possible, 
also in the fashion field. Additionally we will not 
stop working to achieve that change.
was possible that everyday use of clothes brings 
such pleasure even though the clothes used as a 
starting point are not fashionable. 
The performance ended with Leena singing 
These boots are made for walking…. She walks away 
in a pair of red boots – hopefully leaving ideas in our 
minds on how we can lead more sustainable lives. 
critical and so cial design 99
References
Fukuda-Parr, S. (2003). The Human Development Paradigm: Operationalizing Sen’s Ideas on Capabilities. Feminist Economics. Vol. 9 :2-3, pp. 301–317.
Gick, E. & Gick, W. (2007). Why the Devil Wears Prada: The Fashion Formation Process in a 
Simultaneous Disclosure Game Between Designers and Media. Center for European Studies Working 
Paper Series #147. 
Papanek, V. (1997). Design for the Real World. Human Ecology and Social Change. London, UK: 
Thames and Hudson. 
Sen, A. (1999). Development as Freedom. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Scott, J.C. (1998). Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have 
Failed. New Haven, US: Yale University Press 
Weisberger, L. (2003). The Devil Wears Prada. New York: Broadway Books. 
Online references
Abramovics Marina. The Artist is Present. www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2010/marinaabramovic
American Women. Fashioning a National Identity. May 5-August 15, 2010.
www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2010/american-woman).
Krichner, L. (6.7.2010). Fashion as Empowerment @The Met, Artsy, July 06, 2010
http://www.bust.com/blog/fashion-as-empowerment-the-met.html
Savolainen, M. (2008). The Loveliest Girl in the World. Blink Entertainment. Helsinki,http://www.
voimauttavavalokuva.net/artikkelit.htm
Tallinn-Turku 2011. Fashion Empowerment http://www.fashion-empowerment.blogspot.fi/
Vo, Y. (16.9.2011). Designing with Mindfulness
http://www.abetterworldbydesign.com/2011/2011/09/16/designing-with-mindfulness/
Weber, C. (3.12.2006). Fashion-Books: Review of "IN VOGUE: The Illustrated History of 
the World's Most Famous Fashion Magazine (Rizzoli)". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.
com/2006/12/03/books/Weber2.t.html?_r=0
PRODUCT
SERVICE
SYSTEM
Hutter, L., Capozucca, P. & Nayyar, S. (2010). A Roadmap for Sustainable 
Consumption, Deloitte Review issue 7 www.deloittereview.com ,DK.
B u s i n e s s l e a d e r s h a v e a n o p p o r t u n i t y t o c r e a t e n e w 
business models that internalize social and environ -
m e n t a l c a p i t a l a n d w h i c h f o c u s o n i n n o v a t i o n – a l l 
o f w h i c h c a n b e t t e r p o s i t i o n t h e i r c o m p a n i e s f o r a 
l o w - c a r b o n e c o n o m y b a s e d o n s m a r t e r c o n s u m p t i o n 
a n d c h a n g e d p e r c e p t i o n s o f w h a t v a l u e r e a l l y m e a n s 
(Hutter et al. 2010).
Product-Service 
Systems Design 
Thinking for
Sustainable 
Fashion
Cosette M. Armstrong 
Sustainable consumption invariably commands 
a dramatic reduction in material consumption, 
a reality the fashion industry must soon face. 
Environmental issues associated with producing 
clothing and other fashion goods around the globe 
are substantial and can no longer be ignored. Additionally, personal ownership of clothing and 
other fashion goods have become inherently 
linked to the satisfaction of many psychosocial 
needs. Consumption of fashion goods is now recreational rather than needs based. However, the 
more consumers attempt to meet their internal 
needs externally with things, the more dissatisfied the consumer becomes, leaving society with 
a variety of social woes. Thus, the industry currently faces a myriad of environmental and social 
ills that command innovative design thinking for 
the revolution ahead. 
Importantly, revenue generation in the fashion industry is closely associated with material 
resource use and consumption. Further, in an 
era of fast fashion, clothing producers are under immense pressure to produce items at lower 
and lower prices, which requires ever-increasing 
Introduction
sales volume to generate a profit. At the same 
time, market saturation and evolving competitive structures are also commanding greater 
creativity and innovation, especially for mature 
industries like clothing. How, then, might this $3 
trillion global industry address its environmental 
and social challenges by reducing material production and consumption without setting off an 
economic catastrophe? 
Product-service systems (PSS) may offer a solution. These schemes include services like renting, upgrading, redesigning, swapping or lending 
to reduce reliance on natural resources while 
concurrently increasing product quality and longevity. Clothing PSS may provide the industry a 
mechanism to increase factors such as product 
quality and longevity while also providing alternative consumption models that decrease superfluous consumption. This chapter will discuss the 
potential for PSS implementation in the clothing industry, including a discussion about various 
models, design thinking for inspiration, and consumer adoption. 
104 Product Service System
Three types of PSS have been proposed: product-oriented, use-oriented, and results-oriented. Product-oriented services sell a product with 
product-related services that add value to the 
sale, such as maintenance or redesign, customisation, take-back or consultancy. Use-oriented 
services offer product renting, lending or swapping services and are characterised by a lack of 
personal ownership. Therefore, the company retains ownership as well as the responsibility for 
the product’s upkeep. Results-oriented services 
provide a result rather than a product or the use 
of a product, including activity management, 
outsourcing or pay per service unit. These services provide an activity or some type of output 
conducted by the company, like a fashionable 
evening out. The avenue to deliver the result is 
left entirely up to the company. 
The contribution of these PSS models to sustainability lies primarily in the detachment of the 
value proposition from material consumption. In 
some cases, personal ownership is replaced with 
utilisation options, more closely focusing on the 
consumer’s end desire rather than materialism. 
Product design implications for such models may 
include greater durability, flexibility, modularity 
and ease of use to achieve increased use intensity across a multitude of users rather than one 
owner. In other PSS schemes, care and mainteProduct-Service 
Systems
nance services, consultancy or redesign features 
provide support for product life extension when 
an item is owned. Importantly, PSS models are 
service based, affording the clothing retailer 
many opportunities to interact with consumers. 
This offers the retailer a key conduit to become 
more responsive to customers’ needs as well as 
an opportunity to build brand loyalty. 
A report written by the Waste and Resources 
Action Programme in the UK, Working Together for a World Without Waste (2011), identified 
some key opportunities for the clothing industry 
to become more sustainable: 1) reducing environmental impact in production and laundering, 
2) extending product life, 3) reducing landfill 
disposal, and 4) increasing market demand for 
used goods. The report also argued that the most 
abundant opportunities for alternative revenue 
streams, outside the sale of first-off goods, are 
the sale of pre-owned clothing, services that offer consumers ways to gain greater use of items 
already owned, accessible and affordable alterations and repair, and collection of used clothing 
for recycling and reuse. PSS concepts may be 
used to spark innovative thinking about ways to 
combine services with the sale of clothing products, developing revenue-generating offerings 
that target life extension, disposal avoidance and 
greater marketability for used goods. 
Though services have long supported the use 
and maintenance of clothing products, these 
services have not necessarily been utilised as 
a method to achieve dematerialisation, longevity or to resolve environmental issues for 
that matter. 
Services like dry cleaning, repair, alterations and 
tailoring are industry standards. In recent years, 
personal styling and wardrobe consultation have 
gained popularity, though are not always financially affordable. Services such as take-back are 
increasing, though sometimes utilised in exchange for discounts and not always implemented to close the material loop. The potential for 
retailers to utilise these services already familiar 
to the consumer in a new and different way is significant and could offer the customer a compelling 
value proposition. For a product-oriented field like 
the clothing industry, product- and use-oriented 
PSS models are likely the most realistic to implement in the near future while result-oriented services may require far more industry evolution and 
changes in how consumers consume. 
Product Service System 105
There are many sources of inspiration that may 
drive PSS design thinking for the clothing industry (see Figure 1). For instance, one can simply 
examine the variety of issues that lead to premature disposal of clothing products to find 
many potential alternatives. Previous studies 
have shown that the most common reasons for 
premature disposal of clothing are fit, fashion 
change, boredom, and damaged/worn out goods, 
all of which could be addressed through innovative PSS models designed to reduce material 
throughput by eliminating the need for disposal 
while raising the customer’s satisfaction with the 
product. Fit issues could be addressed via alterations or tailoring services sold at point-of-sale. 
Fashion change and boredom could be addressed 
through strategies such as redesign or restyling 
services. Product sharing, swapping or renting 
schemes may also be utilised to stimulate interest in used goods, satisfying the need for something new without the natural resource expenditure of a first-off garment. Damaged or worn out 
items could be a part of take-back schemes used 
to source new materials for new fibres, fabrics 
or trims. Maintenance agreements could also be 
sold at point of purchase to avoid premature disposal when a garment malfunctions or becomes 
damaged. 
PSS Design
Thinking
Problem-oriented thinking
•	 Identification of problems leading to premature disposal (fit, fashion change, boredom, 
damage/wear)
•	 Design PSS services to eclipse disposal (e.g. alterations, tailoring, redesign, restyling, 
swapping, take-back, maintenance agreements)
Service-oriented thinking
•	 Identification of goods that experience long-term ownership, infrequent use
•	 Design PSS services to maintain quality and satisfaction (e.g. maintenance, redesign)
Utilisation-oriented thinking
•	 Identification of products used infrequently; status not derived from personal 
ownership
•	 Design PSS schemes that provide utilisation of products without ownership (e.g. 
renting, swapping, sharing)
Needs-oriented thinking
•	 Identification of human need to do and interact (see Max Neef Matrix) 
•	 Design PSS services to engage consumers in doing (e.g. co-design, participatory 
design or make-it-yourself) and social interaction (e.g. customisation, consultancy 
or swapping/sharing )
Figure 1. Sources of PSS Design Inspiration
106 Product Service System
Other sources of inspiration may evolve from 
service- or utilisation-oriented PSS design thinking. Previous research has shown that clothing 
categories such as dress clothing, coats and leather 
goods, and accessories often experience long owning times but infrequent use. Usually produced at a 
high level of quality using durable materials, these 
products may be kept for many years even if not 
worn. On the one hand, a PSS scheme could assist 
the customer in caring for these items, preserving 
the product’s craftsmanship and better maintaining the customer’s product satisfaction over the life 
of the garment. On the other hand, products that 
are well designed are in the best position for redesign, as the materials involved can endure a second 
or even third life. The potential for redesign PSS 
schemes in this case is great, allowing the customer 
to re-engage with the garment once more in a new 
and different way. Likewise, identifying clothing 
products in which personal ownership is not critical for status and infrequent use are common. PSS 
schemes may be developed to meet a temporary 
material need with far less resource consumption. 
Again, renting, swapping, and sharing services can 
increase the overall utilisation of garments over 
time and reduce the need for constant replacement. Notably, the quality of the garment involved 
in this PSS model must be high to endure increased 
product utilisation across many users.
Finally, needs-oriented design thinking may also 
be used to conceptualise innovative PSS schemes 
that may address some of the social woes currently perpetuated by the fast fashion system.
Social interaction and community engagement 
in society has generally decreased, leaving many 
with unmet human needs. The Max Neef Matrix 
of fundamental human needs provides a framework for the variety of needs that exist (e.g. to 
be, have, do and interact) and ways in which these 
are chiefly satisfied, few of which involve material 
goods. Specifically, PSS schemes may be utilised 
in this context to, for example, assist consumers 
in meeting their natural desires to do and interact. 
Models such as co-design, participatory design 
or make-it-yourself relieve pressure on the consumption of objects and transition the consumption experience to one of empowerment and even 
skill development. Similarly, schemes that provide 
social interaction such as customisation, consultancy or swapping/sharing shift the consumer’s 
focus from the thing to be consumed to the social 
experience that surrounds the object. 
Whatever the conceptual approach taken, 
successful PSS innovation will hinge on the tight 
marriage between the product and service, combining these in such a way that the consumer is 
given a compelling reason to buy into a new consumption model, the retailer or product developer 
reaps revenue, and the overall reliance on material 
resources is reduced. This win-win scenario will 
not be achieved without a significant shift in how 
we think about the clothing business. 
Product Service System 107
Though the potential PSS innovation may be 
limitless from the designer’s or retailer’s perspective, this discussion would be remiss without 
considering the consumer. Previous studies have 
provided some preliminary affirmation of consumer interest in a variety of PSS concepts, the 
greatest interest shown in take-back, consultancy repair, redesign and clothing swaps while 
a moderate interest has been shown related to 
renting and make-it-yourself schemes. Interestingly, PSS models like renting, swapping, makeit-yourself and selling a fashion result have been 
perceived as being most suited for younger age 
groups while PSS scenarios related to products 
sold with redesign or repair services, customisation or participatory design and advice/consultancy have been perceived to be most suited for 
older age groups. 
More importantly, research has provided 
some key insights as to the PSS features that 
may most encourage adoption while also identifying some potential roadblocks for PSS implementation from the consumer’s viewpoint. 
Chiefly, clothing PSS must address hesitations 
on the part of consumers regarding trust in the 
PSS provider, perceived price-for-value challenges and ease of use issues. Consumers desire 
information about how the service will be practically delivered, its guarantees and how excepPSS Consumer 
Adoption
tional cases will be handled. Though consumers 
may readily identify many financial benefits of 
reducing their overall clothing purchases via PSS 
models, scepticism and resistance exist about recurring costs (subscriptions or club fees). Other 
consumers have reservations about their ability 
to easily participate in and use the PSS if, for 
example, they lack confidence in their ability to 
choose customisation services that best meet their 
personal style or if there is a high skill level required 
in participatory or make-it-yourself options. 
Thus, the terms involved in a viable clothing PSS scheme must satisfy hesitations about 
the provider’s reputation, especially related to 
issues such as hygiene and product abuse involved 
in renting schemes as well as scepticism about 
the continuation of the business when a longterm maintenance agreement or other guarantee is involved. Information may also be needed 
to clarify the materials used, how materials have 
been treated, who has used them and under what 
conditions. The development of clothing-related 
PSS may be most ideal for a company with a wellestablished brand image. For example, Marks and 
Spencer has begun to offer services such as takeback. A smaller boutique may have a more difficult 
time earning the consumer’s trust. Acceptance 
of experiential schemes like co- or participatory 
design or make-it-yourself options hinge on the 
company’s ability to educate and provide support 
and reassurance to the customer in the design 
process. Finally, mechanisms must be developed 
to help the consumer compare the costs of a PSS 
to traditional acquisition methods: for instance, 
the cost of a new garment versus the costs and 
benefits of a re-invented item, in both monetary 
and emotional terms. 
108 Product Service System
Clothing is an invariably challenging product type 
to use in a PSS scheme. Changing or eliminating 
the ownership of clothing may be problematic, as 
ownership provides many psychosocial by-products for the consumer. Industry expertise and 
infrastructure required to redesign, reuse and recycle clothing goods currently lacks sophistication 
in an era of fast fashion. However, clothing bundled 
with services might provide an opportunity for the 
industry to offer product quality, durability and 
extended use time, increasing overall satisfaction. 
PSS design thinking offers limitless dematerialisation possibilities and opportunities to close material loops, to decrease our reliance on natural resources, and to reduce waste while also exploring 
alternative consumption models that better meet 
fundamental human needs. 
Admittedly, PSS have not yet proven their 
worth in the sustainable design milieu, largely constrained by the industry’s and the consumer’s resistance to service-based business models. Designers, 
product developers and retailers hold considerable 
power to lead a much-needed cultural shift in this 
direction, changing the nature of production and 
consumption of clothing goods by creating compelling value propositions that entice consumers 
into a new, more sustainable lifestyle. The need to 
improve the ability for PSS design thinking among 
future industry cannot be underestimated.
Conclusion
Product Service System 109
References
Armstrong, C., Niinimäki, K., Kujala, S., Karell, E. & Lang, C. (2014) Sustainable Product-Service 
Systems for Clothing: Exploring Consumer Perceptions of Consumption Alternatives in Finland. 
Journal of Cleaner Production (in press).
Armstrong, C.M. & Lang, C. (2013). Sustainable product service systems: The new frontier in 
apparel retailing? Research Journal of Textile and Apparel. Vol. 17:1.
Mont, O.K. (2002). Clarifying the concept of product-service system. Journal of Cleaner Production. Vol. 10:3, pp. 237–245.
Rexfelt, O. & Ornäs, V.H. (2009). Consumer acceptance of product-service systems. Journal of 
Manufacturing Technology Management. Vol. 20:5, pp. 674–699.
Tukker, A. (2004). Eight types of product-service system: eight ways to sustainability? Experiences 
from Suspronet. Business Strategy and the Environment. Vol. 13:4, pp. 246–260.
Vezzoli, C. & Manzini, E. (2008). Design for Environmental Sustainability. New York: Springer. 
Planned Continuity: 
Multi-life Garments 
through Modular
Structures & 
Supplemental Services
Essi Karell
In recent decades garment life cycles have been 
seen to be shortening dramatically in tandem 
with an increase in fashion consumption. Meanwhile the current fashion system (manufacturers, companies, designers, stores, magazines, 
blogs etc.) has stayed unimaginative and relatively passive with regard to promoting alternatives on how to consume fashion. While the need 
for novelty was once based on real demand, well 
considered in advance, nowadays the majority 
of Western consumers can afford to purchase 
merely on impulse. Products can be acquired "for 
fun", due to boredom and sometimes even for a 
single use. Driven by more and more materialistic values, consumption has become a habit and 
entertainment best characterised by immediate 
gratification. However, for people with the most 
materialistic values the positive emotions evoked 
by a product tend to fade quickly after acquisition 
(Richins 2013). Thus, long-term pleasure appears 
to be impossible to achieve, as once the satisfaction with the purchased item has faded, new 
fulfilment must be found elsewhere. What could 
satisfy the apparent need for something new 
without acquiring more material?
This chapter presents a conceptual design 
case that combines a modular design strategy 
and theory on product-service systems (PSS) 
in order to dematerialise fashion consumption. 
The aim is to extend the garment life cycle and 
identify new ways to experience fashion more 
responsibly compared to prevailing consumption 
practices. First, some principles of modular design and PSS are introduced, after which a hypothetical clothing service is presented to boost 
environmental responsibility as well as customer 
and business benefits.
Introduction
112 Product Service System
point of purchase
1) raw material
extraction
2) design and 
material selection
3) garment 
manufacture
4) packing & 
distribution
5) product use 
& maintenance
6) recycling 
& reuse
7) final disposal
shop
pre-consumption
use / disposal
Opposing the prevailing 
fashion pattern
The hypothetical clothing service described in 
this chapter was developed in autumn 2013 as 
part of my MA thesis project in Fashion and 
Clothing Design at Aalto University. The project 
covers a conceptual service development process as well as a concrete design example of a 
limited clothing collection that was to illustrate 
how the service could work in practice. 
The main objective behind the clothing service was to offer a sustainable alternative to the 
current pattern of fashion consumption and 
meanwhile extend the traditional garment life 
cycle (Figure 1).
As illustrated below the garment's life starts 
from the raw material extraction, making a long journey in an industrial system before actually reaching 
the final consumer. The final consumer is a passive 
receiver who becomes active only after the point 
of purchase when using and taking care of the garment. Final disposal is put on the consumer’s shoulders, while companies remain responsible only for 
the design and production of products. 
To challenge the current pattern, one of the 
tasks within the presented concept is also to 
blur such a sharp division between the production stage and the consumer stage. The concepts 
of product-service systems and modular design 
were selected as theoretical starting points for 
development of the new clothing service, as both 
design strategies have been argued to have positive impact on garment life cycles and potential 
to challenge the existing practices of the fashion system (Niinimäki & Hassi 2011; Fletcher & 
Grose 2012; Koo 2012; Armstrong et al. 2014). 
Among these strategies, customisation was also 
considered as a tool supporting more sustainable 
consumption. The consumer was planned to become a co-creator in the design stage through 
customisation. This was expected to create 
deeper product satisfaction with the product, 
as suggested in earlier studies (e.g. Mugge et 
Figure 1. Traditional garment life cycle
Product Service System 113
Modularity
Most references to modular design are typically 
linked to engineering design and computer technology, but they can be identified also in many 
other everyday activities: modular furniture or 
kitchen decor probably being the most familiar 
concepts among consumers. According to Kamrani and Salhieh (2002) modular design refers to 
a design technique that can be used to develop 
complex products by using similar components. 
The components (modules) must have features that 
enable them to be coupled: A single module may 
only perform discrete functions, but when combined with other modules they can together provide 
a variety of functions (Kamrani & Salhieh 2002). 
From the sustainable design perspective, 
a modular design strategy can be considered a 
transformable design strategy (Koo 201), which 
emphasises the capacity for radical change. 
Transformable design can be understood based 
on the definition of 'transformation', which 
according to Schmid (2008) describes the ability to take one thing (materials, views, experiences, processes) and turn it into another. Transformation generally indicates a change of shape, 
form or structure without the loss of substance 
(Schmid 2008). Hence, a transformable design 
strategy, including modular design, is considered 
here as a tool that allows upgrading and renewing of the existing garment due to its variable 
characteristics. It helps to maintain the satisfying garment attributes in the consumer's eyes 
while maximising its capacity in use. Modular 
design can deliver clear environmental benefits 
and the potential to dematerialise consumption, 
benefits that will be discussed further along with 
the clothing service. 
In fashion modular design typically refers to 
multi-functional garments that can be altered by 
the wearer and thus bring variety into people's 
wardrobes. As Koo (2012) argues, garments that 
can change, adapt or evolve may encourage a 
relationship between wearer and garment that 
is much deeper than can be achieved through 
typical fashion solutions. Such a relationship 
is expected to influence the consumer to wear 
garments much longer and more frequently due 
to the ability to serve multiple needs and eventually reduce fashion purchasing (Koo 2012). 
Meanwhile it carries the potential to reshape 
the existing markets and challenge the current 
rules of the fashion industry, as it gives the user 
an ongoing, active role in designing the product 
(Niinimäki & Hassi 2011). Even though consumers may lack knowledge about or indicate 
little concern for sustainability, transformable 
and modular garments may encourage them to 
engage in sustainable behaviour even without 
their awareness (Koo 2012). Consequently, this 
al. 2005). The prospective emotional bond between user and product was then considered to 
enhance the consumer's empathy towards the 
garment and to invest in it even later in the future. In tandem with the modular garment structure and supplemental service (based on PSS) 
consumers were expected to repeatedly feel satisfaction with the old item, which should hence 
help to extend the garment life cycle. 
114 Product Service System
and meaningful ways. Instead of using products 
and services, it is more important to acknowledge what these products and/or services enable 
consumers to achieve (Manzini & Vezzoli 2002). 
If twentieth century designers saw their tasks as 
the conception, development and production of 
simple objects, the 'object' of today's designer 
is turning into a 'process': something that occurs 
over time, an activity that aims to receive results
(Manzini 2011, p.3). What is thus being designed 
in service design is a so-called 'action platform' that 
enables favourable activity while making certain 
kinds of behaviour more difficult (Manzini 2011). 
To promote sustainable behaviour ProductService Systems provide three approaches, typically classified as three main categories: product-oriented, use-oriented and results-oriented 
PSS. In product-oriented services the business 
model is still concentrated on sales of products. 
The added value is provided through additional 
services, such as product-related services and 
advice or consultancy services, which both aim to 
guarantee product life extension and functionality (Manzini & Vezzoli 2002; Tukker 2004). 
These services can include product maintenance, 
repair or upgrading in a certain time frame or a 
take-back service at the end of the product’s life. 
Benefits of a product-oriented PSS can thus be 
gained by simultaneously minimising costs and 
Product-Service 
Systems (PSS)
Product-Service Systems (PSS) offer great potential for this demand for new business models. 
PSS replace traditional ways of product utilisation through a combination of tangible products 
and intangible services, which together can fulfil 
the consumer's needs without excessive material use (Mont 2002; Manzini & Vezzoli 2002; 
Tukker 2004). Apart from environmental benefits PSS has been argued to profit businesses, 
an advantage that may be more difficult to link 
to modular clothing. PSS can be an excellent 
vehicle to enhance companies' competitiveness 
(Tukker 2004) and to offer higher value for both 
companies and customers than purely productbased solutions (Tischner et al. 2009). 
As the name Product-Service System proposes, it has a strong connection to service design, whose very intangibility is recognised to 
have great potential to dematerialise consumption without compromising on consumer convenience. Similar to service design, function and 
utility are the essential elements of PSS. What is 
to be emphasised from the customer perspective 
is useful, usable and desirable service interfaces. 
As for the service supplier, they must be effective, efficient and distinctive (Mager 2008). 
Therefore, PSS is not only a mix of products and 
services, but actually a system of various operations that connect them together in appropriate 
may also guide consumers to see their own responsibility in the garment life cycle more explicitly. 
On the fashion market modular clothing is 
not new, but is not widely exploited so far even if 
many designers clearly show interest in modularity in various projects. Compared to non-transformable clothing, modular garments require 
more complex and more in-depth exploration 
of patterns and prototypes, which may partly 
explain the situation on the market. The business 
perspective provides another possible reason for 
their exiguity: Even if material reductions offer 
obvious benefits for companies, multiple garment functions have their downsides. When one 
garment begins to replace two or even more 
profitable items, it naturally reduces purchasing, 
revenue and interest among stakeholders. Consequently, modular design not only offers alternative ways to consume, but also demands new business models built on services, cycles and underlying 
human needs (Fletcher & Grose 2012).
Product Service System 115
extending the product life cycle, as well as by 
integrating end-of-life strategies in product design (e.g. use of materials that can be recycled, 
reused or replaced) (Manzini & Vezzoli 2002). 
Use-oriented services include product lease, 
product renting/sharing and product pooling. In 
all these subcategories the product is not sold, 
even if still playing the central role (Tukker 
2004). The company offers only the access to 
products, tools, opportunities or capabilities that 
enable consumers to achieve the result they want 
(Manzini & Vezzoli 2002). The use of the product 
is often based on a regular fee that may allow 
a consumer individual or shared access to the 
product – either sequentially or simultaneously 
(Tukker 2004). The most common use-oriented 
services include laundry services and car sharing. 
Interest in services that rent luxury handbags and 
other accessories, for example, has also been increasing. In use-oriented services the use of a given 
product as well as the needs of consumers can be 
maximised with fewer products. It must be noted 
that collective product use may of course lead to 
faster replacement, but this can also be taken as an 
advantage: as products get worn out much quicker, 
they can be replaced faster with more eco-efficient 
equivalents (Manzini & Vezzoli 2002).
In result-oriented services the consumer and 
PSS provider agree on a certain result instead 
of the purchase or use of products (Manzini & 
Vezzoli 2002). Part of the activity is outsourced 
to a third party. The customer pays only for the 
output and the provider is free to choose how 
to deliver it (Tukker 2004). Common examples 
of result-oriented services are office cleaning, 
catering and copy services, where the provider 
takes full responsibility for all the necessary 
equipment and machines as well as their maintenance, repair etc. (Tukker 2004), but the result can also be seen as rather abstract. Similar 
to other PSS types, result-oriented services may 
dematerialise consumption while optimising use. 
They free consumers from problems and investments linked to acquisitions and maintenance of 
various products or equipment (Manzini & Vezzoli 2002), which the PSS provider can presumably better afford and has better knowledge of.
In the last decade PSS has been widely researched as a result of the growing emphasis on 
the service industry. Accordingly, it has been 
applied in many industries but so far there are 
only few examples of organised fashion service 
systems (von Busch 2009). However, a recent 
study (Armstrong et al. 2014) indicates clear 
interest in clothing-related PSS among fashionoriented consumers, which promotes the potential of PSS also in the context of fashion. Especially in terms of product longevity participants 
in this study perceived much value in services 
that could increase the overall quality and durability, or at least upgradeability, of their clothing 
purchases and hence decrease the need for early 
disposal (Armstrong et al. 2014). 
The clothing service concept presented in this 
chapter aims to promote that mindset through 
the combination of product-related PSS and 
modular design. In tandem these strategies offer 
an action platform, where the consumer is encouraged to engage with the product throughout 
its life cycle in order to create more emotional 
value and prevent the need for new acquisitions. 
The product-oriented PSS type was selected as 
a starting point for the clothing service, even 
though this type of PSS is still focused on sales of 
products. Therefore, it is presumably the easiest 
PSS type to approach by a wider audience that is 
Consumer interest in
clothing-related services
116 Product Service System
still accustomed to the prevailing fashion pattern 
(Figure 1, see page 114). This is supported also by 
the results of the above-mentioned study (Armstrong et al. 2014) where take-back, fashion 
swaps, repair/maintenance, redesign, and advice 
or consultancy (all of which are product-related 
services apart from fashion swaps) were seen as 
the most interesting services among the fashionoriented study participants.
At the core of the clothing service (Figure 2) is a 
modular garment, which is sold both in a traditional 
boutique and online. In conjunction with the product 
purchase customers are offered a supplemental service that enables the item to be upgraded or transformed completely upon extra fee. The garment 
consists of a certain amount of modules (pattern 
pieces), which can be unstitched and reassembled 
in four different ways resulting in four diverse looks. 
What is designed, in other words, is a garment life 
cycle that provides multiple lives planned in advance. When the satisfaction with the newly bought 
garment has faded the consumer can always bring or 
send the product back to the service provider who 
produces the desired variation of the garment. 
The garment is made only on demand. When 
visiting the boutique, the customer can try on different versions of it in several sizes. The final item, 
however, is made according to customers needs in 
just a few days, after which it can be picked up at 
the boutique or delivered straight to the customer. 
At the point of purchase, the customer is informed 
about all the possibilities enabled by the modular 
structure. No matter which variation the customer 
selects, the previous look can also be reassembled 
later on. 
In addition to the various looks, one can choose the 
fabric, colour and details (e.g. additional pockets 
and lining) from an exclusive selection that is made 
Presenting the 
clothing service 
concept
beforehand in order to help the customer's decisionmaking. Materials and colours can also be combined to 
create more unique results. Mixing materials is made 
possible even later on, whenever the customer wishes 
to transform the garment. Hence, smaller variations 
can be easily made instead of a total remake.
High quality materials are the main precondition for 
service utility. To enable the process of repeated reassembly, the chosen materials must be superior in 
their quality and durability (also supported by Armstrong et al. 2014). In addition they must embody 
surfaces that are adaptable or at least help to cover 
the signs of remaking. Therefore, woollen crêpe is 
suggested for the modular garments offered through 
the clothing service; once the product is unstitched all 
the traces of sewing can be removed from the crêpe 
surface by steaming. In addition the woollen garment 
does not require washing but instead can be aired and 
only occasionally dry-cleaned, which further reduces 
the garment's environmental impact. 
Product Service System 117
Figure 2. Concept map of the clothing service
3a) in-house manufacture
6a) take-back-service > reuse of material/ second-hand sale/ unique collection
4) Use and 
maintenance
5b) DIY instructions for reassembly 
(online manual, evening courses)
3b) DIY sewing 
instructions (online 
manual, evening courses)
6b) final disposal
2) customization;
choose of style and 
final materials
1) modular garment design 
and pre-selection of materials
Design
manufacture garment use & reassembly
consumer
point of purchase
5a) REASSEMBLY SERVICE
upon extra fee; choose of a new 
style, new modules, unique 
material and color mixes
Boutique/ 
online shop
118 Product Service System
In the current design example the service provider is responsible for selling and producing the 
product. In addition two more alternative scenarios were generated to make the service more 
affordable and approachable for a wider audience 
while further emphasising the customer's role: In 
the second scenario the customer may purchase 
a manual or access an online manual, which includes detailed instructions on how people can 
reassemble the garments themselves instead of 
bringing them to the boutique for remake. 
In the third scenario the service provider 
sells only the modules and the manual that 
are needed to create a complete garment. The 
service provider cuts and neatens the modules 
beforehand, after which the customer is responsible for making the garment. This can be 
done either at home or at the boutique, where 
the service provider arranges evening courses in 
which customers can participate and finish the 
garments with the help of the staff. This Do-ItYourself approach not only reduces a customer's 
economic investments in the modular garment 
but also will teach new skills. 
The individual consumer has a leading role in 
decision-making, turning the consumer from a 
passive receiver into an active maker which serves 
to deepen the feeling of achievement and in turn 
increases product satisfaction (Niinimäki & Hassi 
The possible impacts on the garment life cycle 
are also visible in the concept map (Figure 2). 
Contrary to the traditional cycle the design 
stage spreads into two levels: while the designer 
decides on the modular garment structure, the 
customer is responsible for finalising the look. 
Similar to bespoke tailoring manufacturing takes 
place only after the point of purchase. The use 
phase extends considerably, if the garment returns back to the service provider instead of 
being left in the wardrobe. The prevailing linear 
flow turns into a multi-cycled process, where the 
consumer becomes an active participant in the 
garment life cycle.
Alternative 
scenarios
Modern garment 
life cycle
2011). Naturally these scenarios also help to 
profit the business, as the most time-consuming 
stage of the garment life cycle (manufacturing) 
is cut out. What finally boost the sales in the current scenarios are the manuals and courses organised by the service provider.
The stage of final disposal is approached also 
through various scenarios. When tired of the 
product or reassembly, the customer is encouraged to return the garment back to the service 
provider who has three possibilities: one option 
could be to unstitch the old garment and resell 
the existing modules to other customers, who 
are willing to upgrade their product with new 
material mixes (e.g. a combination of leather and 
wool). Alternatively if the returned garment is 
in good condition it could be sold as is. In addition the reassembly of the second-hand garment 
would be more affordable to the customer than 
the reassembly of a brand-new item. Thirdly, the 
service provider can also create unique readymade pieces from the returned modules and 
build entire collections around certain colours or 
materials updated with additional details. 
In addition to four basic looks the modular garment structure enables multiple variations to be made later on.
120 Product Service System
The consumer's mindset is tuned to striving for 
continuous seasonal change and personal update. 
Thus, the current example suggests a garment 
that is able to offer multiple functions, which naturally reduces the need for an entirely new purchase. This is likely to benefit consumers also financially. An adaptable product structure enables 
consumers to upgrade the product to meet their 
changing functional and aesthetic needs. Easing 
upgrading with more functional or modern units 
allows consumers to incorporate the benefits of a 
new technology in their current product and/or to 
renew it aesthetically. (Mugge et al. 2005.) 
Even though the original garment structure 
and all its variations are designed in advance, the 
garment lives in a continuous design process, 
where the customer becomes the co-creator of 
the product next to the designer. Customisation 
in the design process may help to strengthen the 
person-product relationships and hence postpone early product replacement (Mugge et al. 
2005). Additionally it enables more unique design. Moreover, customers may experience personal success by creating something on their own. 
Finally the mix of PSS and modularity may also 
encourage the customer's further desire to invest in the earlier purchased garment instead of 
a brand-new item and this way gain continuous 
product satisfaction. 
Most typically modular garments are designed 
so that the wearer him-/herself can transform 
them. This, however, may negatively affect a 
company’s revenue if one garment begins to replace two or more similar garments, and it may 
reduce the interest of the company to sell modular products. Therefore, in the design example the 
business takes the responsibility for the garment 
reassembly, which guarantees the company's revenue among product sales. In addition to business 
profits it can provide customers higher quality 
products and thus increase the satisfaction. 
The value added by services can be key to 
companies' success, as next to aesthetic or recognisable design or brand names they differentiate 
companies and their products from one another. 
A service provider's active interaction with customers may build stronger company-customer 
relationships. This can also improve its strategic 
positioning on the market (Manzini & Vezzoli 
2002; Tischner et al. 2009) as well as a responsible and transparent brand image that communicates the company's social and environmental 
benefits (Tischner et al. 2009).
As garments are made only on demand, the 
company does not take any risk concerning unsold 
garments, which is the case with traditional retail. 
The only stock required is the limited material 
selection. Reduction of materials is one of the 
Customer benefits Business benefits 
To enable a satisfying experience for the consumer, both the product and the service need to 
function as expected. Meanwhile the clear benefits 
regarding why the combination of PSS and modularity is worth investing in must be communicated 
to consumers intelligibly: this should at least include the cost of a new garment versus the costs 
and benefits of a re-invented item, in both monetary 
and emotional terms (Armstrong et al. 2014).
Product Service System 121
Four different looks were sewn during the concept development process in order to illustrate how the concept could work in practice. (Photo: Kerttu Malinen)
122 Product Service System
At the moment it is impossible to tell whether 
the presented hypothetical clothing service 
would actually function in practice, as the modular garment that was designed proposes quite a 
complex structure. This would eventually result 
in relatively high pricing due to the time that 
is required to reassemble one ready-made garment. Hence, the amount of modules used for 
the example can be the biggest obstacle for the 
utilisation from the service provider's perspective. From experience at the stage of prototyping, it must be noted that this type of service 
would probably function best with garments 
made of fewer modules or with accessories. 
From the consumer's perspective on the other 
hand the concern is if the product-service mix is 
tempting enough. What have to be met first are 
naturally the consumers' aesthetic needs, before 
the service utility let alone its meaningfulness 
can be evaluated. 
To get back to the earlier mentioned "action 
platform" (Manzini 2011), this kind of concept 
certainly aims to propose more favourable activity while making certain kinds of behaviour (in this 
case early product disposal) at the least more unattractive. The service approach can offer a solid 
basis for various actors of the fashion system to 
start reimagining the practices within their own 
field and invent new ways to experience fashion 
conclusion
through various platforms. As people are more 
and more aware of the social and environmental 
concerns within the industry, the tendency and 
willingness to make better decisions in shopping 
and use practices must increase and this requires 
more innovative ideas from all parties. A simple 
way to begin could be to redesign the offerings 
related to fashion purchasing, for instance in 
the form of product-related services that could 
easily lengthen the life cycle of old trusted garments. As von Busch (2009) points out, if we 
want to see changes in the consumption patterns 
of fashion or the attitudes among consumers we 
will have to design systems that include them 
and take their role in the life cycle of clothing 
seriously. Even though product-related services 
are already utilised to some extent they should 
evolve and become the norm rather than stay as 
a marginal niche. 
most notable advantages. Due to the modular 
structure, extra material is not required even at 
the stage of reassembly. By enforcing modularity it is possible to change pieces of the product without redoing the whole (Baldwin & Clark 
2000). The modular structure may also prevent 
abrasion, one of the issues related to early clothing disposal: as certain parts of a garment tend 
to wear out easier than other parts, changeable 
modules offer a simple technique to extend the 
garment's life if the function and place of each 
module varies. Hence, the use time of all modular components may be prolonged equally, which 
helps to maintain the overall quality of the item 
and reduce reclamations. 
Product Service System 123
References
Armstrong, C., Niinimäki, K., Kujala, S., Karell, E. & Lang, C. (2014). Sustainable Fashion 
Product-Service Systems. An Exploration in Consumer Acceptance of New Consumption Models. 
Journal of Cleaner Production. (in press).
Baldwin, C. & Clark, K. (2000). Design Rules. The Power of Modularity. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
von Busch, O. (2009). Where are the Fashion Service Systems? Retrieved 12 January 2013 from Self 
Passage: http://www.kulturservern.se/wronsov/selfpassage/XXI/XXI-0905/0905.htm
Fletcher, K. & Grose, L. (2012). Fashion and Sustainability. Design for Change. London: Laurence 
King.
Kamrani, A. & Salhieh, S. (2002). Product Design for Modularity. Second Edition. Boston: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
Koo, H. (2012). Design Functions in Transformable Garments for Sustainability. Minnesota: University 
of Minnesota.
Mager, B. (2008). Service Design. In: Erlhoff M. & Marshall T. (eds.). Design Dictionary. Perspectives 
on Design Terminology. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag AG, pp. 354–357.
Manzini, E. (2011). Introduction. In: Meroni, A. & Sangiorgi, D. (eds.). Design for Services. Surrey: 
Gower Publishing, pp. 1–6.
Manzini, E. & Vezzoli, C. (2002). Product-Service Systems and Sustainability. Opportunities for 
sustainable solutions. UNEP.
Mont, O. (2002). Clarifying the Concept of Product-Service System. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
Vol. 10, pp. 237–245.
Mugge, R., Schoormans, J. & Schifferstein, H. (2005). Design Strategies to Postpone Consumers' 
Product Replacement: The Value of Strong Person-Product Relationship. The Design Journal. Vol. 
8:2, pp. 38–48.
Niinimäki, K. & Hassi, L. (2011). Emerging Design Strategies in Sustainable Production and Consumption of Textiles and Clothing. Journal of Cleaner Production. Vol. 19, pp. 1876–1883.
Ravasio, P. & Pasquinelli, I. (2013). The Better Consumer in Europe: The Trends Fashion Companies 
should watch to make Good Decisions. London: Texsture Limited.
Richins, M. (2013). When Wanting is Better than Having: Materialism, Transformation Expectations, and Product-Evoked Emotions in the Purchase Process. Journal of Consumer Research. Vol. 40:1, 
pp. 1–18.
Tischner, U., Ryan, C. & Vezzoli, C. (2009). Product-Service Systems. In: Crul, M., Diehl, J. & 
Ryan, C. (eds.). Design for Sustainability (D4S): A Step-By-Step Approach. UNEP, pp. 95–101.
Tukker, A. (2004). Eight Types of Product-Service System: Eight Ways to Sustainability? Experiences from Suspronet. Business Strategy and the Environment. Vol. 13, pp. 246–260.
INNOVATION
FOR GREEN
BUSINESS 
Sherin, A. (2013). Sustainable Thinking. Ethical Approaches to 
Design and Design Management. New York: Bloomsbury.
W h i l e i t i s t r u e t h a t t r a n s i t i o n i n g t o m o r e s u s t a i n a b l e 
g r o w t h w i l l r e q u i r e l a r g e c h a n g e s , i t i s i n d i v i d u a l s 
w h o s e c o m b i n e i m p a c t h a s t h e p o w e r t o c h a n g e 
the world in its entirety (Sherin 2013, 16).
New values – 
new business 
opportunities
Kirsi Niinimäki 
The global fashion business is fiercely competitive, and simultaneously Western consumers’ 
environmental interest is increasing; in this environment green business thinking and sustainable 
marketing offer new business opportunities for 
the fashion industry. As it is challenging to ensure profit with the existing fashion system and 
current price levels, it is worthwhile to challenge 
the current unsustainable business models in 
fashion and rethink value creation from a wider 
perspective: value proposals from the consumers’ side as well as from the environmental perspective and through creating long-term relationships between business and its stakeholders. 
In this context it is possible to create sustainable value proposals and stimulate new business 
thinking and business models that contribute to a 
decrease in materialistic consumption.
New radical business thinking is needed to 
create change. The economic and industrial 
systems of the fashion industry are currently 
based on extremely fast cycles of production, 
fast-changing trends and planned obsolescence 
of the products. As garments’ prices fall producers must maintain profitability by increasIntroduction
ing the amount of sold units, which has led to a 
huge amount of fashion products on the market 
and extremely saturated markets. We must find 
new radical ways to create a win-win situation 
for both consumers and manufacturers – for all 
stakeholders – and for sustainable development. 
We need more knowledge about consumers 
and the consumption side to create a sustainable transformation process inside the fashion 
industry and business that leads to sustainable 
consumption practices. We also need to develop 
foresight and new systemic thinking on how to 
move towards sustainable societies, in order to 
see sustainable practices as an opportunity to 
design and not to think that sustainability is an 
obstacle to doing business. Very often the green 
business approach is feared to mean degrowth, but 
it can also be seen as a new challenge and opportunity to do things creatively and differently.
This chapter open views on green business 
thinking, sustainable marketing, radical innovation and new kinds of collaboration with customers. The chapter ends by presenting examples 
from the field that show how to fulfil customers’ 
fashion needs in a sustainable way.
128 Innovation for Green Business
Sustainable business 
and marketing
Innovation for 
green business
Sustainable values lay the ground for credible 
and responsible sustainable business and marketing. Sustainable business and marketing includes 
not only a sustainable value base, but also ethical consideration. This aspect seems to be problematic for some manufacturers and companies; 
they don’t want to make moral claims about what 
is right and what is wrong. However for strategic sustainability thinking it is important to consider not only what efforts and investments to 
make but if would it be worthwhile to withdraw 
from some markets because of ethical reasons or 
too big social or ecological risks (Belz & Peattie 
2009). In this regard a deep assessment should 
be made according to the company’s own value 
base. Including sustainability in the company’s 
strategic planning might open new growth possibilities but it can also be done to prevent risks 
in legal, resource, environmental, reputational or 
socio-political levels (Lowitt 2011). 
As the fashion industry is international and 
global, principles of corporate social responsibility (CSR) should be followed. Moreover it is 
good to remember that consumers’ trust can 
only be achieved through open communication 
and information and only through real commitment to sustainability at all levels of the company’s practices, avoiding too limited a sustainable approach and a “greenwashing” attitude. In 
If we want to change the fashion system towards a 
new kind of balance we need new kinds of radical 
design and business thinking. We have to change 
the current economic paradigm and we have to do 
business differently than we do today. 
Business and industry have to redefine their tasks 
more radically in order to usher in significant ecoinnovations and most importantly all-new business 
strategies (Ottoman 2011, 90). 
As Kemp (2008) reports, a fundamental change 
is needed to reach systemic change, but transition 
faces resistance and it takes time to emerge. 
When we talk about eco-innovations we 
mean products, services or processes that offer 
value both for business and customer, but also to 
the environment through significant decrease in 
environmental impact. Sustainable innovation is 
a larger systemic approach where sustainability 
thinking is integrated in all levels of the business 
(products, technologies, services, new business 
thinking, organisation model, and relationship with 
stakeholders). 
The levels of innovation are described as follows 
(based on Brezet & van Hemel 1997):
•	 Incremental (small improvements for 
existing products)
•	 Redesign (major redesign for existing 
products)
addition, because of the global character of the 
fashion business, the attribute “Made in” is today 
less relevant than the attribute “Made by”, which 
needs a lot of information gathering about the 
different stages in manufacturing and communicating these aspects to not only consumers but 
also all stakeholders.
Stakeholders in sustainable marketing thinking are not only consumers and investors but 
can also include employees, business partners, 
suppliers, competitors, government (through 
regulations), NGOs, pressure groups and communities. Working with these stakeholders needs 
consideration of not only exchanges but also 
long-term relationships and future possibilities 
through radical sustainable innovations (Belz & 
Peattie 2009). 
Innovation for Green Business 129
•	 Product alternatives (new product or 
service concepts)
•	 System innovation and design for a 
sustainable society.
The first level of innovation refers to small, 
incremental product improvements. The second 
means redesigning existing products and production processes (e.g. in an eco-efficient way) and 
the third innovation type aims to find alternative 
methods of delivering the same function. However these innovation types are not enough and 
we need to move towards more radical and systematic innovative thinking while challenging 
the whole industry and its current practices of 
doing business. 
Tischner and Charter (2001) identify four 
approaches to sustainable design: repair, refine, 
redesign and rethink. The fourth approach is the 
one we should aim for. A rethink requires a radical change in our mindset, and it can offer breakthroughs for new lifestyles, ways of living and doing 
things, as well as approaches to fulfil consumer 
needs in a more sustainable manner (Tischner & 
Charter 2001). This approach needs strategic innovations that lead to new business models. As Tukker 
et al. (2008) argue these new practices often stay in 
niches for a long period until a window of opportunity opens and their breakthrough is possible.
For this radical and strategic innovations 
approach we need a much more creative way of 
conducting the business of fashion. Strategic innovation questions who the customer is, what products or services should be offered, and how to offer 
those products and services (Markides 1997). It is 
not merely about rethinking the fundamentals on 
the supply side, but also about redesigning the business on the demand side, e.g. in the form of the 
user experience and rethinking value creation moving from product design to systems thinking (e.g. 
designing product-service systems).
Several companies acknowledge that market 
competition is driven by products’ meanings: why 
people need a product rather than what they need 
in a product. As Verganti (2009) argues people 
use things for profound emotional, psychological, and socio-cultural reasons as well as utilitarian 
ones, and this understanding is most important 
in creating successful sustainable innovations for 
business. This deep understanding of consumers also lays the ground for transforming business models and creating for example sustainable 
product-service systems to fulfil the actual needs 
behind product use in a less materialistic way.
Innovations for sustainable business in the 
textile and fashion sector can be driven by technological improvements or technological innovations (like digital technology), economic changes 
(new green business thinking and a systems 
approach) or legislation. With regard to legislation 
new regulations for extended producer responsibility (EPR), for example, can change the logic in 
the fashion system, and preventing and/or recycling 
waste might be one future business model if EPR 
begins to cover the textile and fashion business. 
Innovation can also be driven by more abstract 
value issues, e.g. safeguarding the corporate or 
brand value from a bad reputation. 
Succeeding in innovation in the sustainability 
context always needs a new kind of business logic. 
Driving sustainable innovation, whether to a more 
radical or incremental path, needs experimental 
and creative thinking and this experimentation 
can get support from clients and lead users before 
presenting these ideas to all customers. Furthermore it is important to create networks of sustainable-oriented companies. These networks can 
support a company’s own values-based practices 
and offer help in reaching their goals.
Ottoman (2011, p.91) proposes five strategies for 
eco-innovation
•	 innovate at the system level
•	 develop new materials
•	 develop new technologies
•	 develop new business models
•	 restore the environment
130 Innovation for Green Business
Future-oriented thinking 
and collaboration with 
customers
New kinds of relationships with the client or the 
customer create new kinds of value in the business. Through a deeper relationship with the customer a company can create long-term dialogue 
with the end-user and through this dialogue create new business opportunities, new understanding of the customer’s true needs and desires, and 
robust understanding of the customer’s readiness to change consumption habits. Simultaneously the company can communicate its values 
and practices to customers and thereby create 
trust and customer loyalty towards the brand. 
Through this approach the company’s focus 
moves from single transaction and short-term 
economic thinking to long-term sustainable 
strategic planning and future-oriented thinking. Customer satisfaction and customer value 
will be at the core of the company’s practices. 
Traditional marketing focuses on profit and revenues. Sustainable marketing also concentrates 
on psychographic aspects like consumer satisfaction and consumers’ interest to stay loyal to the 
brand. (Belz & Peattie 2009). 
New green business approaches are possible, but they require radical business thinking, 
focus on the consumer side and the garment’s 
use phase, and, most of all, consumer satisfaction issues. By taking consumer-based ecoefficiency into account, it is possible to open 
up green opportunities for the fashion business 
that aim for sustainable consumption patterns. 
Hence consumer-based eco-efficiency thinking in business can transform the fashion system 
towards redirective practices that aim for deeper 
consumer satisfaction and therefore sustainable 
consumption patterns. Consumer-based ecoefficiency focuses not only on the environmental 
impact of the use phase but also on product quality 
and consumer satisfaction issues. Through the 
satisfaction approach, value can be created for 
the consumer, the company and even the environment. Satisfied customers use products longer 
and this is an opportunity to decrease the amount 
of purchased clothing and slow down consumption. This is a value opportunity from the environmental viewpoint. Satisfied consumers are 
loyal customers and they repeat their purchase 
behaviour and continue buying brands that can 
provide them with product satisfaction on many 
levels, and this is a value opportunity for sustainable business. (Niinimäki 2014.)
Made-to-measure 
by NOMO Jeans
The following case presents an example of how 
to rethink business. NOMO Jeans (Nomojeans 
Corporation Oy) offers made-to-measure jeans 
based on 3D body scanning technology. Each 
customer is measured with a 3D body-scanning machine. The customer can select fabrics, 
details and decoration from the offered selection 
and this process results in individualised jeans. 
Accurate measurements from 3D body scanner, automated individual pattern creation, and 
standardized customization options enable agile 
manufacturing of unique fitting jeans in the ways 
of mass production.This combination offers deep 
customer satisfaction through perfect fit and an 
individual look. 
The most important attribute in clothes 
that creates dissatisfaction among customers is 
bad fit (Niinimäki 2014). According to NOMO
Jeans a typical customer has tried approximately 
twelve pairs of jeans before finding suitable ones. 
NOMO Jeans has identified their main customer groups and their main purchase drivers in 
the jeans sector as follows:
•	 women aged 30–60, who are fit-seekers
•	 men aged 30–40, who seek individuality
•	 men aged 40–60, who want to invest in 
convenience. 
Innovation for Green Business 131
The company’s basic idea is to produce highquality products that are guaranteed to fit. 
Through this strategy the company is offering 
a satisfaction guarantee for the customer; the 
customer has thirty days to return the jeans to 
the company if s/he is not happy with them and 
especially with the fit. Once a customer’s measurements have been taken, s/he can also order 
new jeans online, which is a convenience factor 
for the customer. The company aims to create 
a solid customer relationship based on product 
satisfaction. (NOMO Jeans)
Made-to-measure jeans by NOMO Jeans (Courtesy of 
Nomojeans Corporation Oy)
132 Innovation for Green Business
Radical thinking 
through collaborative 
consumption
Some examples of a new kind of radical thinking 
are emerging which are focusing on ownerless use 
of garments. These radical models aim to dematerialise consumption through ownerless use. Today 
they are niche offerings and more like social experimentations, but they show that there is an opportunity to offer fashion satisfaction in a radically new 
way, through collaborative consumption and renting and leasing services. 
The jeans renting company Mud Jeans from 
the Netherlands offers a leasing contract for jeans. 
The jeans are made of organic and recycled cotton and produced according to social responsibility standards. The leasing is simple. The deposit fee 
is 20€ and additionally the consumer pays 5€/a 
month for a year. After a one-year leasing period 
the consumer has three options: return the jeans 
back to the company, choose a new pair or pay for 
the use of the original pair for four more months 
and after that use them for an unlimited period. 
During this unlimited use period the consumer can 
get the deposit back by returning the jeans to the 
company. The company owns the jeans all this time 
and it also offers a repair service to extend the use 
time of the jeans. (Mudjeans)
Fashion libraries are another interesting example of collaborative and less materialistic consumption. Fashion library experimentations already exist 
in several countries. In Finland the Fashion Library 
(Nopsa vaatelainaamo) lends out clothes, shoes and 
apparel to its members. The fashion collections are 
from Finland’s most inspirational and famous young 
designers and this design-driven strategy increases 
the consumers’ interest, especially young female 
fashion lovers. The Fashion Library is also establishing strong alliances with big and well-known brands 
like Marimekko and Nanso. The membership is valid 
for six months and is reasonably priced. Members 
get to borrow products for two weeks at a time and 
can also purchase the pieces they have borrowed 
after the leasing time. The collection grows and 
changes each week, which keeps up the interest of 
members. (Nopsa vaatelainaamo.)
Borrowing garments is a good way to consume 
fashion in a more ecological way. Consumers can 
decrease their impulse purchasing by trying out different styles without actually purchasing and owning the garments. Additionally, the use frequency 
of the Fashion Library garments is high, which 
increases the eco-efficiency of the service.
The Fashion Library is a new and social means to 
engage in collaborative fashion consumption. Several fashion blogs publish news about the Fashion 
Library and its new items, maintaining the interest 
of customers at a high level. Also, its limited-edition approach to business keeps up the customers’ 
interest. The six-month membership creates a solid 
relationship with the customers.
Conclusions
A new sustainable and radical mindset is still 
waiting to emerge at large, as we continue to 
design and manufacture fashion mainly in traditional ways and based on conventional business 
models and marketing approaches. As Fletcher 
(2008, p.121) describes the current situation, …
it uses yesterday’s thinking to cope with the conditions of tomorrow. 
To encourage more creative thinking in the 
fashion business, we need radical innovations, 
new value and systems thinking, and a brave 
future orientation. Good practices on how to 
do sustainable business differently are needed, 
which show that new kinds of collaboration open 
opportunities to succeed in the tightly competitive global fashion arena. 
Innovation for Green Business 133
References
Belz, F. & Peattie. K. (2009). Sustainability Marketing: A Global Perspective. West Sussex, UK: John 
Wiley and Sons.
Brezet, H. & van Hemel, C. (1997). Ecodesign. A Promising Approach to Sustainable Production and 
Consumption. Paris: UNEP.
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable Fashion & Textiles: Design Journeys. London: Earthscan.
Jackson, T. & Shaw, D. (2009). Mastering Fashion Marketing. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kemp, R. (2008). Transition Management for Sustainable Consumption and Production. In: Tukker, 
A., Charter, M., Vezzoli, C., Stø, E. & Andersen, M.M. (eds.). System Innovation for Sustainability: 
Perspectives on Radical Changes to Sustainable Consumption and Production. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf, 
pp. 369–390.
Lowitt, E. (2011). The Future of Value: How sustainability creates value through competitive differentiation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Markides, C.C. (1997). Strategic Innovation. Sloan Management Review. Spring 1997, pp. 9–23.
Niinimäki, K. (2014). Sustainable Consumer Satisfaction in the Context of Clothing. ProductService System Design for Sustainability. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf, pp. 218–236. 
Ottoman, J.A. (2011). The New Rules of Green Marketing: Strategies, Tools, and Inspiration for Sustainable Branding. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf.
Tischner, U. & Charter, M. (2001). Sustainable Product Design. In: Charter, M. & Tischner, U. 
(eds.). Sustainable Solutions: Developing Products and Services for the Future. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf, pp. 118–138.
Tukker, A., Emmert, S., Charter, M., Vezzoli, C., Stø, E., Andersen M.M., Geerken, T., Tischner, U. 
& Lahlou, S. (2008). Fostering Change to Sustainable Consumption and Production: An Evidence 
Based View. Journal of Cleaner Production. Vol. 16, pp. 1218–1225.
Verganti, R. (2009). Design Driven Innovation: Changing the Rules of Competition by Radically Innovating What Things Mean. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Online references
Nopsa vaatelainaamo, Fashion library. http://www.nopsatravels.com/en/nopsa-launched-a-fashion-library/
Mud Jeans. http://www.mudjeans.nl 
NOMO Jeans. http://nomojeans.com/
Sustainability
driven 
Innovation and
fashion design
Anika Kozlowski
Fashion today has evolved into one of the world’s 
largest and most dynamic industries. Apparel retailers have turned into fashion lifestyle brands. 
Fashion has become cheap and available to all. 
Consumption has risen and fashion is “in fashion” 
more than ever, thus promoting an aestheticallydriven throwaway mentality. Fashion is now fast 
and disposable, a phenomenon characterised 
by cheap, low-quality, on-trend fashion apparel 
products that promotes the notion of perceived 
obsolescence (Gwilt & Rissanen 2011; Siegle 
2011; Fletcher & Groese 2012). Fast fashion is 
described as a quick response system or just-intime manufacturing that allows for short production and distribution lead times enabling a close 
match of supply with uncertain demand. This 
supports the retailing of low-cost, highly fashionable apparel products that mimic high fashion 
luxury runway collections (Cachon & Swinney 
2011; Fletcher & Groese 2012; Joy et al. 2012). 
This economic accessibility, while extremely 
profitable, neglects quality of materials used 
and construction, subsequently increasing the 
disposability of fast fashion products (Gwilt & 
Rissanen 2011; Siegle 2011). Global brands have 
wielded their economic power and economies of 
scale to prioritise low price points, create mass 
availability, and drive volume purchasing while 
forcing small producers who cannot compete 
Introduction
out of business (Fletcher & Groese 2012). Consumerism therefore is now based on rapid product acquisition and obsolescence, a continually 
increasing throughput of resources (Fletcher 
2010; Fletcher & Groese 2012).
Fast fashion is exclusively a 21st century experience. What was once a simple two-season 
fashion system is now a continuous, overwhelming stream of must have it fashion pieces. Costs 
to society at large from the mass production and 
consumption of fashion apparel are experienced 
through increased pollution, waste, resource 
depletion, and climate change (Esslinger 2011; 
Fletcher & Groese 2012). Offshore manufacturing has increased the exploitation of labour forces while causing significant pollution problems to 
air, land and water due to weak environmental 
regulation (Abernathy et al. 1999; Christmann & 
Taylor 2001; Welters 2008; Steinberger, Friot, 
Jolliet, & Erkman 2009; Fletcher 2008). 
There is a clear need for a dramatic transformation as to how the current fashion industry functions from production to consumption. 
The key to progress is innovation, and there is 
a clear need for innovation within fashion in the 
pursuit of sustainability. This paper highlights the 
importance of design practice as the conduit for 
sustainability-driven innovation within the fashion industry. 
136 Innovation for Green Business
Current business 
and design practices
The effect on
sustainability
The current structure and organisation of the 
fashion industry is a direct result of the current 
business model of fast fashion. This model relies 
on the availability of an abundant, cheap labour 
force to deliver new, on-trend, low-cost fashion products. Therefore production has shifted 
to less developed nations. As a result, supply 
chains have sped up and quick response designto-line times have been reduced. The model 
has proved itself to be extremely profitable and 
has thereby become the dominant approach 
for fashion brands within the industry. This has 
served to create an exceptionally complicated 
supply chain that spans the globe. The result is a 
high-pressure industry for suppliers, producers 
and designers, as quick turnaround times are the 
core driving force. 
Business now dictates the design process, 
leaving little room for innovation or consumer 
engagement. Design is no longer the traditional 
craft it once was. Designers today commonly 
work within a mandate where they are responsible for creating a saleable product, generally 
within a set price point, to meet market expectations and the constraints of manufacturing 
(Gwilt & Rissanen 2011). Designing for continuous replenishment of best sellers and new 
fashions leaves little time to consider the needs, 
behaviours or lifestyles of consumers. 
The fashion industry today is unsustainable as 
financial sustainability is the priority and there 
is very little consideration of the environmental 
or social dimensions of sustainability. A sustainable fashion industry would ideally have all three 
dimensions considered equally within business 
and design practices; there is a clear need to balance these principles of sustainability. One of 
the most challenging aspects in developing this 
balance is the size, complexity, organisation and 
structure of the industry. The industry is financially heavily reliant on its complex supply chain 
from natural resources to social involvement. 
It is, however, in the industry’s best interest to 
respond in an innovative and systemic manner. 
There has been increased awareness among 
key stakeholders of the negative environmental 
and social impacts of the fashion apparel industry 
(Porter & Kramer 2006). This has led to a gradual 
response by the industry to improve on the corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities that 
integrate the principles of sustainability within 
fashion apparel brands (Wong & Taylor 2000; 
Chen & Burns 2006; Dickson & Eckman 2006; 
Birtwistle & Moore 2007; Dickson et al. 2009; 
Goworek 2011). However, these responses to 
date have been limited and they lack a systemic 
approach. The focus has tended to look solely 
to improvements in the sustainability of supply 
The impact of fast fashion on the consumer 
is only recently being addressed within the academic discourse. There is general agreement 
that what has occurred is the loss and understanding of value, quality, fit and garment performance for the majority of fashion consumers as aesthetics have become the sole priority. With the shift to offshore production, the 
role of consumers and designers alike has been 
removed from the apparel production process. 
When one does not understand or see the process of producing fashion apparel, one cannot 
appreciate the true value and cost of the product. With the low costs, it is easier and cheaper 
to buy a new garment than to repair. In any case 
apparent obsolescence and the perceived need 
for a new fashion piece often come first. This 
only serves to further disengage consumers 
from the true cost and value of fashion apparel. 
Personal satisfaction and emotional durability 
have faded and fashion products today only partially satisfy the complex needs of consumers as 
individuals (Esslinger 2011). 
Innovation for Green Business 137
Innovation and 
fashion design
Fashion is largely about design. Therefore, it 
is appropriate to focus on design as the catalyst for change in developing a sustainable 
fashion industry. 
The design practice profoundly influences how a 
product will be made, what resources and materials will be used, and how the product will be 
acquired, used and discarded – that is, the entire 
supply chain is affected. The design phase provides designers with opportunities to embed the 
principles of sustainability in a product (Dickson 
et al. 2009; Armstrong & LeHew 2011) and thus 
provides an important opportunity to reduce 
negative environmental and social impacts. Decisions made at this stage determine more than 
70% of the product development and manufacturing costs and significantly impact end-of-life 
management (Waage 2007). However, sustainable approaches to design and product development are still relatively new (Walker 2006). The 
Centre for Sustainable Fashion (2008) found 
that while designers are becoming more aware 
of and rethinking their role in creating sustainable fashion, they are finding it difficult to work 
within a sustainable framework.
This could be due to the fact that research 
shows characteristics such as colour, style, price 
and fit are the strongest predictors for apparel 
chains. These improvements typically include 
addressing reductions to water, energy and 
chemical use within manufacturing processes. 
Material sustainability, such as the use of organic 
cotton instead of conventional cotton, has been 
another key consideration. When examining the 
entire fashion industry, sustainability seems to 
be at best a peripheral concern and rarely has it 
been integrated into the design practice of fashion retailers (Gwilt & Rissanen 2011).
acquisition as opposed to social or environmental 
considerations (Dickson & Littrell 1996; Kim & 
Damhorst 1998; Kim & Damhorst 1999; Shaw 
& Tomolillo 2004; Joergens 2006). Predefined 
product types whose reliance for differentiation and value rests solely on either technological or stylistic indicators limits the user’s emotional experience. The moment a newer model is 
released ensures loss of meaning and perceived 
product obsolescence (Chapman 2005). Design 
has the opportunity to raise awareness and 
change perceptions of value as it plays a significant role in regulating both material and symbolic resources (Wood 2003).
A challenge for designers will be to approach 
design systemically so that the relationships 
between producers and consumers are better 
understood. It is not only important for designers to consider consumer behaviours and patterns, but also to explore options in engaging the 
consumer to develop greater meaning and value 
to both the product and process. Papanek (1971) 
advocated that the most important aspect about 
design was how it related to people. By repositioning and engaging consumers within a collaborative action role, they can participate in an 
open-ended design process and an open-source 
design system. Consumers evolve to become 
active participants within the process, becoming 
138 Innovation for Green Business
a co-designer or co-producer and thus changing the power relationship between consumers and 
fashion creators (Fletcher & Grose 2012; Meroni 
2012). This allows for the nurturing of new relationships and trust and for the consumer to have more 
control over the institutions and technologies that 
impact their lives (Fletcher & Grose 2012).
There is no “right way” to design, especially 
within a creative field such as fashion. There is a 
common set of elements or stages a designer will 
employ; however, these are flexible and idiosyncratic to the individual designer (Stone 2012). 
Design has the potential to encourage more sustainable consumer behaviour and the development of new sustainable business models. Innovation within design has the potential to better 
serve the needs of the consumer and enhance the 
consumer experience with the brand and product. However, to design for sustainability-driven 
innovation a broader set of considerations needs 
to be introduced. While the specifics would be 
unique and relevant to individual fashion brands, 
they would include the principles of sustainability: environmental, social and financial. 
Current sustainability 
practices and innovation
Sustainability of the fashion industry requires innovation in all its facets. To date, innovation has focused 
on manufacturing technologies and has applied 
mostly to material or process innovation within the 
supply chain (Thorpe 2010; Goworek 2011). While 
supply chain sustainability plays an integral role in 
achieving sustainability, there is a growing consensus within the fashion industry that sustainability 
is only possible through a radical transformation 
of the industry as a whole (Kemp 2008; Fletcher 
& Groese 2012). Systemic change of the industry 
towards a more sustainable future requires a holistic 
approach (Fletcher & Groese 2012) encompassing 
all facets and stakeholders. Companies bear a great 
deal of responsibility for existing production-consumption patterns and can contribute to the change 
of these patterns through innovations in products 
and services (Hoffmann 2012). 
Current sustainability strategies employed by 
business are deficient in three ways: there is a lack 
of focus on the consumer, they do not acknowledge the threats of global over-consumption, 
and they do not take a holistic approach (Sheth, 
Sethia & Srinivas 2011). By shifting the focus to 
the design process, products can be designed to 
influence consumer behaviour, induce sustainable 
consumption, and reduce impact from use; consumer behaviour can thereby have a significant 
influence on the environmental and social impact 
of clothing (Fletcher 2008; WBCSD 2008). By 
focusing on consumer behaviour, the development 
of innovative sustainability-driven business models 
can be fostered in support of sustainable production and consumption. An innovation management 
approach is an important tool in this development, 
which can better secure sustainable competitive 
advantage (Teece 2010). Design practice is the 
ideal approach to translate the principles of sustainability in shaping the development of innovative 
sustainability-driven business models and inducing 
sustainable consumption.
It has been found that many companies are 
beginning to integrate the principles of sustainability into their business strategies (Gobble 2012). 
Research shows the integration and development 
of sustainability within business produces incredible 
organisational and technological innovations that 
yield top-line and bottom-line returns (Nidumolu, 
Prahalad & Rangaswami 2009). Innovations are 
deliberate interventions designed to initiate and 
establish future developments concerning technology, economics and social practices. 
It has been found that smart, top performing 
companies are using sustainability as a frontier 
driver for innovation 
Innovation for Green Business 139
(Nidumolu, Prahalad & Rangaswami 2009) and 
as a source for opportunity and long-term competitive advantage (Verganti 2009; Gobble 2012). 
Therefore, the business model can be the strategic 
leadership asset to drive and integrate sustainability 
and innovation within an organisation (Chesbrough 
2010; Schaltegger; Lüdeke-Freund & Hansen 2011).
Best practices within the
Sustainable Apparel Coalition
In order to develop a better sense of current best 
practices, an investigation was conducted: a systematic review of the CSR reports of 14 apparel brands 
belonging to the Sustainable Apparel Coalition 
(SAC), an industry-wide initiative, found evidence 
of innovative practices and consumer engagement 
(Kozlowski 2012). The initiatives were similar in 
nature and were generally limited in function and 
scale. The most common initiatives mentioned were 
the implementation of take-back services for recycling. However, the recycling programmes involved 
downcycling, conversion to lesser quality products, 
and not recycling into new apparel or footwear 
products. None of the brands reported a systemic 
approach for sustainability through design practice. Design approaches for sustainability targeted 
the use of more sustainable materials or reducing 
impacts within the supply chain, such as the elimination of toxic substances or low-impact dyes. These 
initiatives were also generally limited to a small percentage of the products and not to the entire range 
of products produced by the apparel brands. This 
further underlined the need for a systemic approach, 
as initiatives were haphazard and only targeted certain aspects of the fashion industry. The gap in these 
initiatives was fundamentally that they were not 
connected: i.e. areas such as product sustainability, 
business innovation and consumer engagement were 
addressed as separate entities. The challenge for 
fashion brands and the fashion industry is to begin 
to address sustainability in these areas as a whole 
and to recognise the relationship among them. Table 
1 displays examples of best practice CSR initiatives 
reported by the 14 SAC apparel brands.
For example, Table 1 illustrates that Nike collects 
shoes to be made into tarmac for outdoor sports, 
Patagonia has partnered with eBay for the resell of 
used products, and H&M donates used products 
to local charities. However, details on the initiatives 
listed in Table 1 were generally limited. In order to 
more fully explore the potential and opportunities 
for innovation in design practice, a more detailed 
study of one company, Nike, was conducted. 
Some key examples from Nike are reviewed in the 
next section.
140 Innovation for Green Business
Table 1: Summary of reported indicators within consumer engagement and business innovation.
Apparel
Brands Description Consumer Engagement Business Innovation
H&M Fast Fashion Encourage environmentally friendly washing/drying behaviours 
 Encourage donation/re-use/re-sell of products Design product/ project collaboration
 Have a clothing take-back programme
GAP Inc. Lifestyle Have a clothing take-back programme Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
Nike Sportswear Encourage donation/re-use/re-sell of products Implementing Closed Loop/c2c strategies
 Have a footwear take-back programme Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
 
adidas Sportswear Have a footwear take-back programme Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
Puma Sportswear Have a clothing take-back programme Implementing Closed Loop/c2c strategies
 Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
Patagonia Outdoors Encourage environmentally friendly washing/drying behaviours 
 Encourage donation/re-use/re-sell of products Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
 Have a clothing take-back programme 
 
MEC Co-operative Encourage environmentally friendly washing/drying behaviours
 Outdoor Have a clothing take-back programme Implementing Closed Loop/c2c strategies
M&S Department Encourage donation/re-use/re-sell of products
 Have a clothing take-back programme Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
Hanesbrand Casual Encourage environmentally friendly washing/drying behaviours
 Encourage donation/re-use/re-sell of products 
Levi’s Lifestyle Have a clothing take-back programme Collaboration for end-of-life product recycling/re-use
 Implementing Closed Loop/c2c strategies
Esprit Lifestyle 
Timberland Outdoors Have a footwear take-back programme Implementing Closed Loop/c2c strategies
Columbia Sportswear Sharing best practices within the industry
Loomstate Casual Have a special collection for sustainable products Design product/project collaboration
Innovation for Green Business 141
Nike and innovation
Nike has been cited as one of the most innovative 
brands within the fashion industry today (Carr 
2013). A key innovation has been the development of the Nike+ platform created for runners 
in collaboration with Apple. Through it, Nike has 
harnessed the power of social media by creating 
a platform for their consumers; even the users of 
other brands may become involved. 
Nike+ is an app for iPhones developed to 
track runners’ training progress. Runners can 
track distance, pace and routes. Additional personalised information, such as calories burned, 
can also be provided. Runners may also “tag” 
the particular pair of shoes that was used for the 
run so that the distance run with those shoes is 
logged and the runner is made aware when the 
average 500 km milestone for the retirement 
of the shoes is reached. The app also allows runners to connect with other runners. They can 
compete for the most runs or distance over a set 
period and the app has a leaderboard that tracks 
the number of runs or distance covered by the 
runners’ friends who also utilise Nike+. 
This has provided Nike with a huge pool of 
open-source data that are voluntarily provided 
by the consumer. Nike now has demographic 
information on those using the app, which shoes 
are tagged for various types of runs (such as trail 
versus city running), and the lengths and speed 
of those runs. Recently, Nike added the ability 
for the app to create photos that tag additional 
information and which can be uploaded directly 
to Instagram (a photo sharing platform) through 
the app. Nike also has access to the music that is 
played by the runner during those runs. 
Nike+ with Instagram has been a major tool 
used in connecting runners globally. The recent 
development of urban running crews or the street 
runner has become a global phenomenon through 
the use of these media platforms. Since Nike+ is 
used to compete and Instagram to communicate, 
an interesting loyalty to Nike has emerged. A 
common theme among the runners within these 
urban running crews is a loyalty to Nike products. 
Runs are completed and photos of the run are 
uploaded to Instagram with hashtags such as 
#nikerunning #nevernotnike #nevernotrunning. 
Photos of recent acquisition of new Nike gear, 
such as tights or runners, are also continuously 
uploaded to Instagram. 
Nike+ has grown organically and the potential of social media tools for sustainability is 
undeniable. A platform such as Nike+ has the 
potential for collaborative action, consumer 
engagement, development of new services and 
experiences, and greater data collection to 
support sustainability-driven innovation with a 
systemic approach. Nike+ has changed how runners run and has altered behaviours. However, it 
has not yet been used in the pursuit of sustainability. Nike+ is effective as it is driven by recognition, the belief that shared goals work better, 
is motivating, tracks progress, and creates an 
experience and a sense of community through 
engagement. The next challenge for designers is 
to capitalise on social trends, such as what has 
occurred with Nike+, to encourage sustainable 
consumption and consumer behaviour for sustainability through the development of sustainable products and business models. For example, 
Nike+ could be used to develop sustainable products that work within a closed-loop productionconsumption system. The open data collected 
through Nike+ and the engagement of the platform itself provides designers with the information and opportunities for innovation to drive 
sustainable product design and consumption.
142 Innovation for Green Business
Systemic approach to 
innovation and sustainability
If a systemic approach to design for sustainability and innovation is to be taken, there 
needs to be a focus on aspects such as consumer engagement and social trends. 
A focus on product sustainability is framing 
innovation as a materials problem. The inclusion 
of a broader set of considerations, such as consumer engagement, relevant social trends, business models and new services, into the design 
process allows for innovation and sustainability 
to be framed in a more systemic manner. Nike 
has demonstrated innovation within product 
and services independently; however, the next 
step would be to begin linking and developing a relationship between these areas from the 
design stage to develop innovative solutions 
to sustainability.
Relevant social trends today include the use 
of social media on platforms such as Instagram, 
Facebook, blogs or Twitter. Examining these 
platforms and the activities on them can help 
identify trends such as the rise of do-it-yourself 
(DIY) culture. For example, there is an increased 
sharing of information over these platforms 
as to how one can customise fashion apparel 
and create “it” fashion pieces. These platforms 
have created virtual communities that allow for 
global connection and communication among 
fashion consumers. 
The rationale behind focusing on social trends 
and consumer engagement is that they have the 
potential to develop sustainable products that 
are more highly valued and better serve the 
needs of the consumer. For example, Nike has 
developed Nike id where consumers can customise any Nike shoe through colour and the addition of text such as one’s name (Nike 2013). This 
idea and example of mass customisation provides 
the consumer with a higher valued product due 
to an emphasis on a collaborative design process 
that satisfies and capitalises on the DIY trend. 
By understanding the lifestyle of the consumer 
and engaging them into product development 
and design processes, a company could enhance 
the value of their product and, ultimately, their 
brand. Nike has capitalised on the social media 
trend, through Nike+, to enhance brand value by 
strengthening their relationship with consumers 
over this platform. 
Social trends are a significant aspect in the 
development of innovation as they provide information as to what is relevant among certain 
social groups. Identification and analysis of social 
trends can provide insight and understanding 
into the lifestyle of the consumer. Nike+ also 
provides consumers with a new experience that is 
service-based as opposed to product-orientated. 
A new experience has the potential to enhance 
emotional durability for the consumer through this 
type of engagement. There is also the potential to 
link these services and media platforms to product 
sustainability, thereby taking a more systemic 
approach. These aspects, when approached systemically, have the potential to develop innovative solutions for sustainability.
While Nike has developed innovative products and services, it has yet to apply innovation 
in a systemic manner for sustainability. This could 
be facilitated through exploring how the relationship between areas such as products, services 
and design could enhance sustainable innovation. 
Spangenberg et al. (2010) argue that the development of sustainable production and consumption 
requires a transformation by redesigning products, 
services, infrastructure and industrial practices. 
Innovation is essential for effective transformation (Friedman 2011). Therefore, brands should 
look not only to develop innovative solutions to 
sustainability, but they should do so in a systemic 
manner targeted towards industry-wide transformation for a sustainable fashion industry. 
Innovation for Green Business 143
conclusion
Growing consideration of the supply chain in 
manufacture is an impediment towards achieving greater sustainability. Increasingly, the 
market has followed a trajectory along the socalled “race to the bottom” in order to maintain 
relevance in an intensely competitive market. 
Cost reductions and rapid production directives coupled with unbridled success in the market has reduced the priority of sustainability 
issues. Certainly, the recent labour disasters in 
south Asia have contributed to further marginalise design issues in favour of better labour 
standards. Furthermore, many sustainability 
programmes largely focus on metrics of ecoefficiency and, unconsolidated, form a largely 
piecemeal framework.
To realise industry-wide transformation, sustainability initiatives need to move beyond this 
current haphazard approach. The industry should 
use innovation to challenge antiquated notions of 
the fashion experience and interaction. Designers 
have the opportunity to push the limits of traditional fashion design practice through a broadened set of design criteria. To design for sustainability is to move beyond designing a sustainable product and supply chain eco-efficiency. 
Designing for consumer engagement can produce a better understanding of consumers’ consumption behaviours, allowing for improved integration of sustainability principles. A systemic 
method in favour of innovation through design is 
perhaps the most relevant and important tool to 
develop sustainability by establishing the trajectory needed for industry-wide transformation. 
144 Innovation for Green Business
References
Abernathy, F. H., Dunlop, J. T., Hammond, J. H., & Weil, D. (1999). A Stitch in Time. New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press.
Armstrong, C. M., & LeHew, M. L. (2011). Sustainable Apparel Product Development: In Search of 
a New Dominant Social Paradigm for the Field Using Sustainable Approaches. Fashion Practice. Vol. 
3:1, pp. 29–62.
Birtwistle, G. & Moore, C.M. (2007). Fashion Clothing – Where Does It All End Up? International 
Journal of Retail & Distribution Management. Vol. 35:3, pp. 210–216.
Cachon, G.P. & Swinney, R. (2011). The Value of Fast Fashion: Quick Response, Enhanced Design, 
and Strategic Consumer bBehavior. Management Science. Vol 57:4, pp. 778–795.
Centre for Sustainable Fashion (2008). Fashion and Sustainability: A Snapshot Analysis. London, UK: 
London College of Fashion.
Chapman, J. (2005). Emotionally-durable Design: Objects, Experiences and Empathy. London. UK: 
Earthscan. 
Chen, H. L. & Burns, L. D. (2006). Environmental Analysis of Textile Products. Clothing & Textiles 
Research Journal. Vol 24:3, pp. 248–261.
Chesbrough, H. (2010). Business Model Innovation: Opportunities and Barriers. Long Range Planning. Vol. 43:2/3, pp. 354–363.
Christmann, P. & Taylor, G. (2001). Globalization and the Environment: Determinants of Firm Selfregulation in China. Journal of International Business Studies. Vol. 32:3, pp. 439–458.
Dickson, M. A. & Littrell, M. A. (1996). Socially Responsible Behaviour: Values and Attitudes of the 
Alternative Trading Organisation Consumer. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. Vol 1:1, 
pp. 50 - 69.
Dickson, M. A. & Eckman, M. (2006). Social Responsibility: The Concept as Defined by Apparel 
and Textile Scholars. Clothing & Textiles Research Journal. Vol. 24:3, pp. 178–191.
Dickson, M. A., Loker, S. & Eckman, M. (2009). Social Responsibility in the Global Apparel Industry. 
New York, NY: Fairchild Books.
Esslinger, H. (2011). Sustainable Design: Beyond the Innovation-driven Business Model. Journal of 
Innovative Management. Vol. 28, pp. 401–404.
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable Fashion & Textiles. London, UK: Earthscan.
Fletcher, K. (2010). Slow Fashion: An Invitation for Systems Change. Fashion Practice. Vol. 2:2, pp. 
259–266.
Fletcher, K. & Grose, L. (2012). Fashion & Sustainability. London, UK: Lawrence King.
Friedman, L. (2011). Sustainability Driving Innovation/Innovation Driving Sustainability. International 
Journal of Innovation Science. Vol. 3:1, pp. 1–2.
Gobble, M. M. (2012). Exploring Innovation and Sustainability. Research-Technology Management 
Journal. Vol. 55:5, pp. 64–66.
Goworek, H. (2011). Social and Environmental Sustainability in the Clothing Industry: A Case Study 
of a Fair Trade Retailer. Social Responsibility Journal. Vol. 7:1, pp. 74–86.
Gwilt, A. & Rissanen, T. (2011). Shaping Sustainable Fashion: Changing the Way We Make and Use 
Clothes. London, UK: Earthscan.
Hoffmann, E. (2012). User Integration in Sustainable Product Development. Sheffield, UK: Greenleaf.
Joergens, C. (2006). Ethical Fashion: Myth or Future Trend? Journal of Fashion Marketing and 
Management. Vol 10:3, pp. 360–371.
Joy, A., Sherry Jr., F. Venkatesh, A., Wang, J. & Chan, R. (2012). Fast Fashion, Sustainability, and 
the Ethical Appeal of Luxury Brands. Fashion Theory. Vol. 16:3, pp. 273–296.
Kemp, R. (2008). Transition Management for Sustainable Consumption and Production. In: Tukker, 
A., Charter, M., Vezzoli, C., Sto, E. & Andersen, M.M. (eds.). System Innovation for Sustainability: 
Perspectives on Radical Changes to Sustainable Consumption and Production. Sheffield: Greenleaf, pp. 
369–390.
Kim, H. S. & Damhorst, M. L. (1998). Environmental Concern and Apparel Consumption. Clothing 
and Textiles Research Journal. Vol. 16:3, pp. 126–133.
Kim, H.-S. & Damhorst, M. L. (1999). Environmental Attitude and Commitment in Relation to Add 
Message Credibility. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. Vol. 3:1, 18–30.
Kozlowski, A. (2012). Corporate Social Responsibility in the Apparel Industry: A Multiple Case Study. 
(Master’s Thesis). Retrieved from http://digitalcommons.ryerson.ca/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=254
6&context=dissertations
Meroni, A. (2012). Feeding Milano: A Challenging Design Experiment of Collaboration and Conviviality. In: Özcan, C., Doğu D.I., Taşçı, A, D. & Kocabıyık, E (eds). Agrindustrial Design, Product and Service 
Design Congress Proceedings. Izmir University of Economics. Print.No.050, pp. 39–45.
Nidumolu, R., Prahalad, C.K. & Rangaswami, M.R. (September 2009). Why Sustainability is Now the 
Key Driver of Innovation. Harvard Business Review, pp. 1–9.
Papanek, V. (1971). Design for the Real World: Human Ecology and Social Change. Chicago, IL: Academy 
Chicago.
Schaltegger, S., Lüdeke-Freund, F. & E.G. Hansen (2011). Business Cases for Sustainability and the 
Role of Business Model Innovation: Developing a Conceptual Framework. Leuphana Universität Lüneburg, 
Germany: Centre for Sustainability Management.
Shaw, D. & Tomolillo, D. (2004). Undressing the Ethical Issues in Fashion: A Consumer Perspective. 
In: Bruce, M., Moore, C. and Birtwistle, G. (eds.). International Retail Marketing: A Case Study Approach. 
Burlington. MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 141–152.
Sheth, J.N., Sethia, N.K. & Srinivas, S. (2011). Mindful Consumption: A Customer-centric Approach 
to Sustainability. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science. Vol. 39, pp. 21–39.
Siegle, L. (2011). To Die for. London, UK: Fourth Estate.
Spangenberg, J.H., Fuad-Lake, A. & Blincoe, K. (2010). Design for Sustainability (DfS): The Interface 
of Sustainable Production and Consumption. Journal of Cleaner Production. Vol. 18, pp. 1485–1493.
Steinberger, J. K., Friot, D., Jolliet, O. & Erkman, S. (2009). A Spatially Explicit Life Cycle Inventory 
of the Global Textile Chain. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. Vol. 14:5, pp. 453–455.
Innovation for Green Business 145
Stone, E. (2012). In Fashion. New York, NY: Fairchild.
Teece, J.T. (2010). Business Models, Business Strategy, and Innovation. Long Range Planning. Vol. 
43, pp. 172–194.
Thorpe, A. (2010). Design’s Role in Sustainable Consumption. Design Issues. Vol. 26:2, pp. 3–16.
Verganti, R. (2009). Design-driven Innovation. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Press. 
Waage, S.A. (2007). Re-considering Product Design: A Practical “Road-map” for Integration of 
Sustainability Issues. Journal of Cleaner Production. Vol. 15, pp. 638–647.
Welters, L. (2008). The Fashion of Sustainability. In: J. Hethorn, & C. Ulasewicz (eds.). Sustainable 
Fashion, Why Now? New York, NY: Fairchild Books, pp. 3–29.
Walker, S. (2006). Sustainable by Design: Explorations in Theory and Practice. London, UK: Earthscan.
Wong, E. & Taylor, G. (2000). An Investigation of Ethical Sourcing Practices: Levi Strauss & Co. 
Journal of Fashion Marketing & Management. Vol. 40:1, pp. 71–79.
Wood, C. (2009, December 14). Can China Turn Cotton Green? Miller-McCune, pp. 30–34.
Online references
Carr, A. (2013). Nike: The no.1 Most Innovative Company of 2013. Retrieved from: http://www.
fastcompany.com/most-innovative-companies/2013/nike
Nike. (2013). NikeiD products. http://www.nike.com/gb/en_gb/c/nikeid?ref=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.
google.ca%2F
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD). (2008). Sustainable Consumption and Trends: From a Business Perspective. http://www.wbcsd.org/pages/edocument/edocumentdetails.aspx?id=142
Innovative Fashion 
Concepts and the 
Communication of 
Sustainability
Lisbeth Svengren Holm 
It is generally recognised that changes are needed 
on a systemic level – to make the whole fashion 
system more sustainable and achieve a cradle-tocradle approach (McDonough & Braungart 2002). 
It is also recognised that this will require new business models throughout the supply chain as well 
as changed consumer behaviour (Allwood et al. 
2006; Fletcher 2008; Tham 2009). Furthermore, the complexity of a global value chain, the 
variety of businesses and business models in the 
system, means that of all the environmental, social, 
economic and cultural aspects in how we define 
sustainability (Black 2008; Carbonaro & Votava 
2009), there is no single ‘best’ or most sustainable 
(in its broadest sense) approach or solution. 
We are stuck in the system of market driven, 
more or less fast, fashion with its supply of new 
collections several times per year and even 
weekly, as in the case of some fast fashion retailers such as Zara and H&M. This system of mass 
production resulting in cheap products seducing the consumers with great bargains forms the 
very core of the industrial and consumer society 
(Ruppel 2009). A slow-down of the system is 
unlikely to happen. And changing the system into 
a more sustainable one – if it ever will happen – 
will not be a fast process. Still, there are forces 
and many initiatives that – if we are optimistic 
– are leading the fashion industry towards greatIntroduction
er sustainability even if the changes are small 
and on the margins looking at the industry as a 
whole. Some are more optimistic and mean that 
sustainability, as a concept, is becoming a core of 
the fashion industry (Scott 2008). When seeing 
the interest among Swedish fashion companies 
who participate in various seminars about sustainability it is obvious that many fashion design 
companies are indeed looking for new ways to do 
business, design and produce the clothes. Innovative sustainable ideas that can change the system are needed because innovations will attract 
followers, which will further move the industry 
towards sustainable solutions. 
There are indeed many innovative ideas for 
new fashion concepts and business models 
that could lead to a more sustainable fashion 
industry, even if these solutions are just small 
steps on a thousand-mile march. 
Innovations are traditionally thought of as 
new technologies, design and materials. New fibres and digital printing that needs less water are 
examples of new technologies that contribute to 
more sustainable solutions (Loker 2008). But 
there are also new business concepts, which are 
actually not new but have been lost in the industrialisation of fashion: for instance tailor-made 
clothes (which is now related to slow fashion), repair of garments, rent of clothing and re-use, i.e. 
channels offering secondhand or vintage apparel. 
These concepts are back, even if in new versions 
adapted to current technologies, design concepts 
and trends. For these concepts to be of interest 
for the last part in the fashion system – the consumers – they need first of all to become aware 
of them, but also more knowledgeable about why 
they should embrace them, what benefits them 
as consumers? Consumers’ attitudes to sustainability usually rank it quite low: consumers do 
not want to pay a higher price just because the 
garment is more sustainable or ethical (Svengren 
Holm & Holm 2010), and they feel sustainability 
is the companies’ responsibility. Fashion companies are indeed taking a greater responsibility to 
become more sustainable even if it is done under 
pressure, for instance from the media but also 
from several political and non-political organisations. One example of a company initiative is the 
establishment of, for instance, the Sustainable 
Apparel Coalition (SAC) , whose aim is to create a tool for designers, the so-called Higg index 
tool. With the help of this index designers can 
learn about the environmental and social impact 
of for instance material choices. This is built on 
the Nike index for materials, and Nike is also one 
of the companies behind the Higg index. More 
148 Innovation for Green Business
Fashion service concepts
Selling products in several cycles has normally 
been the role of non-profit organisations such 
as the Red Cross or Oxfam. Reuse, or secondhand, sometimes phrased as vintage if we mean 
high quality branded items, is quite a large and 
growing business (e.g. Allwood et al. 2006; 
Fletcher 2008; Scott 2008). This is confirmed 
by non-profit organisations like the Red Cross 
and in Sweden ‘Myrorna’ (the secondhand store 
of the Salvation Army). Approximately half of 
the turnover of these non-profit organisations 
in 2011, 890 million SEK, was reported to be 
clothes (ASFB 2013). The private secondhand 
trade on the online Swedish secondhand site 
“Blocket” increased by 23 per cent in the third 
quarter of 2012 compared to the same period 
in 2011 (ASFB 2013). Whereas secondhand is 
dominated by non-profit organisations, there is 
an interest in secondhand/vintage by established 
designers and fashion design companies (e.g. 
Scott 2008). The Swedish fashion brands Filippa 
K and Boomerang both have a secondhand selection in their stores. We will look more into the 
case of Filippa K. 
Another way to reduce production and consumption is to provide a service for repair of 
damaged products and thereby prolong their life 
(Fletcher & Grose 2012). Repairing existing garments must be the oldest concept for renewing 
clothes. What used to be a necessity for most 
people was abandoned in the wave of mass production of garments where the price fell to such 
a level that nobody considered it worthwhile 
to repair old clothes, at least not in the affluent Western parts of the world. Older people 
are however still more likely to mend clothes 
(Ekström et al. 2012). Exceptions are only those 
clothes that we truly like so much that we indeed 
invest time and money to mend them (Niinimäki 
2012). For most garments this is no longer considered worthwhile. As a consequence there are 
also very few tailors left where you can hand in 
the garments that need to be mended. Some 
laundry services run by people with tailoring skills 
have repairs and mending of garments as an additional service. Nudie Jeans, a Swedish fashion 
company with a focus on denim products, offers 
this service for its customers and their concept is 
described below.
A third concept is to rent the clothes and in 
that way satisfy the consumers’ need for variety 
without frequent buying of new clothes. The idea 
of a library for clothes was realised by a group 
of women in southern Stockholm who created 
‘Lånegarderoben’ (Renting Wardrobe) in 2010. 
This concept is now established in several cities 
around Sweden. It is based on a membership fee 
and the member can borrow clothes for a shorter 
than 80 of the world’s leading companies are 
members of the SAC, for instance Patagonia, 
H&M, Zara, Puma, Adidas, and Burberry, just 
to mention a few. This could be one basis in the 
future to also inform and enable consumers to 
make better choices. But we are not there yet. 
The Higg index and sustainable material will 
not solve all problems. We need to influence consumers’ behaviour both when shopping and in the 
use phase, i.e. washing the garments. We need 
to reduce the production of new materials. Can 
all this be done without losing the joy of fashion 
and without losing business? Few, but still some, 
companies try to be proactive and develop service concepts that support sales and efficient 
use of existing materials. As these focus on supporting the fashion products these concepts are 
referred to as product-service systems (PSS) 
(Niinimäki 2012). Redesign is becoming more 
common (McDonough 2013), also in fashion 
(Brown 2013; von Busch 2008; Ericsson 2013), 
but is not in focus in this chapter. In this chapter we will describe and discuss some service 
concepts that Swedish fashion design companies 
have embraced in order to act more sustainably 
as part of their business model and how this is 
communicated to customers.
Innovation for Green Business 149
period. Several brands sponsor these organisations with clothes. Although this is a growing 
business it is still in the start-up phase and we 
are more interested in commercial brands that 
have incorporated this idea into their business. 
One company that has done so is Uniforms for 
the Dedicated, which will be described below. 
A fourth concept is to provide the consumers with a recycling or take-back system that can 
take all clothes regardless of quality or condition. 
There has been an extensive discussion about 
what consumers do with garments that they do 
no longer want. It is very common to simply leave 
it in the wardrobe – as long as there is space for it. 
But at some point the wardrobe begins to bulge 
and there is no more space for new garments. 
Many people then give some away to friends or 
to secondhand channels if it is still considered 
nice and wearable. But as soon as it is considered 
not nice it is thrown away (Koukouvinos 2012). 
Creating closed loops for textiles has been 
discussed for a long time and there are several 
activities done to encourage consumers to bring 
in textiles, regardless of their condition, to be 
sorted and further returned to the system again 
– for secondhand sale as is, for use in another 
way, for instance cut into rags, used as filling in 
furniture, cars, etc., or sent to incineration and 
thereby turned into energy. This is referred to 
as the waste hierarchy (EU Waste Hierarchy) 
where reuse and preparing for reuse is at the top 
level, followed by recycle, recovery and in the 
end disposal, for instance incineration or landfill, also discussed for textile waste (Gustafsson 
& Hjelmgren 2013). A company that has developed an extensive and easy service system for 
returning textiles is H&M; their concept will be 
described below. 
150 Innovation for Green Business
company’s many initiatives. If one is lucky 
enough to find this information or know there is 
a secondhand store, an Internet search reveals its 
website [1]. There could be several reasons for 
this opaqueness. It could be a different kind of 
store, not included in the regular store concept, 
and possibly Filippa K indeed does not own the 
store. The secondhand store emerged in collaboration with Judit’s Second Hand, a well-known 
secondhand store in Stockholm who also owns 
the Filippa K Second Hand store. The store is 
located almost beside Judit’s Second Hand store 
in Södermalm, in Stockholm. The website for the 
Filippa K secondhand store is informative, but 
minimalistic, giving only the most basic needed 
information: a short description of the store, 
general information about what assortments to 
expect, what is asked for, opening hours, where 
to find and how to contact the store (Filippa 
K, secondhand). 
A visit to the store reveals that it is nothing 
like the regular Filippa K’s store design; on the 
contrary, it has a typical secondhand store interior: old items as décor and rather small, but still 
well organised and pleasant. The garments sold 
however are not only secondhand; the selection 
also includes new garments from Filippa K, for 
instance their sample collections from this year’s 
launch. According to the shop assistant demand 
is much greater than supply. On the website 
there is a tab “searched for” where it is stated 
that there is demand especially for larger sizes. 
Filippa K is well known for its slim design and the 
shop assistant states that it is common that those 
who hand in their used Filippa K garments have 
outgrown them; hence the most common garments in the store are in small sizes. This is of 
course also the case for the sample collections 
that were launched for the catwalk. Compared 
to the other activities that Filippa K conducts 
in design and production for sustainability purposes the store has a marginal effect. But it has 
been mentioned as an example of an innovative 
concept for enabling more sustainable fashion 
consumption and is something visible for the 
consumers, those who find it and are interested. 
UNIFORMS FOR THE DEDICATED
Behind Uniforms for the Dedicated is a group 
of creative people who shared interests in snowboarding, mountain climbing, surfing and travelling. The business started with a T-shirt they 
designed to wear themselves in the first place 
– to communicate their identity as a social community, but they also sold the T-shirts in friends’ 
[1] http://www.filippaksecondhand.se
Service concepts in
selected Swedish 
fashion design companies 
FILIPPA K
Filippa K is a fashion company founded in 1993 
and today one of the largest Swedish fashion 
design companies. Filippa K has a CSR policy 
and states the alignment between the policy and 
its general business idea. According to its history Filippa K took some strategic decisions to 
act with the aim to become more sustainable in 
2008 (Filippa K, Sustainability Report 2012). 
This year the company became a member of the 
Fair Wear Foundation and opened a secondhand 
store for its own branded garments. 
The Sustainability Report for 2012 reports 
many activities regarding how the negative 
impact on the environment is being reduced as 
well as the social conditions in production. However the secondhand store is not mentioned on 
Filippa K’s website in the list of stores, nor do the 
regular Filippa K stores in Stockholm have any 
information about it. When a shop assistant was 
asked, she knew of it but stated: “It is not part of 
us, it does not belong to Filippa K.” There is also 
nothing on the company’s website about the possibility to hand in used garments. 
One needs to read the report on the company’s responsibilities to finally find information about the secondhand store as one of the 
Innovation for Green Business 151
stores. They started as a group of designers, artists, filmmakers and musicians with a common 
interest in sustainability – and in working in the 
creative sector. They all felt dedicated to the idea. 
In 2007 they decided to try and make a business 
of what they were doing, not only with clothes, 
but also with designed furniture, music and films. 
Uniforms for the Dedicated was born. Their success is men’s clothes. After only a couple of years 
the clothes are sold by more than 150 retailers 
worldwide, including online stores such as Asos 
and Zalando. The brand has received awards for 
its creativity. In 2008 Swedish Fashion Council 
awarded it Rookie of the Year and in 2009 it was 
awarded “Newcomer of the Year” by the magazine Café (Café Magazine).
In September 2012 Uniforms for the Dedicated opened their first store in Stockholm, in 
Södermalm This stays in line with their philosophy 
of acting sustainably; the materials used for the 
store are materials they have up-cycled themselves. The store is for their range of garments but 
also pieces from their furniture collection (Uniforms for the Dedicated). 
The ambition is to create a sustainable brand 
and to find different ways to achieve this. Partly 
this is done by choice of material and high quality 
also in the details of the garments. But another 
concept that has been launched is renting. 
In the autumn of 2013 Uniforms for the Dedicated selected some parts of its collection for 
short-term lease in their store in Stockholm. The 
idea is that renting should provide an alternative 
to just buying – and thereby contribute to more 
considerate and careful shopping overall. On the 
company’s website the philosophy is described 
under different headlines, such as Design Philosophy and Change-Earth, and the renting concept 
is labeled “The Collection Library” and found on 
the first web page. Here the interested person can 
read about the idea, why it exists and the practical details of how to rent the garments. So far 
the number of customers who have rented any 
apparel is not large but according to the store 
manager the people who enter the store are curious and people have started to talk about it in 
social media. It takes time for customers to get 
used to such a new concept in a regular fashion 
store. According to the one of the owners, Mike 
Lind, it is encouraging and the company will continue with the concept and expand it. 
NUDIE JEANS 
Nudie is a Swedish jeans and casual wear label 
founded in 2001 by Maria Erixon Levin, a 
Swedish designer and entrepreneur, and her exhusband Joakim Levin (Nudie Jeans). Besides 
a stated passion for denim and jeans the owners show a strong commitment to sustainability 
from all perspectives. Sustainability is the core of 
its brand. The company has seen positive growth 
and ten years later it is a medium sized company employing around 50 persons. The owner 
stresses the philosophy to grow organically without any external investors and therefore has 
chosen to rely on reinvesting the profits (SVD). 
According to the two owners this is because they 
want to have total control themselves and no one 
else should tell them what to do. 
The company is specialised in unwashed 
jeans and has received several awards for its ecological and ethical work. There is no doubt that 
Nudie Jeans is committed to act in a sustainable 
way. The price level of the products is a consequence of that good quality and ethical behaviour throughout the supply chain. Nudie Jeans is 
recognised for its communication of what it does 
and is ranked as an “A” company on the “Rank a 
Brand” list, a website ranking the company from 
a sustainability perspective [2]. Nudie Jeans’ 
philosophy is that jeans are something very personal, “not just a piece of clothing” – more like 
“a second skin” for the wearer according to the 
152 Innovation for Green Business
the relationship with the wearer. On the shelf 
opposite, in four piles, at least 40 jeans lie waiting to be repaired. Between five and sevens jeans 
are handed in each day for repair according to 
the shop assistant. 
Nudie Jeans has also expanded its line of denim 
products with a new category: denim rags. The 
rags are made from worn-out Nudie Jeans denims 
that were beyond repair. The rags are referred to 
as slow craft as they are woven by hand on manual 
shuttle looms. Pictures on the Nudie Jeans website shows how this is done to further communicate the value of these rags. (Nudie Jeans) 
H&M
H&M is one of the largest fashion retailers worldwide and now the largest company on the Swedish 
stock market. Being labelled as a fast fashion company H&M has been criticised for its unsustainable business models. Since the end of the 1990s 
H&M has taken several measures to act in a more 
sustainable way throughout the whole supply chain. 
In 2012 H&M started to provide a service for their 
customers to dispose of used and worn-out garments in their stores. One problem for an efficient take-back system is to be able to handle the 
infrastructure and transportation of the collected 
material, which H&M can solve by using its own 
transportation system. After collaboration started 
with the Swiss company I: Collect for sorting the 
collected garments and the first test in a number a 
stores, H&M quickly moved to include all stores in 
the system in 2013. But the system is only provided 
for the H&M branded stores; H&M’s two other 
brands COS and &Other Stories are not part of the 
system. The shop assistants in these stores know 
of the system when asked but state that, “Yes, we 
belong to the same corporation but we are a different brand.” & Other Stories does take back empty 
packaging from the cosmetics department but 
no textiles. 
All H&M stores have a bin for the disposal of 
all kinds of garments regardless of brand, material, quality or status. This has been reported in 
the media, and it is of course visible in the store 
– even if one needs to be alert to see it. A bin 
with a poster above is placed next to the cashier. 
At the entrance to the fitting rooms a poster 
reminds consumers, “Don’t let fashion go to 
waste” and provides information about the collection of old garments, signed off by H&M Conscious, the brand for H&M’s sustainable collections 
and activities. 
[2] http://www.rankabrand.org/index.php/ranker/Niels (accessed 16.01.2014). Rank a Brand is a website that, with the help of 
consumers and volunteers, assesses how companies communicate what they do to become more sustainable. All product categories are considered, also fashion companies. The argument for this ranking is the need for information, according to Niels Oskum, 
a Dutch engineer and CSR expert: “Most products in our shops are made in low wage countries. When buying stuff, brands are 
guiding signposts. I like to know what those brands mean in terms of carbon emissions, environment and labour conditions.”
website. Nudie has thus described their jeans as 
the “naked truth about denim”. As the wearer is 
supposed to have an intimate relationship with 
and passion for his/her jeans they are intended to 
be worn for a very long time. But this also means 
that the jeans become worn out and parts need to 
be repaired. As a consequence of this philosophy 
Nudie Jeans therefore offers a repair service for 
free in several of its stores around the world. If 
the wearers do not have access to a Nudie Jeans 
store a sewing kit especially for jeans repair can 
be ordered – also free of charge. 
Nudie Jeans’ store in Stockholm is located in 
Södermalm, an area well known as a hipster community where the jeans density is high. A visit to 
the store was made to see how the repair concept is realised. The store is rather spacious and 
there are two sewing machines in the sales room. 
On the table with the sewing machines are some 
jeans obviously in the process of being repaired. 
On the wall behind the cashier hangs around 
twenty repaired jeans waiting to be picked up by 
their owners. It is clearly visible that the jeans 
have been mended although it is nicely done. 
Worn seams have been patched and holes have 
been mended with zigzag stitches – further contributing to the personalisation of the jeans and 
Innovation for Green Business 153
On H&M’s website it is easy to find “Garment Collecting” under the heading CSR and 
responsibilities. The webpage gives information 
about the idea and how it works. The consumer 
can bring in any garment, regardless of brand. 
For every kilogram collected H&M donates 
0.02 EUR to a local charity organisation chosen by H&M. So far (in January 2014) 3.8 tons 
have been collected, resulting in 75,116 EUR for 
charity worldwide. According to H&M very little 
needs to be incinerated; most of the textiles 
can either go to secondhand channels or converted into filling materials. But some of it is also 
recycled into new fibres and used, blended with 
new fibres, to make new jeans. In that way the 
demand for new fibres is actually reduced. 
Sustainability 
communication
strategies
Historically we used to repair clothes and shoes 
but when prices went down and we could afford 
it, we bought new things instead. And the prices 
for clothes have continued to decrease. We do not 
know whether the generations that have become 
used to shopping and buying new and cheap fashion frequently will endorse repair, renting or buying secondhand to a larger extent. But there is an 
awakening among people in general about environmental problems (Hethorn & Ulasewicz 2009). 
The interest in these issues among students, for 
instance at the Swedish School of Textiles, University of Borås, is much larger compared to only three 
or four years ago. This is evident also in their choice 
of subjects for theses. It might be that PSS (Product-Service Systems) (Niinimäki 2012; 2014) and 
the RE-concepts (REpair, REuse, REturn, REnt) 
could be the basis for developing new services that 
people are also willing to pay for. The young generation is knowledgeable about climate problems, and 
the re-concepts could also support their desire for 
fashion on an individual level, i.e. they can see more 
benefits than just the contribution to a sustainable 
fashion industry. Fashion is emotional and individualistic; fashion is about creating a personality and 
an identity so the design of the clothes is of great 
importance (Niinimäki 2012). The services have to 
support this role of fashion as well as be within the 
comfort zone and easy to embrace. 
From a sustainability perspective it is important what H&M does just by the volumes of 
textiles it puts on the market. Companies who 
like H&M have developed take-back systems, 
regardless of brand, offer a valuable service from 
a sustainability perspective and will certainly 
reduce negative impact, but this does not necessarily reduce consumption. H&M is also not taking the opportunity to include their other brands, 
which have a different identity and higher quality 
compared to the H&M brand. 
The fact that Filippa K engages in sustainability and opens a secondhand store is a positive 
activity, as it contributes to the reuse of existing 
garments and gives consumers an opportunity to 
clean out their wardrobe before buying new garments. A bulging closet is a problem for many 
fashion-interested people, but this is an activity on the margin of the company’s business and 
not supported by its regular brand or business 
activities. 
Uniforms for the Dedicated is dedicated to 
creating a new lifestyle and embracing sustainability. The renting service is in line with this 
strategy. Nudie Jeans also has sustainability as 
a core part of its brand and has developed repair 
and recycle as a service contributing to a more 
sustainable industry. Nudie Jeans is however the 
only company that highlights this on the top of 
154 Innovation for Green Business
look at the company’s websites to find information about what the company is doing – or 
be knowledgeable about the brand stories. To 
be fair, many companies now have training and 
education of their staff, including shop personnel, about sustainability. Nevertheless, with no 
special campaign and no immediate first-page 
information they will not capture the attention 
of those consumers who only have a tepid interest in sustainability and never ask questions. 
Some companies are highlighted in the media 
for their design and crafting quality, referred to as 
slow fashion and in that sense as sustainable companies (e.g. Ecosalon.com) [3]. Those companies 
– and consumers – who invest in the quality of their 
products are indeed contributing to sustainability, 
but the question is to which extent it changes consumer behaviour and the fashion system. 
[3] http://www.ecosalon.com
conclusion
There are different strategies for how companies 
communicate their sustainability to consumers. 
Some companies have sustainability as the core 
of operations, like Filippa K and H&M, but not 
as core of the brand, as for instance Nudie Jeans 
and Uniforms for the Dedicated. Instead they 
are very careful not to mix the core brand with 
anything other than fashion – and quality and 
trends. The Nudie Jeans website gives no doubt 
about the passion for jeans – and for sustainability. Sustainability endorses the brand and as a 
consequence innovative services to support this 
strategy are provided to the consumers. Compared 
to most fashion companies the extensive information about Nudie Jeans’ policy and activities 
for sustainability is however rather an exception. 
For those companies who do act in a sustainable 
way, the strategies for sustainability, services and 
communications are summarised in Table 1.
the first page of their website. It is easy to understand why the company receives an “A” ranking 
on the www.rankabrand.org website. 
Frequent shoppers and those who are actively 
interested in sustainability and new lifestyles will 
learn about the services, but it requires a special 
interest to find information about them on the 
company websites. A brief survey of another ten 
established Swedish fashion brands’ web pages 
reveals that there is no company who communicates their sustainability policy or activities 
directly on the first page of their website. 
There are however some young Swedish 
fashion entrepreneurs who like Uniforms for the 
Dedicated, for instance Castor Pollux, who is 
committed to quality and sustainability and indeed 
communicates it through the brand story. Some 
companies, such as Acne, Odd Molly and Gina 
Tricot, follow the same strategy as Filippa K and 
H&M and have a special link to their CSR activities under the tab ‘About the company’. These 
are often very informative, so the companies will 
certainly claim they are active when it comes to 
sustainability and they are transparent about this. 
In the stores, however, where decisions on 
purchase are made, most companies do not communicate sustainability, so we are expected to 
Innovation for Green Business 155
(1) Sustainability is endorsed by the brand and the 
services further strengthen the association with 
sustainability as part of the company’s strategies, 
including brand strategies. This is communicated 
directly on their website – on the first page. 
(2) Sustainability is integrated in the brand but 
no services are added. The sustainability approach 
and activities are communicated as part of the 
story of the brand and hence a direct communications strategy.
(3) Sustainability is integrated in design and 
operations. Services have been developed and 
added to the business to strengthen the operations. This is communicated through reports 
under the tab “About the company” – as indirect 
communications.
(4) Sustainability is part of design and operations 
but no service has been added to the business. 
The activities are communicated through reports 
under the tab “About the company” – i.e. indirect 
communications. 
(5) Sustainability is integrated in the design and 
craft of the products, which are of high quality. 
Quality aspects are communicated, but there is 
no reference to sustainability per se and therefore 
no communication about sustainability as such. 
For some fashion design it could be referred to as 
“slow fashion”. 
Service Concepts / 
Communications strategies
Table 1. Strategies for companies working with sustainability
Communications directly 
(first page on website)
Communications indirectly 
(link on tab ‘About’)
No communications 
on website
No communications on website (1) Integral part of design and operations (3)
Integrated in the brand story (2) Integral part of design and operations (4) Integral part of design (5)
Services added
No Services added
This overview of services and communications 
strategies does not reveal anything about consumers’ response, which needs to be researched 
further. There is also no evidence that companies 
who do not communicate are not actually doing 
anything. Some of these companies might have 
strict policies, CSR managers and sustainablyoriented actions in many aspects. So why do 
they not communicate it on their websites to 
their consumers? And what prevents more direct 
communications that could clarify for consumers 
what really is going on in terms of sustainability? 
This could be a question for another study. 
156 Innovation for Green Business
Allwood, J., Ellebaek Laursen, S., Malvido de Rodriguez, C. & Bocken, N. (2006). Well Dressed? 
The Present and Future Sustainability of Clothing and Textiles in the United Kingdom. University of 
Cambridge, Institute for Manufacturing. 
ASFB (Association of Swedish Fashion Brands) and Fashion Incubator in Borås (2013.) Modebranschen i Siffror – Statistik och Analys. (Fashion Industry in Figures – Statistic and Analysis). Report 
13:03. Stockholm: Volante.
Black, S. (2008). Eco-chic: the Fashion Paradox. London: Black Dog. 
Brown, S. (2010). Eco-fashion. London: Laurence King Publishing. 
Brown, S. (2013). Refashioned. Cutting-edge Clothing from Upcycled Materials. London: Laurence 
King Publishing.
von Busch, O. (2008). Fashion-able. Hactivism and Engaged Fashion Design. Art Monitor. A publication series from the Board for Artistic Research (NKU) of the Fine, Applied and Performing Arts 
University of Gothenburg. 
Carbonaro, S. & Votava, C. (2009). The Function of Fashion?: The Design of New Styles of 
Thoughts. Nordic Textile Journal. 
Ekström, K., Gustafsson, E., Hjelmgren, D. & Salomonson, N. (2012). Mot en Mer Hållbar Konsumtion. En Studie om Konsumenters Anskaffning och Avyttring av Kläder (Towards a More Sustainable 
Consumption. A Study of Consumers’ Purchase and Disposal of Clothes). Borås: University of Borås, 
School of Business and IT. 
Ericsson, A. (2014). The Life of a Dress. Borås: Swedish School of Textiles, University of Borås 
(forthcoming).
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable Fashion & Textiles. Design Journeys. London: Earthscan.
Fletcher, K. & Grose L. (2012). Fashion and Sustainability. Design for Change. London: Laurence King 
Publishing. 
Gustafsson, E. & Hjelmgren, D. (2013). Kan Detaljhandeln Bidra till att Minska det Textila Avfallet? 
Textilreturen i Ullared – ett Experiment om Återvinning (Can Retailers Contribute to a Reduction of 
Textile Waste? Textile Return in Ullared – an Experiment with Recycling). Borås: The University of Borås, 
School of Business and IT. 
Hethorn, J. & Ulasewicz, C. (2008). Sustainable Fashion: Why Now? A Conversation about Issues, 
Practices and Possibilities. New York: Fairchild. 
Koukouvinos, D. (2012). Psychosocial Factors Influencing Young Consumers’ Disposal Behaviour in 
Greece. An Application of Triandi’s Theory of Interpersonal Behaviour. Master’s Thesis. Borås: The 
Swedish School of Textiles, University of Borås. 
Loker. S. (2008). A Technology-Enabled Sustainable Fashion System: Fashion’s Future. In Hethorn, 
J. & Ulasewicz, C. (eds.). Sustainable Fashion. Why Now? A Conversation about Issues, Practices, and 
Possibilities. New York: Fairchild. 
Lundqvist, C. (2008). För dem är mode mer än kläder. Helsingborgs Dagblad. http://hd.se/
mer/2008/10/27/foer-dem-aer-mode-mer-aen-klaeder/ [2014 01 31]
References
Niinimäki, K. (2012). Proactive Fashion Design for Sustainable Consumption. Nordic Textile Journal. 
Vol.1, pp. 60–69.
Niinimäki, K. (2014) Sustainable Consumer Satisfaction in the Context of Clothing. In ProductService System Design for Sustainability. Sheffield: Greenleaf, pp. 218-237. 
Ruppel Shell, E. (2009). The High Cost of Discount Culture. New York: Penguin Putnam Press.
Scott, W. (2008). Recycle and Reuse as Design Potential. In Hethorn, J. & Ulasewicz, C. (eds). 
Sustainable Fashion. Why Now? A Conversation about Issues, Practices, and Possibilities. New York: 
Fairchild. 
Svengren Holm, L. & Holm, O. (2010). Sustainable Fashion and New Business Models. Nordic Textile 
Journal. Vol. 1, pp. 30–39.
Tham, M. (2009). Lucky People Forecast - A Systemic Futures Perspective on Fashion and Sustainability. London: Goldsmiths College, London University.
Online references
Café Magazine. http://cafe.se/cafes-stora-modepris-2009/ 
EU Waste Hierarchy. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/European_Waste_Hierarchy
Filippa K Sustainability Report (2012). http://www.filippa-k.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/
Sustainability-report-2012.pdf 
Filippa K secondhand. http://www.filippaksecondhand.se 
Nudie Jeans. http://www.nudiejeans.com. 
Rank a Brand. http://rankabrand.org. 
Sustainable Apparel Coalition. http://www.apparelcoalition.org.
SVD. http://www.svd.se/naringsliv/branscher/handel-och-tjanster/kreativt-kaos-pa-vag-mot-jeanstoppen_7406842.svd
Swedish Fashion Council. http://www.stockholmfashionweek.com/rookiesdesigners.php
Uniforms for the Dedicated. http://se.uniformsforthededicated.com/pages/stockholm-store
Innovation for Green Business 157
collaboration
Sherin, A. (2013). Sustainable Thinking. Ethical Approaches 
to Design and Design Management. New York: Bloomsbury.
W h a t a r e y o u r e t h i c a l b e l i e v e s ? W h o y o u w a n t t o w o r k 
f o r ? W h a t a r e y o u r s k i l l s ? A n d , w h a t a r e t h e s o c i a l 
and environmental impacts of what you produce?
( S h e r i n 2 0 1 3 , 1 6 2 . ) 
Open 
collaboration
Kirsi Niinimäki
New forms of collaboration between different 
partners are needed to create new knowledge, 
understanding and guidelines on how to make 
positive change in the fashion system. New collaborative initiatives are emerging and it is exciting to see that lately the fashion industry has also 
been eager to take part in these initiatives. This 
new mindset creates a new kind of openness in 
the industry, which can be beneficial also for the 
consumer and by and large for society. And of 
course these forerunner companies can build trust 
by sharing knowledge gained from their actions 
with consumers. New collaborative knowledge 
can be about materials, manufacturing and the 
consumption of fashion, and several guidelines 
have been openly published. Here some examples are briefly presented.
Introduction
162 c ollaboration
Clean Clothes campaign nice SAC and HIGG index
The Clean Clothes campaign started in 1989 
and now it functions in fifteen European countries. It is run by various organisations and trade 
unions and the head office is located in Amsterdam. Clean Clothes focuses on improving working conditions in the global fashion industry. It 
also collates distributes a lot of information on 
sustainable and responsible consumption. Clean 
Clothes campaigns have been critical and have 
shed light on many problematic issues in the 
global fashion industry. They have also asked 
many big global fashion brands critical questions 
about their manufacturing practices in different 
countries. In Finland the Clean Clothes campaign collaborates closely with the organisation 
Finnwatch, which disseminates a lot of knowledge about garments sold to Finnish consumers. 
(Clean Clothes, Finnwatch.)
NICE (Nordic Initiative Clean and Ethical) 
is a joint commitment from the Nordic fashion industry, which aims to be at the forefront 
regarding social and environmental issues. The 
Nordic Fashion Association began the NICE 
project in 2009, which is directed at manufacturers for clean and ethical fashion, but it also 
provides new information for consumers on 
how to lower the environmental impact of garments by avoiding over-washing, tumble-drying 
and ironing. The Association also suggests good 
maintenance and repair of garments to prolong 
the use time of clothing. (NICE.)
The Sustainable Apparel Coalition (SAC) started 
in 2009 when Patagonia was helping Walmart to 
create an assessment tool for its supply chain. 
In the same year Walmart and Patagonia invited 
twelve CEOs from the apparel industry to start 
the SAC. Today all leading apparel and footwear 
companies are included in the SAC, e.g. Adidas, Levi 
Strauss & Co, Marks and Spencer, and Nordstrom. 
The Coalition seeks to lead the industry toward a 
shared vision of sustainability. Through open collaboration the aim is to construct a common 
approach for measuring and evaluating apparel 
and footwear products’ sustainability through 
technological innovations and create priorities 
for action.
The Coalition’s vision is an apparel and footwear industry that produces no unnecessary 
environmental harm and has a positive impact on 
the people and communities associated with its 
activities. The coalition is self-initiated and today 
it represents nearly one-third of the global market share for apparel and footwear. Furthermore 
it collaborates with different research institutions and universities to produce new knowledge 
for the fashion field. 
The SAC has launched an open source web 
tool called Material Sustainability Index (MSI), 
an interactive platform that allows anyone to 
submit new data into the system (SAC and 
c ollaboration 163
MSI). MSI is included in the Higg Index, which 
compiles environmental and social criteria for 
footwear and apparel industries, based on current 
and future European regulation. The Higg Index 
accords 50% of the evaluation score to the material and 50% to the actual manufacturing facilities. This is done to make sure that the sustainability consideration goes beyond material selection 
alone. The Higg Index is still under development, 
and the future plan is to include product category 
rules for performance metrics in the system. (SAC
and HIGG index.) 
References
Online references
Clean clothes. http://www.cleanclothes.org/ 
Finnwatch. http://www.finnwatch.org/)
NICE. http://nordicfashionassociation.com/nice
SAC. www.apparelcoalition.org/msi/)
SAC and HIGG index. http://www.apparelcoalition.org/higgindex/
SAC and MSI. http://www.apparelcoalition.org/msi
The Making of 
a Social Object: 
Collaboration 
between Nike 
and Centre for
Sustainable 
Fashion
Dilys Williams 
Introduction
The Centre for Sustainable Fashion (CSF) is a 
group of researchers, designers and communicators, brought together through shared ambitions around the possibility of fashion: a means 
to connect us to each other and with nature, and 
a means to make real our adaptability to time and 
place. It seeks ways for osmosis between human, 
ecological and technological elements to create 
a mixture that makes for better balance and a life 
well lived, as applied through fashion’s personal 
and collective practices.
The centre’s work is situated in the cross-referencing of research projects (often working with 
others outside of fashion), the development of 
innovative commercial practices (with large and 
small businesses), and the teaching and learning 
of design-for-sustainability (with undergraduate, 
postgraduate and PhD students). We seek ways 
and places to connect and be adaptable as individuals, evolving a unique sense of who we are in 
the world, as communities, whether location or 
interest based, and in our governance and political identities and actions. For this reason, we find 
ourselves sometimes in the House of Lords, at 
other times in remote villages, and always looking for space to be reflexive in our work. 
Sustainability can be distinguished by its multidimensional, nonconformist, not readily acceptable 
range of change processes and practices. It can lead 
us to consider fundamental qualities and characteristics of life and challenge our current habits and 
practices in their respect. It can question us as individuals, communities and organisations and can 
seek in us the qualities of imagination, interaction 
and sensitivity, along with practical skills of creation 
and communication. Sustainability is about who we 
are and what we do and make. This framing means a 
radical shift in how we experience life, quite different from many of the more easily palatable forms 
of sustainability within current practices, where 
efficiencies in existing systems form the visible 
changes that take place.
Designers are well placed to explore these 
questions and habits, especially when placed in 
the cross-frame of research, education and current practice. What might be deemed risk in one 
area can become experimentation opportunity in 
another. Just such a stretching was tested when 
Nike’s Sustainable Business Innovation team approached us with a question, charged with possibility, whilst challenged by current infrastructures of global business. 
166 c ollaboration
How can we decouple 
success from the 
degradation of nature? 
This question has enabled a bringing together of 
carefully collected data, seven years of meticulous work by a dedicated team at Nike with the 
conditions for open and cooperative innovation, 
and a methodology developed through a number 
of iterations at the Centre for Sustainable Fashion. The data counts materials according to their 
chemical, energy, water, land and waste dimensions; the methodology framework encourages 
empathic connection between people as an ideation process in fashion design. The conduit, the 
creation of an iOS app, was developed through 
cooperative processes and practices of artefact 
creation using the data as a means to push boundaries of design through sustainability thinking. The 
outcomes include a first iteration of this app, ready 
for others to contribute to its evolution, a social object that enables an informed discourse for designers across a broad contemporary landscape.
Over the past few decades, this landscape 
has changed quite dramatically, challenging 
some of the most established facets of our human lives, our societies, and our economies. Our 
perceptions of time and space, material goods 
and their ownership, governance and control, 
teaching and learning, and even our perceptions 
of ourselves in the world have changed. But the 
facets of humanity that have not changed are those 
at the core of our existence, our interconnectedness with each other and with nature. Our inherent wish is to cherish and be cherished and to 
be accepted for who we are and to learn who we 
might be. This is the constant and change that 
motivates us to continue to evolve, discover and 
learn. Our minds and our bodies, however, have 
not evolved at the speed at which our technology 
has opened up opportunity. Might we be in a flux 
state, enabled by new possibility yet not refining 
the ways in which the inflow of technology can 
create equilibrium in our creative and sustainable 
outputs? This basic premise of systems thinking 
and how we have unbalanced our flows is immediately visible in the fact that the average city 
dweller now uses 60 times more energy each day 
than practically the same body used as a hunter 
gatherer (Thackara 2013). We are changing our 
climate in so many respects, but our ecosystems 
cannot evolve to build in resilience to this new 
era, this current human-related geological state 
of the anthropocene [1] and all that it means to 
our ecological balance.
Design needs to be careful though. It has opened 
up a floodgate for the making and discarding of 
an increasing amount of ‘stuff’. It has been a part 
of the creation of the anthropocene. As Al Gore 
recently noted in addressing a major world business, we are “designing in the dark” (Gore 2013). 
Design can help us to navigate the world 
around us and better engage with its contents 
and its changes, through the relationships as 
well as the artefacts that it can create. 
What might appear to be carefree design excited 
by the bringing together of various elements, often through technology and creating excitement 
in its outcomes, is actually careless, not through 
conscious negligence but through a linear design 
method that does not factor in the value of its 
component parts and is not resourceful in their 
application. This project undertaken by the Centre for Sustainable Fashion with Nike sought to 
explore ways in which informed decisions in design could expand design’s possibility to be both 
creative and sustainable – the ingredients for innovation for the 21st century and beyond. 
[1] Anthropocene can be defined as the period during which human activity has been the dominant influence on climate and 
the environment (Anthropocene Journal, 2013)
c ollaboration 167
Implications of 
design decisions
The coming together of arguably the world’s 
leading sportswear brand, Nike, an organisation 
that is led by innovation and employs over 600 
designers, and the sole research centre focusing 
on sustainability as applied to fashion, CSF, provided us with an opportunity to offer an alternative to the dominant large-scale industry narrative of sustainability in fashion. 
The narrative within large-scale fashion businesses tends to lean heavily on technical problem 
solving, the problem identified as ‘risk’ caused by 
over-reliance on resources that may become less 
stable in supply, waste and pollution produced in 
the creation and discard of their products, and 
the lives and health of their most vital resource, 
people, mainly women. This is hardly surprising; 
businesses are judged by their ability to reduce 
the risks. Society is also judged by this ability – 
the UK certainly exerts an inordinate amount of 
energy in measures to reduce risk. In the workplace, whether hospitals, schools or theatres, 
guidelines make clear what you can and cannot 
do, according to their risk assessment. This has 
developed from real and dreadful situations of 
danger. But despite these guidelines and rules, 
the reality is they are not touching the sides in 
the slip-sliding towards greater climate impacts, 
greater injustice and greater danger. The IPCC
report just published demonstrates that despite 
our efforts, climate change is an increasing problem and its impacts an increasing reality (IPPC
2013). Aside from our ineffectiveness in reducing danger, might this approach also be stifling 
opportunity? The rigid, not easily adaptable 
frameworks of governance, business and education, whilst seeking to protect and stabilise, do 
little to create the conditions needed for creativity and ingenuity to grow and seed change.
Through access to incredible data, knowledge 
and expertise, and by engaging design in making sense of it, this project sought to open up 
new conversations about the materials that 
we choose, the products that we make, and 
the ways in which our work as designers can be 
responsive and make a positive contribution 
to the world around us – surely the premise of 
all good design.
 (See also Dieter Rams’ ten principles of good 
design). The ambition of the project was to engage with data not as a fixed notion of ‘right and 
wrong’, or a notion of it as the leader in design 
decisions, but as a means to engage in a process 
that could be viable and doable in a clearly realisable form, whilst engaging in a longer term 
process of interaction between constituents that 
might change how they work, what they do, and 
what they count. This iterative, informed process of design offers an expansive view, exploring 
questions over seeking answers, and might innovate for sustainability in expected and unexpected ways.
It is not the strongest of the species that survives, 
nor the most intelligent that survives. It is the one 
that is the most adaptable to change. Charles Darwin (1809–1882) 
168 c ollaboration
Cooperation between
data and design 
Objectives and parameters 
for cooperation
The interdependence of data and design informs 
our daily lives, whether it is through the design of 
objects that make data accessible to us, such as 
through the phones that most of us use on a daily 
basis, or the clothes that fit our shapes and movements. Data informs design, whilst without design, 
data is often inaccessible or lacks relevance to us. 
The conditions for the study of this interdependence in the context of the project were set 
up by compiling a team of design, management 
and communication students to participate in 
an immersive design incubator. This was guided 
by principles of sustainability and Education for 
Sustainable Development frameworks (Sterling 
2001; Svanström, Lozano-Garcia & Rowe 2008; 
UN Economic Commission for Europe 2011) 
and research undertaken by the author to date 
(Shared Talent), along with a team from Nike responsible for the collation and communication of 
the Nike Materials Sustainability Index (NMSI), 
a compendium of data that measures key environmental impacts of over 6,000 materials covering Chemistry, Energy and Greenhouse Gas 
Intensity, Water and Land Use Intensity, and 
Physical Waste. 
The model for the project made reference 
to hybrid Problem Based Learning techniques 
(Bessant et al. 2013; Jones et al. 2010; Wiek et 
al. 2011) adapted to suit the parameters of this 
Defining objectives that can contribute to innovation in industry, enhance student experience and create conditions to develop and apply research necessitates a careful balance and 
understanding of the risk levels involved for each 
constituent part. Clear parameters were agreed 
at the outset to embrace:
•	 Shared values in thought leadership in 
industry and education 
•	 Development of a ‘social object’ through 
prototyping of products
•	 Cross-fertilisation of emerging designer 
creativity and ethics with industry wisdom 
and expertise 
•	 Demonstration of the value of cooperation 
as pre-competitive business strategy and 
design method
•	 A means to catalyse the design community 
towards a collective approach to measuring and reducing environmental impacts 
through a holistic process
•	 A sustainability-led and knowledge-based 
approach to design 
•	 Qualitative understanding in response to 
the quantitative data generated through 
the NMSI.
live project. It involved 30 undergraduate students from the London College of Fashion, four 
designers from industry, and a range of Nike 
designers, technologists and leaders in sustainability innovation, working with a lead researcher 
and innovation managers at the Centre for Sustainable Fashion. 
c ollaboration 169
The benchmarks for success were agreed 
along the same premise of informing industry 
practice, teaching and learning methods, and 
research validity. These were based on Education for Sustainable Development benchmarks 
outlined in the UNESCO Five Essential 
Pedagogical Approaches (UNESCO 2009) and 
specific measures for this project:
Futures thinking
Embed a more informed and sustainable 
approach to design practice and education, 
informing policy-making relating to environmental guidelines 
Critical and Creative thinking
Highlight quality, aesthetically relevant, technical and crafted products that illuminate sustainability thinking as a driver for innovation
Participation and Participatory learning
Cooperate towards a discourse of design-forsustainability for application in open-source 
teaching and learning materials
Systemic thinking
Inform discourse towards creation of an ‘app’ 
through recording participants’ explorative, 
analytical and synthetic thinking
Partnerships
Create a social object in the form of an iOS app 
open to the design community.
Through research gathered from participants and 
the wider Nike network, it was possible to draw up 
a list of key sustainability considerations for fashion 
students and businesses. These are by no means an 
exhaustive list but offer insights gathered through 
interviews, online feedback and informal discussion. These include considerations of:
•	 Disruption of ‘habitable life’ due to climate 
change implications (for example severe 
weather extremes and climate refugees)
•	 Cost and availability of resources (including 
oil, land, water, crops)
•	 Critical resource implications (such as the 
Right to Clean Water)
•	 Global policy decision-making relating to 
fashion production and consumption
•	 Global policy decision-making relating to 
climate change and economic and social 
development
•	 Relationships and power imbalances in 
fashion (for instance labour practices and the 
democratisation of accessibility to fashion)
•	 Culture and norms in sustainability and implications for lifestyle and consumption.
The methods and practices of the project included dynamic interaction between student teams, 
working closely with design mentors and Nike 
team guides, facilitated through the cooperative 
framework of the project. This included ‘checkin’ sessions to foster collaboration, through 
defined qualities and characteristics of sustainability mentoring for collaborative skills development, a filtering of ideas through discussion with 
industry experts to define design parameters, 
and techniques for engagement with a prototype 
iOS app. The feedback of the teams back to Nike 
offered an information flow that influenced the 
development of a second prototype app alongside the development of 3D fashion prototypes, 
and the ultimate presentation of process and 
outcomes through face-to-face presentation to 
an industry panel. More details of the narrative 
of the project can also be found at www.sustainablefashion.com. 
170 c ollaboration
Conclusions 
and next steps 
The project evidenced some of the relationships 
of design, including what designers might do collectively through dialogue with each other and 
relationships between qualitative and quantitative design decisions. The outcomes, including an 
open source iOS app MAKING, freely available 
for download, offer possibilities for a narrative 
that can bridge the solutions-based approach of 
many commercial businesses with a more constructivist approach of design thinking and doing 
towards better decision-making. 
In the case of this project, we were able to 
measure impacts of decisions made in terms 
of resource use, energy, waste and emissions, 
alongside the gathering of narratives of challenges and possibilities of a design framework 
based on sustainability values. The aesthetic outcomes were felt by the participants to have been 
in many cases enhanced by the process, whilst 
the short timeframe of the project was seen as 
the greatest barrier to innovation and creativity. 
This in itself can be seen as a major barrier in 
business, driven by speed to market, where time 
taken is an expense on the balance sheet. 
We are however, as stated at the outset, at a 
time when short and longer-term considerations 
are a necessity for us all. If tools such as this app 
and processes such as this explorative cooperative process can innovate for business and 
for sustainability, then we might take this nongeneralisable research as a means for others to 
engage with the app and inform its development 
and further application as part of a dynamic and 
iterative process where sustainability draws parts 
together, rather than separating them. From a 
research perspective, this project has enabled 
my work, as director of CSF, to inform future 
design-for-sustainability practices in industry 
and education. 
The conclusions that I have been able to draw 
from the project include the naming of some 
of the characteristics that might inform future 
work. These include observation of sustainability 
in action as:
•	 An active process, where each player 
participates bringing a visible contribution, 
replacing hierarchy with trusted, interconnecting networks of collaboration
and competition
•	 A synthetic process, where the parts in 
themselves lack meaning until all held 
together 
•	 A self-organising process, when placed 
within a socially cohesive community and 
a larger understood infrastructure
•	 Creating value for those involved and 
for others
•	 Understanding materials, production processes, viability, desirability, and implications of decisions made
•	 Made possible when space is made for 
unexpected outcomes to be developed
•	 A building of trust through experience over 
reliance on certifications and auditing.
As humans, we are critical thinkers; we can question personal, business, ecological, social and 
cultural imperatives in our work, and we can use 
reflexivity to further our “understanding of ourselves and our self-location, our relationships with 
other humans and with the natural world” (Morrell 
& O’Connor 2002, p. 17). 
This ability can be overwhelming at times, and 
we need the tools of design and accessibility to 
data in a digestible and flexible format in order to 
navigate the complexity of our world. The human 
body is evidence of the complexity of nature, yet 
we navigate its complexity as a matter of course. 
Our cities are an example of the human ability 
to construct and navigate complexity, as well as 
to balance flexible and fixed elements. At a time 
when so much is changing, and for designers who 
are constructing for an uncertain world, imagination, ingenuity, improvisation and empathy must 
cooperate with technological opportunity, through 
tools for accessibility and appropriate use. 
c ollab
orati
o
n 171
The MAKING app offers an unprecedented 
opportunity to access data directly relating to 
ecological imperatives in materials that we can 
use in our work. I encourage you to use it and 
inform it, through feedback online to Nike and 
the Sustainable Apparel 
Coalition, with whom 
it is linked. It can be developed and enhanced 
through engaging in a parallel fostering of col
-
laboration and cooperative working practices. 
This might then offer us possibilities not only to 
reduce our un-sustainability, but also to create 
restorative practices in human connection within 
ourselves, with others, and with nature. As you 
might expect, our collaborators at Nike have 
visualised this call to action in engaging ways, 
in their words, reminding us that great things 
can happen when ‘Makers of the World Unite’ 
(Nike 2012). 
Image from Nike x Centre for Sustainable Fashion project 
(Photo: Kerry Dean)
172 c ollab
orati
o
n
Image from Nike x Centre for Sustainable Fashion project (Photo: Kerry Dean)
c ollaboration 173
References
Bessant, S., Bailey, P., Robinson, Z., Bland Tomkinson, C., Tomkinson, R., Ormerod, M. & 
Boast, R. (2013). Problem-Based Learning: A Case Study of Sustainability Education Higher Education 
Academy. A toolkit for university educators.
Jones, P., Selby, D. & Sterling, S. (2010). Sustainability Education: Perspectives and Practice across 
Higher Education. London: Earthscan.
Morrel, A., O’Sullivan, E. & O’Connor, M. (eds.) (2002). Expanding the Boundaries of
Transformative Learning: Essays on Theory and Praxis. Hampshire, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sterling, S. 2001. Sustainable Education Re-visioning Learning and Change. Schumacher Briefings. 
Bristol: Schumacher Society.
Svanström, M., Lozano-Garcia, F.J., & Rowe, D. (2008). Learning outcomes for sustainable development in higher education. In: International Journal of Sustainability. Vol. 9:3, pp. 339–351.
UNESCO. (2009). Education for Sustainable Development; United Nations Decade (2005–2014). 
Paris: UNESCO. 
Wiek, A., Withycombe, L. & Redman, C. L. (2011). Key Competencies in Sustainability: A Reference Framework for Academic Program Development. Sustainability Science. Vol. 6, pp. 203–218.
Online references
Anthropocene Journal. 2013. Anthropocene Definitions. http://anthropocenejournal.
com/2013/05/27/anthropocene-definitions/ Published May 2013.
Darwin, C. http://thinkexist.com/quotation/it_is_not_the_strongest_of_the_species_that/7533.html 
IPPC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2013). Climate Change 2013: The Physical 
Science Basis. (Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg1/#.UrLMxZEQU6Y 
Nike (2012). Makers of the World Unite. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tmmPlISETJg 
(accessed 3 December 2013). 
Nike. Nike Materials Sustainability Index. http://www.nikeresponsibility.com/infographics/materials/
index.html 
Rams, D. Ten principles for good design. https://www.vitsoe.com/gb/about/good-design 
Conferences and Talks
Thackara, J. The Design Museum And Puma Annual Sustainable Design Lecture. 8 November 2013. 
London, UK.
Gore, A. Marks and Spencer Plan A Conference 13 June 2012. London, UK.
Economic Commission for Europe. Learning for the future: Competences in Education for Sustainable Development. Committee on Environmental Policy: United Nations Economic Commission for 
Europe Steering Committee on Education for Sustainable Development. Sixth meeting, Geneva, 7 and 
8 April 2011.
Projects
Shared Talent http://www.sustainable-fashion.com/projects/shared-talent/ and http://www.sharedtalentindia.co.uk 
Nike x Centre for Sustainable Fashion x London College of Fashion “Mobilize Makers”
http://www.sustainable-fashion.com/projects/nike/ and 
http://www.sustainable-fashion.com/resources/publications/ 8 Nike project publications
Open 
Participatory
Designing for
an Alternative 
Fashion Economy
Anja-Lisa Hirscher & Alastair Fuad-Luke
The fashion industry is deeply embedded within 
the construct of the global economy. As such it 
is vulnerable to disruptions, such as economic recession, and is also struggling to respond to sustainability imperatives (Rissanen & Gwilt 2011; 
Fletcher & Grose 2012). Given these contingent 
realities it seems appropriate to ask if there are 
other possible economic visions for fashion and 
clothing and what role design(-ing) might play 
in developing this alternative economy/ies. With 
this chapter the authors aim to explore new 
models applying open and participatory fashion 
design practices that challenge the predominant 
roles and relationships between and among Designer, Producer and Consumer (DPC). This approach asks for a radical change, new thinking and 
the willingness to experiment in order to look at 
creating an ‘alternative fashion economy’ where 
exchanges can be monetary and non-monetary 
(time, knowledge, skills, social conviviality, etc.), 
and where the consumer is active not passive. 
Notions of ‘alternative economies’ and participation in clothing and fashion design help set the 
wider context of these investigations. Experimentation in this field focused on applying business 
tools such as the ‘value proposition’, inspired by 
the ‘Business Model Canvas’ (Osterwalder & 
Pigneur 2010), and combining these with design 
research-through-practice and design educational projects. The authors encouraged professionals and Masters design students to create 
new value propositions based upon participation 
and openness among the Designer, Producer 
and Consumer (DPC). These ‘open design’ value 
propositions were analysed by looking at the 
DPC relationships and new third party actors, in 
order to generate a diagrammatic model of the 
system of exchanges. New means of designing 
with and for the consumer are also presented 
through a case study called Make{able}, which 
illustrates the implementation of participatory 
design methods and halfway products. 
Are designers and consumers ready for 
these changes, to encourage a shift in mindset 
in the fashion industry? Activation of consumers to become participants in fashion and clothes 
Introduction
making will shift them from passive consumers 
towards active makers, but it also sets up new 
opportunities for designers, producers and new 
actors. Participatory design, open design, customisation, the emerging maker culture, do-ityourself (DIY) and do-it-together (DIT) are all 
approaches that can potentially replace the need 
to consume with what Jonathan Chapman calls 
“more creative personal and social experiences” 
(Chapman 2013). Involving consumers in designing and making (producing) involves reflection on how we consume, a form of ‘self-reflexive 
consumption’ (Heiskanen & Pantzar 1997). This 
involvement provides nourishing ‘rituals of delay’ 
to slow our metabolism of consumption and can 
be seen as an expression of slow activism (FuadLuke 2010, p.136). More importantly, perhaps, 
is that the disturbance of current DPC relationships can contribute to new visions of enterprise 
and alternative modes of exchange.
176 c ollaboration
Participatory clothing 
design to challenge 
overproduction and 
overconsumption
In the current economic system, the fashion industry plays an important role – driven by ever 
faster changing production and consumption cycles. This system is complex, with many individuals involved in raw material harvesting, spinning, 
dyeing, weaving, cutting, sewing and global transportation, and there is potential for exploitation of 
humans and nature. It is obvious that this system, 
which looks difficult to sustain in the longer run, 
has to change. Currently easy disposal of cheap 
and low quality goods is encouraged, resulting in a 
desire to consume more. Burns (2010) describes 
this issue as planned and aesthetic obsolescence. 
It refers to product design aiming for short-term 
satisfaction, which leads to the disposal of perfectly functioning goods due to a loss of emotional 
attachment. This results in a growing amount of 
clothing and textile waste and inefficient resource 
use. Fletcher and Grose (2012) state that the 
recycling of textile waste and more eco-efficient 
production alone do not solve the problem of an 
unsustainable industry, because the problem of 
overconsumption is not addressed at its core – it 
does not question the amount of apparel consumed. For true change, design has to focus on 
sustainable lifestyles instead of ‘sustainable’ products
(Rissanen 2011, p.127). 
Enabling consumers to change their behaviour 
towards more sustainable lifestyles without reducing their current levels of personal well-being and happiness is a challenge for designers to 
explore. New ways of designing, producing and 
consuming goods, including the creation of new 
relationships among the involved stakeholders, 
can enable more active consumers (Fuad-Luke 
2010, pp. 145–148). For instance, participation in the design process can aim for long-term 
satisfaction with products through a deeper understanding of and value-feeling for the objects 
created. With fashion activism, a form of political 
activism and the participatory approach to empower 
the consumer with the tools, information and knowledge to become an active and independent individual
(Hirscher 2013, p.26), designers are able to offer 
alternative methods and practices, while encouraging more sustainable consumption patterns. 
To change lifestyles towards more sustainable 
behaviour, we need to address the core of consumption, the desire to consume more. Consumers need to be enabled by designers to move from 
passive recipient to active participant to gain the 
ability and understanding of how things are produced and consumed. 
Fletcher and Grose (2012) discuss the opportunity created when participatory design 
fosters the collaborative making process and 
thus enables a relocation of the roles designer 
versus consumer. Knowledge exchange thereby 
takes place and a deeper understanding of the 
products as well as the user need can be better 
assured. Stories of making can be captured signalling an emotional bonding with the product, 
and the pieces can be worn as a sign of personal 
achievement (Fletcher & Grose, 2012).
Participatory design (Bjögvinsson, Ehn & 
Hillgren 2012) and open design (Van Abel et al. 
2010) have been explored in fashion and clothing design, especially in the field of research 
(Fletcher & Grose 2012). However, most of 
these projects have not yet resulted in a selfsustaining market solution. Moreover, most of 
the current sustainable fashion design approaches do not question the current system radically 
enough. They seem reluctant to foster a real 
change in the current relationships within the 
existing system of actors and tend to still see the 
consumer as a passive recipient. 
c ollaboration 177
The rise of 
‘Alternative Economies’ 
Four decades ago the adjectives ‘small’ and 
‘beautiful’ were co-opted by the economist E.F. 
Schumacher in the 1970s to refer to ‘economics as if people mattered’ (Schumacher 1975). 
Schumacher’s core argument was that mass production and economic growth in itself does not 
facilitate an equitable distribution of economic 
and other beneficial exchanges; what is required 
is a nobler vision of economics inspired by cooperation, education and a desire to elevate people. 
By the mid-1980s there was a buoyant discourse 
about a ‘new economics’, the Living Economy, 
challenging the shift in macroeconomics towards 
the global economy (Ekins 1986). Alternative 
economic summits to the G8, such as The Other 
Economic Summit (TOES) conferences, gave 
birth to new organisations such as the UK-based 
New Economics Foundation (NEF) (New Economics Foundation 2013). Yet this buoyant alternative discourse faded as the 1990s heralded 
the expansion of the global economy, aided and 
promoted by the rapid spread of Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICT), access to 
the internet, and access to cheap international 
travel. Visions of an eco-, green and/or bioeconomy gained some traction in the imagination of the public, governments and business 
(Brown 2001) but they were, largely, linked to 
eco-technology growth strategies and new jobs 
in these emerging markets. It was the global 
economic crisis in 2008 that really revived the 
‘alternative economies’ debate, including the 
emergence of the ‘no growth’ economy (Jackson 
2009) and décroissance or de-growth economy 
(Latouche 2011). Other approaches explored alternative modes of exchange through the sharing economy (Gold 2004), which has morphed 
through the ubiquity of the presence of the internet into ‘collaborative consumption’ (Botsman & Rogers 2011), a collaborative economy.
Today, the alternative economies debate is vibrant and the adjectives to describe the economy 
have an echo of Schumacher’s concepts of putting people firmly in the centre of the exchanges 
rather than the default of purely monetary exchanges (Figure 1). Trading moves beyond money to consider the exchange of time, gifts, skills 
and knowledge. Some of these exchanges can be 
considered as design, designs and designing. In 
these notions of shared or alternative exchanges 
it is not just professional designers who are doing 
the designing but professional amateurs, amateur 
and citizen designers and/or other professionals. 
These alternative visions of economy thus seem 
to be opening up design(-ing). 
c ollaboration
178 c ollaboration
Figure 1. Traditional and Neoliberal, Transitional and Alternative Economies
Type of Exchange:
M onetary, Mixed, N on-Monetary
Geo-Political
Black (untaxed, 
illegal)
Dual
Global
Market
Mixed
National
Open
Palace
Planned
Political 
Regional
Social
Social Market
Stable
State directed
Sectorial
Creative
Design
Digital
Knowledge
Learning
Information
Service
Environmental
BioEcoGreen
Clean-tech
Renewable
Energy
Conceptual
Emerging
Local
Post-consumer
Post-industrial
Sustainable
Alternative
exchange
Gift
Grey (informal)
Money free
Open Source
Time based
Traditional & Neo-Liberal Economies
Alternative Economies
Transitional Economies Open design is informed by the history of the open 
source movement, the sharing of digital code, either for software or hardware, with its origins in 
the late 1960s and early 1970s. Today, the open 
source movement embraces open digital code, 
open data, open knowledge, open government/
governance and much more (Open Knowledge 
Foundation 2013). Marleen Stikker of the Waag 
Foundation, in the Netherlands, notes that, “Open 
design is seen as part of a growing possibilitarian 
movement… it gives us all the instruments to become the one-man factory” (Stikker 2010). Open 
design finds a multiplicity of definitions, depending 
upon the exact disciplinary or polydisciplinary lens 
the writer is applying (Van Abel et al. 2010), but 
there is a consensus that open design implies others are able to copy, modify and use the ‘design’. 
Some open designers do not apply restrictions to 
the application of their work other than insisting 
that it remains in the public domain and cannot 
be commercially exploited. Their view echoes the 
‘Copyleft’ attitudes from the 1970s. Others might 
open the work to varying degrees according to 
the Creative Commons or similar licences with 
which they release their work. When open design 
is considered as an option, then, alongside traditional copyright and other Intellectual Property 
(IP)/ Rights (IPR) practices, it actually expands 
how designers permit their work to enter society. 
Open design offers new 
value exchanges and 
creates new relationships 
c ollaboration 179
The authors have created the ‘Open-o-meter’ to 
encourage designers to think strategically about 
IP options and pricing options, including ‘free of 
charge’ (Figure 2). Designers should also think 
about which elements of the design have the potential to be free and which elements are chargeable, whether the design is a recipe/instruction 
and/or is ‘downloadable’ or whether it is a product 
or service. It is in the ‘free of charge’ elements in 
which non-monetary exchanges can take place.
To explore further business model opportunities, implementing open design thinking, the authors worked in August 2013 with the new intake 
of Masters students to the Department of Design, 
Aalto ARTS (School of Arts, Design and Architecture, Aalto University, Helsinki, Finland). The 
students were asked to generate new ‘value propositions’, as specified in the Business Model Canvas 
(Osterwalder & Pigneur 2010). A ‘value proposition’ looks at a product, service or experience that 
meets a need, creates satisfaction and generates 
value for the consumer (Figure 3). To create this 
proposition it is necessary to consider the type 
of customers being targeted, the benefits for the 
customers, what daily key activities and resources 
are required, and what key partners are necessary 
to work with to deliver the proposition. Finally, 
consideration must be given to the cost structure 
and profits.
ready-to-buy product 
with an open IP, e.g. ready 
made garment, which includes 
patterns to copy/modify
product (e.g. pattern...) 
is free and can be 
copied, modified 
and distributed
product (e.g. pattern...) 
is free but does not 
allow to be copied
= IP protected
ready-to-buy product 
with protected IP
= ready made garment 
recipes/
instructions 
© ©
ready made
product
free
full price
negotiated
price
closed
(cold)
open
(hot)
Figure 2. The Open-o-meter and pricing options 
180 c ollaboration
Figure 3. A modified value 
proposition diagram (after 
Osterwalder & Pigneur, 
2010) used by the students, 
Aalto ARTS
Figure 4. Value Proposition: Wooden World – Amanda Österlin La Mont, Creative Sustainability Master student, 
Aalto ARTS 
Four weeks before the eight-day intensive module began, the students received a booklet giving 
step-by-step guidance to help them build their 
open design value propositions (Pekkola, Hirscher 
& Fuad-Luke 2013). During the module, entitled 
Joint Masters Introduction, students from different design disciplines worked in multi-disciplinary 
teams to create open design projects, culminating 
in the Market of Open Experiments launched on 
30 August 2013 in Karhupuisto square in the Helsinki neighbourhood of Kallio (Market of Open Experiments 2013). While working in these teams they 
developed their own individual value propositions. 
Of the 122 students, 111 submitted a value proposition. Twenty-nine of these value propositions were 
assessed by the authors as having created propositions that were genuinely ‘open’. Of these, ten 
propositions created a shared resource/platform/
network, six focused on services, five on artefacts, 
and six on downloadable patterns. An example 
value proposition, Wooden World, a platform for 
sharing designs using wood, is given in Figure 4. 
These propositions were analysed to examine exchanges that took place among Designers, Producers and Consumers (DPC) and any new actors 
such as third party agents or organisations. 
c ollaboration 181
In consumer markets of traditional and neoliberal economies the main exchange is financial, 
cash or credit through a third party or retailer, 
i.e. it is a monetary exchange (Figure 5). In the 
‘market’ created by the students’ open design 
value propositions there are monetary exchanges 
but also a diverse range of other exchanges ‘free 
of charge’, i.e. non-monetary exchanges (Figure 6). These non-monetary exchanges included 
donation of production waste from producers; 
ideas, skills and knowledge from the designers; 
ideas, skills and knowledge from the consumers; 
and the provision of facilitation, tools, knowledge 
exchange and networking by third party organisations. Furthermore, the value propositions included exchanges from consumer to consumer 
that involved ideas, knowledge and skills – this 
can be seen as Do-It-Yourself (DIY) and DoIt-Together (DIT) production and consumption. 
Modelling new relationships among Designer, Producer and Consumer (DPC) 
Figure 5. Monetary exchanges in the traditional consumer market among DPC
€€€
Monetary exchange 
& cash flow
Retailer
producer
raw 
material
supplier
Energy &
Utilities
consumer
designer
Figure 6. Monetary and non-monetary exchanges in the ‘open design’ consumer market among DPC and third parties
Fields of Activity
€€€
- free knowledge/ knowledge exchange
- waste materials
- faciliation
- networking
- tools
Other exchanges, 
free of charge
Monetary exchange 
& cash flow
DIY & DIT
production & 
consumption
system 
new
Actors
tools, services, 
networks,
shop
producer
/supplier
consumer
designer
- pay for knowledge
- suppliers, tools, 
patterns, products, 
webspace
182 c ollaboration
New 
Actors
producer
/ supplier consumer
consumer 
to Consumer
DIY & DIT
production & 
consumption
system 
Design, 
Production
& Consumption
with new actors
designer
Fields of
Activity
DIY & DIT Production
Open Production 
& Consumption
Government
private
companies
sponsors
funders
other 
professionals
???
Satellite organisations
Figure 7. Diagrammatic model for exploring alternative DPC relationships and system of exchanges based upon ‘open design’ 
value propositions
New monetary exchanges also occurred within 
the DPC model and the DIY/DIT system. Finally, 
other exchanges (monetary and non-monetary) 
were also noted with ‘satellite’ organisations that 
were present in the students’ value propositions. 
Analysing all the value propositions led to a diagrammatic representation of an extended DPC
model within which a system of new exchanges can 
occur, including a consumer to consumer (C2C) 
design and production cycle based on DIY (Do-ItYourself) and DIT (Do-It-Together) (Figure 7). 
c ollaboration 183
Sharing, personalisation, customisation, co-designing with customers, halfway or achievement 
products and the personalisation of products 
during the use-phase are all viable strategies for 
extending the product-user relationship and, 
hence, the life span of the product (Mugge et 
al. 2005). Person-product attachment represents the emotional bonding experienced between a product and its owner (Schifferstein & 
Zwartkruis-Pelgrim 2008). Design can aim to 
strengthen this attachment and thus potentially 
slow down and reduce the disposal of products 
(Chapman 2009). For this reason, a more valued person-product attachment can result in 
positive behaviour change due to changed habits 
and attitude (Cooper 2005). It can also reduce 
the fast throughput of resources, due to sustained affection ensuring longevity in product life. 
Design for person-product attachment is 
challenging, as it concerns personal and emotional values, habits and the attitude of every individual. The consumer’s behaviour is influenced 
by the quickly changing meaning of products and 
the consumption models in the current society 
(Niinimäki 2011). Therefore a deep understanding of the consumer’s use, satisfaction and disposal behaviour is essential. Designers have to 
start designing with the user instead of for them, 
to gain a better sense of what they are looking 
No one is only a consumer; every act of consumption requires a certain degree of participation (Vezzoli & Manzini 2008, p.30). Recognising this relationship, Vezzoli and Manzini discuss 
opportunities to empower consumers and communities with design tools that initiate more collaboration and involvement (Vezzoli & Manzini 
2008, p.26). These ‘enabling solutions’ invite 
the consumer to participate in the design process whilst respecting their motivation, willingness and capability (ibid.). 
This approach relates to the ideology of 
participatory design. Participatory design has 
its roots in the early 1970s in Scandinavia – 
where workers were enabled to become part of 
a joint decision-making process on the design of 
their workspaces (Bjögvinsson, Ehn & Hillgren 
2012). It aims to empower people to influence 
products, services and environments they use 
and work with (Mattelmäki & Sleeswijk Visser 
2011). There is a close link to the dimension of 
civic political activity, as it aims, similar to some 
co-designing methodologies, to reduce topdown hierarchies and therefore tackles the current fashion system (von Busch 2008). Both 
design methods aim for new perspectives in the 
current economic system through greater democracy, improved empowerment and less domination (Fletcher & Grose 2012, p. 144). 
Valued Person-Product 
Attachment to tackle 
overconsumption
A special case in
Participatory Design: 
Halfway products 
for. The more the user can engage with a product 
the tighter the bonding can grow through joint 
experiences captured in that product (Mugge 
et al. 2005). Especially personalised and handmade products can gain special value, as they 
represent a strong human-human relationship 
(Schifferstein & Zwartkruis-Pelgrim 2008). 
Chapman states that active user participation in 
the design and production process can engender 
a deeper personal meaning of the object for the 
user (Chapman 2009, pp. 137–162). Participatory design processes, including halfway products, play an important role here, as they offer 
the consumer active involvement in the design 
and making phase. These methods offer collaborative decision-making power and foster new 
relationships between and among designer, 
producer and consumer. 
184 c ollaboration
The number of research projects and real-life examples related to open- and participatory fashion 
design is growing. Rosie Martin (2012), for example, with ‘diy-couture’, offers an easy-to-make 
collection that does not require patterns at all and 
is therefore easy to apply and modify, even for 
sewing beginners. ‘Openwear collaborative clothing’ provides free patterns with instructions online 
(Openwear 2010). The project was initially based 
on a research fund but is now run as an open exchange platform for designers and makers. Fashion Hackers from Germany invites their followers 
on Facebook to contribute ideas, sketches and 
votes on creations for the next season; these will 
then be interpreted and made into patterns to be 
downloaded for a small price and made by the users 
(Schmuckermeier 2013). DIY or ‘pre-cut’ assembly kits, as provided for example by CUT Magazine 
(CUT 2013), PaulMalina (PaulMalina 2013) or the 
Makerist (Makerist 2013), are according to Mugge 
et al. (2005) an opportunity to create emotional 
product bonding through product personalisation. 
The authors claim that the toolkits offer a satisfactory balance between the products’ self-expressive 
value and the complexity of the personalisation process (Mugge et al. 2005, p. 474). Hacking and 
redesigning existing garments while providing instructions, as in Otto von Busch’s “recyclopedia”, 
a collection of downloadable sewing ‘cookbooks’, 
represent more radical approaches allowing open 
participation for consumers (von Busch 2008). Participatory design applied in sewing events/workshops 
or makerspaces – like Nadelwald (Nadelwald 2013) 
in Berlin – are currently among the most common 
applications of participatory design in fashion. They 
offer opportunities without which a single user may 
be restricted: sewing machines, patterns, material 
and advice can all be found in one space and used 
for a certain fee. In 2009 Kate Fletcher initiated the 
‘Local Wisdom’ project, which centres round ‘exploring the craft of use’ (Local Wisdom 2013). It celebrates and encourages users’ skills by encouraging 
learning from each other (Fletcher & Grose 2012). 
A special case in participatory design is the 
halfway approach. A half-way product is designed as 
unfinished by intention (Hirscher 2013 a); it thereby 
leaves the end-user an open space to customise and 
finalise the piece (Fuad-Luke 2009, p. 95). The 
main aspect is the non-functionality of the item 
without the user’s input to finish it (Hirscher 2013 
a). Halfway products enable the opportunity to 
shape and influence the nature of the narrative experience by the very nature of interaction that occurs between two parties...(Chapman 2005, p.128). Thereby the user becomes an active part in designing and 
making the product and can thus form its story. 
Her/his position changes from a passive recipient 
ready-made
User/Maker
Beginner Experienced
Product
Halfway
Product
Halfway
Product
self-made
meet best
Figure 8. Design opportunities for halfway products (Hirscher 2013 b)
c ollaboration 185
Make{able} is an open collaboration among different designers, aiming to enable and empower 
the user to participate in designing their own 
clothes. Participatory sewing workshops with 
halfway products build the basis of the project 
case study. The designers enable the consumer 
to join with and influence the design process. 
The workshops aim for a joyful atmosphere and a 
collaborative making experience. These designing 
and making experiences are captured as memories in the garment, thereby creating emotional 
attachment. Through the making process the 
consumer can gain a greater understanding of 
garment construction and new skills. Make{able} 
workshops offer consumers as well as designers 
an open platform to experiment and learn from 
each other. 
In monthly workshops, facilitated in different 
locations around the greater Helsinki area, users and 
designers are invited to learn and design together to 
create unique and more meaningful garments. The 
project’s timeline is 1.5 years and ongoing, with 
twelve workshops facilitated until now and more 
than 140 participants and fashion designers 
contributing. Figure 8 illustrates Make{able}’s 
current location and relationships as a nonprofit organisation, as well as possible future 
relationships, based on feedback gathered from 
designers and participants. It is currently based 
A case study: Make{able} – 
Participatory sewing 
workshops with 
halfway products 
on voluntary work of the designers and material 
donations of post-production waste, plus grant 
funding from the EU (Youth in Action).
This project explores tools for activism. It concurrently explores the acceptance and interest of 
consumers and designers in this new and more 
radical alternative to ‘ready-to-wear’ fashion. 
The researchers’ own observations as well as 
those of other designers during the workshops 
provided the basis for later reflection upon the 
general feelings, emotions, situation, appreciation 
and presence of the facilitators and participants. 
Consumer perspective
Participants filled out prepared questionnaires or 
were in conversation with the facilitators. Designing and making clothes is not a step everyone will 
easily take by themselves. Participatory design and 
the concept of halfway designs represent a design 
opportunity to ease this critical entry step. As one 
of the participants confirmed, Now I dare to start; 
sewing patterns look so difficult. Participants agreed 
that the aspect of a garment half-ready was appreciated, as it made it easier to accomplish results within 
a shorter time. However it still offered the chance to 
design the piece following their own vision. According to one participant, It was easier than I thought; 
good instructions made it really fun! (Figure 9)
towards an active participant (Hirscher & Niinimäki 
2013). With halfway products, designers can make 
it easy for the user to get involved (Hirscher 2013 
a), as results can be achieved with less time and 
basic skills. ‘Halfway’ can be anywhere in-between 
the materials, e.g. textiles, and the ready product 
(Figure 8). The challenge is to overcome restricting factors for the consumer such as time, skills 
and facilities and meet the people where they are 
likely to get involved. A successful halfway product 
is one that enables the maker/user to gain satisfaction with a design choice by finishing it according 
to personal preferences but does not discourage 
the user with overly difficult processes. In the best 
case, knowledge can be generated while producing. 
These challenges can be addressed by the designer 
by repositioning her/his role to become a facilitator, communicator or ‘new actor’, offering services 
and alternative forms of exchange: time, knowledge and skills. 
186 c ollaboration
Figure 9. Make{able} workshop with Halfway Shorts, July 2013 (Photo: Daniel Morales)
The majority of participants agreed that they 
gained a feeling of happiness and satisfaction 
during the making process or afterwards, seeing 
the results achieved. They were proud to be able 
to create something wearable by themselves. Many 
of the participants have joined the workshops repeatedly, as they appreciate the creative working 
environment, the learning process and the joyful 
atmosphere of collective making. (Figure 10)
The majority of the participants agreed that 
their attitude has changed and they want to 
learn more about clothes making and production. However it cannot be assured whether their 
overall consumption of garments has reduced or 
if the made garments maintain a stronger value 
than bought fashion or clothing. This needs to 
be evaluated over a longer period of time. A true 
change of behaviour that involves learning new 
habits and new sustainability-oriented preferences would need more time as well as further 
data collection.
Designer perspective
It is a truly challenging task to design products 
that gain emotional value for another person. The 
greatest challenge for the designer is to involve 
the user in the earliest stages and offer them as 
much freedom in designing as possible. 
c ollaboration 187
For a more versatile perspective, the authors 
gathered feedback from facilitating designers 
in the Make{able} case study. The designers observed that there was high interest in designing 
and making among the consumers/participants. 
They obviously appreciate the opportunity to 
learn and make things in an inspiring environment. One designer stated, I was surprised that 
beginners were so enthusiastic and brave, sitting for 
the first time in front of the sewing machine.
Regarding the question whether the designers felt that their role and/or understanding of 
being a designer had changed while working together with the consumer, all designers agreed. 
The task of designing shifts from designing for 
the consumer towards designing with the consumer by becoming an adviser/ facilitator and by 
conceptualising the outcome together. Designers also agreed that it is a very satisfying experience to be helping, teaching and advising while 
seeing people enjoy and work together. The work 
of the designer goes beyond the design and prototyping process of traditional fashion designing. 
Design work in a participatory setting requires 
a variety of skills: good design skills to offer 
halfway products that even sewing beginners 
are able to make, make{able}, but good listening skills are also required as well as social and 
facilitation skills. The ‘design-part’ shifts from 
Figure 10. Results of Make{able} workshop – 
Tunic and Shorts (Photo: Anja-Lisa Hirscher)
only designing the product towards three main 
stages, before, during and after a participatory 
workshop. This point is well articulated in the following quote by Tjasa Avsec, one of Make{able}’s 
regular fashion designers: 
Before the workshop you have to design simple 
products which can be sewn by total beginners in a 
few hours, but are still effective, appealing and interesting. That is the design part, which importantly 
affects the result of the workshop as it gives the 
framework and enables the success. 
During the workshop, your role changes from being a designer to being an adviser. You suggest the 
best possible way on making the customer’s idea 
188 c ollaboration
c ollaboration 189
Interest in the Make{able}workshops is growing. 
Everyone agreed that they enjoyed the workshop 
setting and appreciate regular workshops or similar 
sewing opportunities. The number of participants 
is constantly increasing, which reflects the consumer’s appreciation of alternatives to mainstream 
‘ready-to-wear’ fashion. However, it seems that 
the industry, designers and producers are less enthusiastic. How can the producer be involved in 
these participatory approaches? Could they for 
instance offer halfway products in smaller scale 
production? Or is it the task of the designers to 
slip into the role of the ‘new actor’ to create the 
relationship between consumer and producer 
through projects like Make{able}? Can designers 
then ask for a participation fee and offer a new 
shopping experience instead of a ready product? 
(See Figure 2.)
So far, this case study is mainly driven by the 
voluntary work of the designers. To encourage more 
sustaining funding alternatives, the designers gave 
some suggestions for improvements, which are illustrated in orange in the diagrammatic model 
of the exchange system (Figure 12). The sysAnalysis & 
Future scenarios 
tem map shows opportunities for alternative 
exchange forms like patterns for a small fee, 
sales of halfway products in cooperation with a 
producer, a small participation fee for the workshops, or support by local municipalities in exchange for providing knowledge and skill empowerment to their citizens.
Make{able} does definitively illustrate that 
there is a growing interest among consumers for 
such alternatives; however there needs to be the 
possibility to scale up, to reach a broader audience and motivate consumers as well as designers and producers to start thinking differently. To 
shift from a niche market towards more common 
practice, producers need to be involved to offer 
alternative, local and smaller-scale production 
systems. To reach a broader audience a greater 
variety of concepts has to explored and applied. 
Participatory workshops are only reaching a certain audience – who is ready to invest time and 
creativity in making their own things. Making 
offers experience and a feeling of satisfaction 
through achievement, a different kind of satisfaction than that resulting from a quick purchase. 
Figure 11. Make{able} Workshop: Designers and users conceptualising together (Photo: Daniel Morales)
come true, based on your designer’s and maker’s 
experiences. I think it is important to listen to the 
consumer and encourage feeling of success. That is: 
they themselves designed and produced the product, you have only guided them on their way. 
After the workshop it seems like it doesn’t matter 
who spends hours on brainstorming and designing 
the concept of the product and the basic shape; it 
is the customers' experience which matters. It is a 
contradicting observation, as on the other hand, 
the customers maybe value the designer’s work 
more by understanding the process.
At the same time the designers felt they 
could learn from the users and gain a deeper 
understanding of how they perceive clothes/
products (Figure 11). Together very unique and 
diverse results were created, which the designers could not have imagined before. Designer: 
If every individual would design and make her/his 
clothes, we would live in a very interesting society. 
One of the designers pointed out that it is “a learning together”. In some way the designer becomes 
a student and a teacher/adviser at the same time, 
as new ways of designing and making are explored.
190 c ollaboration
Figure 12. Current and possible future relationships and exchanges for Make{able}, participatory sewing workshops with halfway products 
Fields of
Activity
DIY & DIT Production
Open Production 
& Consumption
Government
sponsors
funders
other 
professionals
???
Satellite organisations
MAKE{able}
Workshop
Website
producer
/ supplier consumer
consumer 
to Consumer
knowledge 
exchange
designer
possible future 
relationships
EU: Youth in Action Grant
provides materials
provide space, 
exchange knowledge
knowledge
knowledge 
exchange
patterns
sells advice,
facilitation 
provide space
knowledge for citizens
sells tools /ideas
sells products,
ideas
sells half-way products
legal advice
bookkeeping
sells fabrics & tools
private
companies
€€€
Monetary exchange 
& cash flow
Other exchanges,
free of charge
c ollaboration 191
At a seminar and workshop held by the authors 
on 4 December 2013 at the Aalto Media Factory, Aalto ARTS, the participants were tasked 
with exploring new exchanges among DPC, third 
parties and satellite organisations using the model developed in Figure 6. The participants included experts from the fashion and textiles industry, 
doctoral and post-doctoral design researchers 
(fashion, textiles, co-design, and Design-for-Sustainability), fashion design and Creative Sustainability Masters students, and graphic designers. 
They readily identified new exchanges (Figure 13) 
and also the challenges and opportunities presented by these alternative exchanges (Figure 14).
It was compelling to discover that the centre 
of attention and activities focused strongly on the 
‘new actors’ who took on the key role of facilitator and enabler among designers, consumers and 
producers. These new actors provided websites as 
services, networks or blogs or workshops in physical spaces. Collectively, the new actors represent 
potential hubs in alternative business models. 
Of the ‘satellite’ organisations, beyond the 
DPC and new actor relations, ‘Education’, not 
necessarily presented as a University, has a potential strong impact on all stakeholders. ‘Media & Web’ also represents a strong influence in 
this system map and may be identified as one of 
the key players in describing and promoting new 
An Alternative 
Fashion Economy? 
DPC relationships. These new relationships offer 
revived or new forms of non-monetary exchange 
– sharing knowledge, skills and time – and are 
underpinned with new exchange values. During 
the discussion with the workshop participants, 
the term ‘new craftsmanship’ arose, as a means 
of reanimating the value of skilled making, 
knowledge and time invested into making goods 
and giving prominence to meaningful qualitative 
features, not just goods at market prices. 
The challenges for designers, producers and 
consumers differ. Designers are, it appears, 
so well embedded in the ways of the fashion 
industry that it is difficult to step into a different mode of designing. Producers are similarly bound by their habits, their manufacturing 
equipment and spaces and lack of contact with 
consumers. Consumers do not understand how 
current fashion goods are produced or what alternatives could be offered. However, there are 
significant opportunities for all of these key actors too. For example designers have a chance 
to exercise their creativity and create new income streams directly with consumers; producers can become service providers to consumers; 
and consumers can increase their awareness and 
knowledge by getting involved in designing and 
making something unique for themselves. Yet 
the real challenge and opportunity might be for 
new third party actors to act as intermediaries 
or interagents between the existing actors, to help 
facilitate new ideas of exchange through designing 
and making differently.
These findings challenge the designer’s 
mindset, but there is potential for change as s/he 
gains new influence due to new structures and relationships in the system. For example designers 
can bring to life new business models driven by 
open- or participatory design and centre themselves as the ‘New Actor’ in alternative modes 
of production and consumption. The DPC system map can also be used as a tool to explore and 
develop new relationships and based on these 
create new business models. The more meaningful relationships a business can create, based 
on monetary and non-monetary exchange, the 
more economic-social-environmental sustainability it can secure. However, this opportunity 
demands a change of mindset among all related 
stakeholders who dare to step outside the ‘norm’ 
and imagine differently. There is the chance to 
create new values and better lives through what 
we might call new maker-ship, creator-ship or 
designer-ship. 
192 c ollaboration
provide space, 
exchange knowledge
Figure 13. Potential monetary and non-monetary exchanges in the ‘alternative fashion economy’
Fields of
Activity
DIY & DIT Production
Open Production 
& Consumption
€€€
Monetary exchange 
& cash flow
Other exchanges,
free of charge
Maker Centers
Webplattforms
Designer/Actor
Communicator 
Hubs
consumer
groups
consumer 
to Consumer
knowledge 
exchange
citizen
designer
knowledge
knowledge
knowledge 
exchange
sells tools /ideas
patterns
sells materials, E.O.L. products
sponsorship for new ideas
special orders
free patterns, 
consumer trends
stories, skills 
style-advice
DIY
knowledge
 blogs
knowledge
knowledge
unique designs 
halfway, co-design
Government
sponsors
funders
other 
professionals
Education
Media/
Web
Satellite organisations
private
companies
producer
/ supplier
designer
Funding
provide space
knowledge for citizens
consumer
c ollaboration 193
Figure 14. Challenges and opportunities to the actors in the DPC model towards the ‘alternative fashion economy’ 
Fields of
Activity
Challenges
Opportunities
Relationships
Others/
new
Actor
producer
/supplier
consumer
designer
Education
Location
Underused machines
Habits
Middle-people
Regulations
System is not transparent
Shopping habits
Accessability
Lack of understanding
Education
Knowledge
New technical 
innovations
Missing link
Communication
Opinion leader
Security
Steping outside of the ‘norm’
Lacking imagination
in alternative ways
Education
Designers types
Think they have no time
Image
New image
More creativity
Different channels 
of income
See & do 
Making
Sustainability
Aware & good people
Personalisation
Self-image
Show the making
Variety of price
Potential service providers
More responsible image
More economic sustainability 
through more relationships
communication
sharing & co-creation
information channel
New image
New relationships
194 c ollaboration
demand new behaviour from the other actors? 
We can also question the role of some of the satellite organisations. Is the education provided by 
higher education institutions (HEIs) valid for the 
future challenges designers will have to face? The 
government could play another important role, 
for example, through the implementation of new 
regulations for production that encourage new 
DPC-relationships aimed at making local production more attractive.
Even if new DPC and new actor relationships develop new modes of exchange, how can 
these new niche market alternatives be scaled up 
sufficiently to have a bigger reach and to challenge the existing fashion market? A much wider 
audience needs to be motivated and involved, 
and this means that these alternatives need to 
be much more attractive than business as usual. 
How can we create a change in the mindset of 
people to desire these new multi-value exchanges over just monetary exchanges for a product or 
service? This may require a shift in socio-cultural 
attitudes towards work-life-leisure balance and 
how we value our time. New forms of exchange 
can offer consumers participation in design and 
production as an experience rather than selling a 
ready-made product.
Is the fundamental issue here about production and consumption as a social learning activity, not an economic activity? The focal activities 
of many of the open participatory value propositions and Make{able} are centred on the experience of designing and making together; the results are important, but equally so is the process 
of doing and learning together. This ‘togetherness’ is something sociologist Richard Sennett 
sees as an activity with much longer historical 
precedence than competing with each other 
(Sennet 2012). These experiences ‘together’ 
have potential to change attitudes and behaviour 
but require that the DPC relationships find new, 
exciting hybrid ways of combining their knowledge. Botsman and Rogers’ (2011) notion of collaborative consumption embraces collaborative 
design, but perhaps it is collaborative production 
that is the weak link. Bringing design, production 
and consumption actors together and new DPC
opportunities will generate fresh exchanges and 
potential new economic activities.
This article illustrated possible early-stage developments towards an alternative fashion exchange system with findings from design research-through-practice and design educational 
projects. The authors explored the notion of creating new modes of exchange within an ‘alternative economy’ through: the conceptualisation 
of new open, participatory design ‘value propositions’; halfway products through Make{able} 
workshops; and through illustrating the DPC and 
diagrammatic model of system exchanges. These 
all revealed possible new relationships among designers, producers, and consumers and show the 
potential for other new actors to influence the 
system. With this modelling the authors aimed 
to inspire new and alternative business ideas for 
the involved stakeholders to step out of the norm 
and dare to create and offer different forms of 
exchange. However, the question remains: Are 
designers really hungry for new alternative business models, or are they too well trained for 
the fashion industry, as it exists? If the answer 
is ‘yes’, how can we motivate them, because the 
fashion system as we know it is generically unsustainable. Does the alternative fashion economy need to be framed differently by changing 
the focus away from the role of the designers 
and producers towards the consumers who could 
become the ‘new actor’ as citizen designers who 
discussion
c ollaboration 195
Over the last forty years ‘alternative economies’ 
have been proposed to counter predominant economic thinking. Most of these alternatives have 
arisen from a macroeconomic perspective from 
the fields of economics, sustainable development 
and the social sciences. The studies here, from 
design research-through-practice, and from a 
microeconomic perspective, offer a potentially 
fresh way of engaging in the construct[ion] of an 
alternative economy, which, in this chosen context, is an alternative fashion economy. This economy is focused on the monetary and non-monetary 
exchanges of open and proprietary knowledge 
among designers, producers and consumers – and 
emergent new actors. It is driven by design thinking 
applied to ways of designing and making combined 
with ways of creating value propositions which link 
directly to the development of new business or enterprise model.
From the work to date, it is clear that exploring new relationships and exchanges between and 
among the system actors requires a mindset shift. 
Consumers seem willing and primed to become 
citizen designer-makers. In general, the fashion 
designers seem more reluctant to shift, although 
those who did take part in Make{able} workshops 
seem very positive about the benefits of close 
contact with consumers. Producers, as yet, seem 
only tangentially involved, for example, through 
the supply of post-production waste. Perhaps 
the most important change agents are, potentially, the new actors (like Make{able}, Openwear and so on) who offer a vehicle (network, 
platform, space, other resources) to bring together the DPC in interesting new ways. Could 
this kind of design(-ing) activity be a way forward for a more humanistic, convivial, localised 
economy? Is there potential to join up with other 
socio-economically driven initiatives such as 
time-banks, repair cafes, peer-to-peer production, second-hand clothing stores and alternative currencies, or with the socio-technological 
communities of the maker movement (Fab Labs, 
makerspaces and more)? The next step is about 
testing more value propositions and scaling them 
up from niche activities to a critical mass that 
can genuinely challenge the hegemony of the 
fashion industry. If the fashion designers don’t 
engage, will the citizen designers, or new actors, 
pick up the challenge? Emergent actors in an alternative fashion economy seem poised for further experimentation.
conclusion
196 c ollaboration
References
Bjögvnsson, E., Ehn, P. & Hillgren, P.-A. (2012). Design Things and Design Thinking: Contemporary Participatory Design Challenges. Design Issues. Vol. 28:3, pp. 101–117. 
Botsman, R. & Rogers, R. (2011). What’s Mine Is Yours. How Collaborative Consumption is Changing 
the Way We Live. London: HarperCollins.
Brown, L.R. (2001). Eco-Economy. Building an Economy for the Earth. New York: W.W. Norton & 
Company.
Burns, B. (2010). Re-evaluating Obsolescence and Planning for it. In: Cooper T. (ed.). Longer Lasting Products: Alternatives to the Throwaway Society. UK: MPG Books Group, pp. 39–61. 
von Busch, O. (2008). Fashion-able, Hacktivism and engaged Fashion Design. PhD thesis. 
Gothenburg: School of Design and Crafts (HDK). 
Chapman, J. (2005 & 2009). Emotionally Durable Design – Objects, Experiences & Empathy. London: Earthscan. 
Cooper, T. (2005). Slower Consumption - Reflections on Product Life Spans and the “Throwaway 
Society”. Journal of Industrial Ecology. Vol. 9:1–2, pp. 51–67 
Ekins, P. (ed.) (1986). The Living Economy. A New Economics in the Making. London & New York: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Fletcher, K. & Grose, L. (2012). Fashion & Sustainability – Design for Change. London: Laurence King 
Publishing
Fuad-Luke, A. (2009). Design Activism - Beautiful Strangeness for a Sustainable World. London: Earthscan.
Fuad-Luke, A. (2010). Adjusting Our Metabolism: Slowness and Nourishing Rituals of Delay in 
Anticipation of a Post-Consumer Age. In: Cooper, T. (ed.). Longer Lasting Products. Alternatives to 
the Throwaway Society. Farnham: Gower Publishing. pp. 133–155.
Gold, L. (2004). The Sharing Economy: Solidarity Networks Transforming Globalisation. Farnham: 
Ashgate Publishing.
Heiskanen, E. & Pantzar, M. (1997). Toward Sustainable Consumption: Two New Perspectives. 
Journal of Consumer Policy. Vol. 20, pp. 409–42.
Hirscher, A.L. (2013a). Fashion Activism - Evaluation and Application of Fashion Activism Atrategies to Ease Transition towards Sustainable Consumption Behaviour. Research Journal of Textile and 
Apparel. Vol. 17:1, pp. 23–38.
Hirscher, A.L. (2013b). Joyful Participation in New Ways of Designing and Making Clothes – Enabling 
Person-product Attachment to Potentially Reduce Unnecessary Consumption. Master’s Thesis. Helsinki: 
Aalto ARTS.
Hirscher, A.L. & Niinimäki, K. (2013). Fashion Activism through Participatory Design. Paper 
presented at the Conference Crafting the Future. Gothenburg. 17–19 April 2013.
Jackson, T. (2009). Prosperity without Growth. Economics for a Finite Planet. London: Earthscan.
Latouche, S. (2011). Vers Une Société D’abondance Frugal: Contresens et Controversies Sur la Décroissance. French. [Towards a society of abundant frugality: Misinterpretations and controversies about 
de-growth]. Paris: Mille et une Nuits.
Mattelmäki, T. & Sleeswijk Visser, F. (2011). Lost in Co-X – Interpretations of Co-design and Cocreation, Proceedings of IASDR 2011, the 4th World Conference on Design Research, 31 Oct. - 4 Nov. 
Delft, Netherlands, Edited by. Roozenburg N.F.M. , Chen L.L. & Stappers P.J. 
Martin, R. (2012). DIY-couture. London: Laurence King.
Mugge, R., Schoormans, J.P.L. & Schifferstein, H.N.J. (2005). Design Strategies to Postpone 
Consumers’ Product Replacement: The Value of a Strong Person-product Relationship. Design 
Journal. Vol. 8:2. pp. 38–48.
Niinimäki, K. (2011). From Disposable to Sustainable – The Complex Interplay between Design and 
Consumption of Textiles and Clothing. PhD thesis. Helsinki: Aalto University publications. 
Osterwalder, A. & Pigneur, Y. (2010). Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game 
Changers and Challengers. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Rissanen, T. & Gwilt, A. (2011). Shaping Sustainable Fashion – changing the way we make and use 
clothes. London: Earthscan.
Rissanen, T. (2011). Designing Endurance. In: Rissanen, T. & Gwilt, A. (eds.). Shaping Sustainable 
Fashion – Changing the Way We Make and Use Clothes. London: Earthscan
pp. 127–140.
Schifferstein, H.N.J. & Zwartkruis-Pelgrim, E.P.H. (2008). Consumer-product Attachment: Measurement and Design Implications. International Journal of Design. Vol. 2:3, pp. 1–13. 
Schumacher, E.F. (1975). Small is Beautiful: Economics as if People Mattered. London: Harper & Row.
Sennett, R. (2012). Together. The Rituals, Pleasures and Politics of Cooperation. London: Penguin 
Books.
Stikker, M. (2010). Introduction. In: Van Abel, B., Evers, L., Klaassen, R. & Troxler, P. (eds.). Open 
Design Now. Why Design Cannot Remain Exclusive. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers. pp. 15–19.
Van Abel, B., Evers, L., Klaassen, R. & Troxler, P. (eds.). (2010). Open Design Now. Why Design 
Cannot Remain Exclusive. Amsterdam: BIS Publishers.
Vezzoli, C. & Manzini, E. (2008). Design for Environmental Sustainability. London: Springer-Verlag.
Online references
Chapman, J. (2013). Textiles Environment Design. Design to Reduce the Need to Consume, http://
www.textiletoolbox.com/posts/design-reduce-the-need-consume-2/
CUT. (2013). ‘CUT –Leute machen Kleider’ www.cut-magazine.com
Local Wisdom. (2013). Local Wisdom - An International Fashion Research Project Exploring the 
‘Craft of Use’. http://www.localwisdom.info 
Market of Open Experiments. (2013). Market of Open Experiments. [blog] http://www.open-moe.com
Makerist. (2013). Makerist- Deine Handarbeitsschule im Internet. http://www.makerist.de 
Nadelwald. (2013). Nadelwald – Co-sewing space. http://nadelwald.me 
New Economics Foundation. (2013). New Economics Foundation. http://www.neweconomics.org 
c ollaboration 197
Open Knowledge Foundation. (2004-2013). Open Knowledge Foundation. http://okfn.org/ 
Openwear. (2013). Openwear – Collaborative Clothing. www.openwear.org 
Paul Malina. (2013). Paul Malina. http://paulmalina.wordpress.com 
Pekkola, K., Hirscher, A-L. & Fuad-Luke, A. (2013). Open Source Creation. Making open design a 
business reality. A mini-handbook. http://open-moe.com/2013/08/29/the-vp-booklet/ 
Schmuckermeier, S. (2013). Fashion-Hackers. www.fashion-hackers.de 
At the end: 
Envisioning
the future
Kirsi Niinimäki
Designers should learn how to envision the future rather than aim to merely meet the needs of 
the present. We have to understand that sustainable development and building change is a longterm commitment, not a short-term “add-on”: it 
has to be based on strategic thinking and commitment at all levels to transform the current 
design processes, manufacturing systems and 
even economic thinking and fashion consumption. When the real transformation happens, it 
will offer long-term benefit for the company, but 
in the short term, it is not easy to make profit. 
We need visionary foresight methods and 
models to create attractive future visions in 
which all stakeholders can believe and commit 
themselves. We should use for example backcasting to create future visions, a desirable scenario of how things should be. The backcasting 
method can be used as a strategic tool where the 
desirable future vision is created in the problem 
area (preferable together with all stakeholders) 
and then the path and actions, how to reach this 
vision, are planned. Changes that are needed in 
the current situation in order to reach the target 
are carefully examined and planned. Backcasting 
can thus be described as positive future visioning, 
whose action plan to reach the desirable future 
situation connects present decision-making and 
our actions to a sustainable future. In conjunction it is important to understand that sustainability is a process, a path, a journey, where we 
develop our thinking and skills on the way.
It is also important to make all actions visible to your co-workers, stakeholders, consumers and the media, inside and outside your company. Kruger et al. (2012) propose working with 
sustainability every week, to reserve time with 
your team to work on issues around sustainability, preferable on the sustainable transformation process, to make this process visible to 
everyone and to set goals through a “Sustainable 
Navigation Map”. They point out that companies should focus on several aspects like design, 
procurement, supply chain, sales and marketing, 
consumer activities and new value creation and 
simultaneously bravely think of new processes, 
systems and services. This kind of goal-oriented 
approach makes it possible to create a desirable 
future together, step by step, by experimenting 
and learning together.
It is important to see ahead, open your mind 
and envision creatively and bravely the future of 
sustainable fashion. We can all get started and 
make change happen; we can start with statements to commit to or we jump in by making big 
changes, to start long-term transformation processes. The important issue is not to be passive 
but to see opportunities to do things differently 
– and most importantly create networks. Collaboration with like-minded people from different fields 
opens opportunities for new kinds of business 
and design thinking.
Sherin (2013, p.181) gives the following guidelines on how to get started in the transformation 
process for a better and more sustainable future:
•	 make what you know and what you have 
learned available to others whenever possible
•	 educate stakeholders, consumers and end 
users so they value sustainable processes 
and products
•	 help to create and steer a market for sustainable goods and services
•	 work with like-minded vendors and companies whenever possible.
References
Kruger, H., Himmestrup Dahl, E., Hjort, T. & Planthinn, D. 
(2012). Guidelines II: A Handbook on Sustainability in Fashion. Copenhagen: Sustainable Solution Design Association SSDA. 
Sherin, A. (2013). Sustainable thinking: Ethical Approaches to Design and Design Management. New York: Bloomsbury.
200
Maarit Aakko is a PhD candidate in the School of Arts, Design and Architecture, Aalto University, Finland. Her research interest is mainly in “slow 
fashion”, particularly in artisanal fashion creation, focusing on aesthetics 
and quality and involving ecological and ethical considerations in fashion.
Cosette Armstrong, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the Department of 
Design, Housing, and Merchandising at Oklahoma State University, USA, 
where she teaches courses related to sustainable design and visual communications. Her research has focused on sustainability education and sustainable design. She has explored pedagogical strategies, curriculum design 
and engagement tools for the integration of sustainability into textiles and 
clothing education. Most recently her work has also explored the potential 
for product-service system development for the fashion industry as well as 
the use of emotional attachment in clothing design.
Anu Corin is a young Finnish fashion designer with a serious interest in 
sustainability and a Bachelor’s degree from Novia University of Applied 
Sciences, Finland. With an honest and holistic approach to sustainability 
her work tries to examine our times and ascertain what sustainable fashion 
could be.
Alastair Fuad-Luke is an international sustainable design facilitator, consultant, educator, writer and activist and is currently Professor of Practice, 
Emerging Design Practices, in the School of Arts, Design and Architecture, 
Aalto University, Finland. His books include Design Activism (2009) and 
The Eco-Design Handbook (2002, 2005 and 2009). Currently his research 
interests include developing open source methods and tools for ‘design(-
ing) for social innovation’ and applying design approaches to exploring ‘alternative economies’ which nourish Our Commons. You can read some of his 
thoughts on his collaborative blog, Window 874, http://window874.com. 
He is a founding member of the Open Fashion Design Network, www.modeuncut.wordpress.com. 
Anja-Lisa Hirscher is a designer and activist with a background in graphics 
and illustration. She graduated from the MA programme Creative Sustainability at Aalto University, Finland, and is now engaged with her project 
Make{able} – participatory clothing design workshops to encourage sustainable fashion consumption. Besides this, she supports Emerging Design 
Practices with research and teaching activities at Aalto University.
Essi Karell, MA, is a fashion designer and research assistant in the School 
of Arts, Design and Architecture, Aalto University, Finland. She has been 
working on projects related to fashion-oriented Product-Service Systems 
and future service concepts around digital textile printing. Her interest lies 
in design for sustainable behaviour and servitisation of fashion.
Anika Kozlowski is a fashion designer and PhD student in the Environmental Applied Sciences and Management programme at Ryerson University, 
Canada. Her dissertation work specifically examines how the design process can develop to be sustainability-driven and begin to induce sustainable consumption behaviours through consumer engagement, innovation 
and sustainability-driven business models within the fashion industry. Her 
research pulls from her experience working as a fashion designer and travelling and working with women in factories in India and Africa. Anika takes 
particular interest in how the urban running crew culture, social media, 
DIY, big data, smart materials and hacktivism can influence emotionally 
durable design and brand value creation. 
writers
writers
201
Mari Krappala, PhD, is a writer and a researcher in contemporary art. She 
is a docent of cultural studies in the School of Arts, Design and Architecture, Aalto University, Finland. Her PhD work dealt with contemporary 
art processes, photography and Luce Irigaray’s philosophy of the ethics of 
sexual difference. Mari teaches art theory, artistic research methodology 
and supervises MA and PhD works. At the moment she is doing curatorial work with independent art groups in interartistic fields. Her recent research topics deal with death, sorrow, borders – and imaginary ways to live 
with(out) them.
Kirsi Niinimäki, PhD, is a designer, teacher and researcher who aims to 
encourage holistic understanding in the field of sustainable design and the 
connection between design, manufacturing systems and consumption habits. Additionally she is interested in sustainable design and its value creation, 
especially how sustainable design embeds future-oriented value. Kirsi investigates how sustainable design can be combined with new green business thinking and more strategic management of sustainability. Her books 
include From Disposable to Sustainable (2011) and Dialogues for Sustainable 
Design and Art Pedagogy. Currently she works in the School of Arts, Design and Architecture, Aalto University, Finland, in Design Research as a 
post-doctoral researcher in SDIM, the Strategic Design Integration and 
Management research group. 
Kati Reijonen, PhD, is a design thinker, educator and soon-to-be meditation 
teacher, with a special focus on social design. She dedicates her time to the 
promotion of human well-being, seeing design as a tool for creating a better 
planet. Kati has worked on three continents and in seven languages. She is presently interested in how design can assist spiritual healing and self-discovery.
Lisbeth Svengren Holm, PhD, is professor in fashion management at the 
Swedish School of Textiles, University of Borås, since January 2010. Svengren Holm was the first in Sweden to defend a doctoral thesis in the field 
of design management in 1995. After doing research primarily in design 
management and innovation, her research interest today is design and fashion 
management with research in innovation, sustainability and leadership. Recent research projects are about creative leadership and organisation in the 
creative and cultural industries, and the international growth of Swedish 
fashion design companies. She is head of the multi-disciplinary research 
programme Fashion, Function, Futures (F:3) at the University of Borås, Sweden. 
Dilys Williams is a fashion designer, collaborator and creator of the Centre 
for Sustainable Fashion, a University of the Arts London Research Centre. 
Engaging translational leadership to evolve the purpose of the centre’s activities, her work draws on extensive experience of setting up and guiding 
teams across the fashion spectrum. Nurturing qualities in individuals and 
teams, Dilys enables the creation of high quality, knowledge-led research, 
curriculum and enterprise projects grounded in sustainability thinking, applied to the context of fashion. Impacts of this work permeate political, 
business and education environments and communities.
writers
This publication aims to provide a source of inspiration for students, 
designers and companies, and all stakeholders whose interest lies in the 
area of sustainable fashion. The book presents approaches to fashion that 
embrace future-oriented value. Several chapters illustrate how effective 
fashion can be as transformative design or change agent experimentation. A sustainable approach can also reframe current business thinking 
and reveal opportunities for innovative business strategies. 
Sustainable Fashion proposes how we can make positive change in 
current practices and how to effect new mindsets, creating transformation in fashion.