Nova Scotia to spend $23 million to boost province’s film industry
Stephen Cooke | Posted: March 8, 2022, 10:25 a.m. | Updated: March 8, 2022, 5:25 p.m. | 8 Min Read
Wildhood, the new feature film from writer/director Bretten Hannam (Wildfire, North Mountain) is now filming in Windsor. Described as “a Two Spirit odyssey”, it stars Phillip Lewitski and Michael Greyeyes in the story of a teenager trying to reconnect with his Mi’kmaw heritage while on the run from his resentful white father. - Riley Smith
Locally-shot films like Wildhood by writer/director Bretten Hannam, (right, with actor Michael Greyeyes) will be better able to secure financing with Tuesday’s announcement of a new $15 million Nova Scotia Content Creator Fund. Premier Tim Houston also announced $8 million for a new soundstage to enable year-round film and TV production. Wildhood opens on Friday at Park Lane Cinemas. - Riley Smith
STORY CONTINUES BELOW THESE SALTWIRE VIDEOS


When Nova Scotia Premier Tim Houston says the province means business, that includes show business, with Tuesday’s announcement of a new $23 million investment in local film and TV production.

The new initiative to maintain the momentum gained in the industry over the past two years includes $8 million earmarked for a new soundstage facility as well as a new $15 million Nova Scotia Content Creator Fund to support local film and television productions.

“Today has been a long time coming,” said Houston at One Government Place, alongside Laura MacKenzie, executive director of Screen Nova Scotia, and Halifax producer and Screen Nova Scotia board member Michael Volpe (The Lighthouse, Trailer Park Boys).

“Our government has long understood the value of the film industry,” continued Houston. “Its importance in growing the economy, creating jobs, and putting Nova Scotia on the map as a premium tourism destination. All of this drives towards our goal of increasing tourism and increasing population growth; these things go hand in hand.”




A long time coming
The “long time” the premier referred to is the seven years since former Premier Stephen McNeil’s Liberal government gutted the Nova Scotia Film Tax Credit in its spring 2015 budget, and replaced it shortly afterward with the Nova Scotia Film and Television Production Incentive Fund, administered by the crown corporation Nova Scotia Business Inc.

The subsequent decline in film and television production in the province led many skilled workers in the industry to seek opportunities elsewhere or switch careers altogether, which made Nova Scotia less attractive to outside productions as its film and TV knowledge and labour base shrank in number.

But things have been looking up in recent years. There’s been an increase in production in the province, from Robert Eggers’ Academy Award-nominated The Lighthouse and The Good House starring Sigourney Weaver and Kevin Kline to acclaimed TV series like Chapelwaite, The Sinner, Diggstown and Moonshine.

At Tuesday’s film funding announcement, Nova Scotia Premier Tim Houston, and Laura Mackenzie and Mike Volpe from Screen Nova Scotia show a video of film actors and filmmakers sharing their experiences of working in the province. - Eric Wynne
At Tuesday’s film funding announcement, Nova Scotia Premier Tim Houston, and Laura Mackenzie and Mike Volpe from Screen Nova Scotia show a video of film actors and filmmakers sharing their experiences of working in the province. - Eric Wynne
The production incentive fund has supported 82 projects over the past year and the film industry’s contribution to Nova Scotia’s economy was roughly $180.8 million in 2021-22, up significantly from $91.6 million in 2020-21 and $78 million in 2019-20.

Recent Nova Scotia stories which are now receiving their official releases include the features Dawn, Her Dad & the Tractor, which had sold out screenings at Park Lane on the weekend; the Two Spirit drama Wildhood, which opens locally on Friday; and the dystopian thriller Tin Can, which comes to video-on-demand on March 18.

“Now is really the time, we need to seize the opportunity to help the industry grow,” said Houston, citing the lack of a dedicated soundstage as one of the reasons why film production is not traditionally a year-round activity in the province.

“To say that the weather makes it difficult to film at certain times would certainly be an understatement, so today we’re announcing that the province will invest $8 million towards a soundstage that will shift film and television from a seasonal industry into a year-round job creator and economic generator.”

Soundstage necessary for year-round industry
Electropolis Motion Picture Studios, in the former Nova Scotia Power plant on the Halifax waterfront, was shut down when the utility reclaimed the building and converted it into its head office in 2008. Shelburne Film Studios — established in 1999 on a former naval base — went bankrupt a decade later after its location two-and-a-half hours outside of Halifax proved impractical for most productions.

The new 4,645 square-metre (50,000 sq. ft.) soundstage, costing $20 million in total, will be located within Halifax, and MacKenzie cited the increasing demand for Canadian-shot content by streaming services like Netflix, Disney+ and Prime Video, as the reason why it is necessary to take the industry to the next level.

Laura Mackenzie, executive director of Screen Nova Scotia, said the funding announced Tuesday marks an exciting and pivotal moment for the film sector. - Eric Wynne
Laura Mackenzie, executive director of Screen Nova Scotia, said the funding announced Tuesday marks an exciting and pivotal moment for the film sector. - Eric Wynne
“With the development of a soundstage, we will be equipped to welcome our share of the tidal wave of production that has been coming across this country. It’s an essential piece of infrastructure for a successful production industry,” explained MacKenzie, who said a year-long production calendar will enable crew members based in Nova Scotia to work at home through the winter, rather than seek out shows shooting in Toronto or Vancouver. It would also entice back those who were forced to move away after the tax credit was axed.

“As we enter into one of the most significant workforce transitions in history, a soundstage will be a major tool in assisting the industry in creating upwards of 500 highly skilled jobs in the next five years.”

The $15 million Nova Scotia Content Creator Fund was also seen as good news by members of the industry, as it will provide $3 million per year over five years to eligible Nova Scotia-led productions, supporting local directors, writers and performers.

Local films like Seth A. Smith’s surreal science fiction nightmare Tin Can — coming to VOD this month — will have an easier time securing financing with the support of the new Nova Scotia Content Creator Fund announced on Tuesday. - File
Local films like Seth A. Smith’s surreal science fiction nightmare Tin Can — coming to VOD this month — will have an easier time securing financing with the support of the new Nova Scotia Content Creator Fund announced on Tuesday. - File
Tin Can producer Nancy Urich says support from the fund would be welcome as she and her partner, Tin Can director Seth A. Smith, develop their next film The Willows, based on the work of British horror writer Algernon Blackwood, for production in 2023.

“We are currently piecing together the financing, so this news means we can have some peace of mind that now we can potentially make this and other future projects here in N.S., which would be amazing,” she said in an email.

“This is just great news overall for the creative industries of Nova Scotia, more film productions at home means more jobs and opportunities for musicians and artists too, who may be new to film, but could get in on the expanding industry.”

Big-budget and indie films go hand-in-hand
At the time of the film tax credit cut in 2015, Jenny M. Reeves, president of Local 849 of the film workers’ union IATSE, stressed the importance of supporting homegrown productions while working to attract international productions like The Lighthouse or a blockbuster like James Cameron’s Titanic, which filmed its present-day sequences in Halifax and off the Atlantic coast.

“Film workers then use those skills learned on larger productions to bring a breadth of knowledge and experience to the table when working with local filmmakers on indigenous productions,” wrote Reeves, “allowing them to tell those incredibly important stories using the very best technologies and most highly-trained people available.”

Hobo With a Shotgun producer Rob Cotterill said the fund will be a huge benefit to modestly budgeted Nova Scotia films that rely largely on local cast and crew members and will go a long way towards sustaining and growing the industry at all levels.

“The fund is going to allow local producers to bridge their financing gaps, which is what we’ve lost ever since we lost Film Nova Scotia and (the province) killed all those financing programs,” said Cotterill, who recently wrapped production on Hobo With a Shotgun director Jason Eisener’s upcoming feature Kids Vs. Aliens.

“For bridging the gap on indie films, unless you had private investors from elsewhere, you just couldn’t close your financing deals. So this will allow local producers to close their financing on features and also give a boost to television programs and help fill that gap too.”

With these new incentives in hand, Houston and representatives from Screen Nova Scotia will visit the epicentre of film and TV production in Los Angeles from March 12 to 16 to meet with decision makers from HBO, Disney, Netflix, NBC Universal and other studios “to tell them what Nova Scotia has to offer and really show them that we are open for business.”

“We’re not going to walk away and let this momentum dissipate,” said Houston on Tuesday. “We’re going to send a strong message next week in L.A. that the film and television industry has a partner in the province of Nova Scotia. We will support their growth.

“We’re going to keep the momentum, we’re going to seize this opportunity to make sure that it does not go away.”