Introduction
Welcome to The Clothing Chronicles ezine ! Glad to have you aboard . 
So… how can you use your clothing to look younger / older , thinner / heavier , 
richer / poorer , taller / shorter , more curvy / less curvy – or whatever your image goals ? 
It ’ s easy : all you have to do is know your body and how to use various elements to 
achieve the desired effect . 
Unfortunately , all the information you find online or in fashion magazines doesn ’ t 
help a lot . They often describe body shapes in terms of fruit ( pear , apple ) or 
geometric shapes ( triangle , inverted triangle )  , and then prescribe trendy clothing 
pieces that you don ’ t like , are too expensive , or that don ’ t fit your lifestyle . 
Fashion For Real Women is different . We show you how to dress better by spending 
less , how to turns heads without making jaws drop . Many of our readers report that 
they not only look and feel better after implementing some of our suggestions , but 
they ’ re also garnering more attention in their work and social lives . 
In these pages you ’ ll find some of our reader-favorite articles that many said 
changed the way they view and buy clothes . Hope you enjoy them . Look for your 
first issue of The Clothing Chronicles soon . 
Diana Pemberton-Sikes
FashionForRealWomen . com 
 “ I must say your newsletter is one of the most useful . At last someone who 
gives something for the real women ! My compliments ”  . 
Giovanna Vittoria Nervi
Milan , Italy 
 “ You have helped me so much !  !  ! My closets are beautiful because of you !  ” 
Patricia Brown
San Francisco , CA 
 “ I ’ ve found your adobe book and your articles absolutely invaluable . Your 
advice is applicable and practical .  ” 
Fay Grant
Charleston , SC 
 “ I have enjoyed … getting your news letters , because although it seems 
common sense to work out how to dress and what to wear , it makes it a lot 
easier to have it all down in black and white by an expert . I found it a lot 
easier to follow my instincts in my twenties , but need help at my age ( 57 ) so 
as not to look either a frump or mutton dressed as lamb . You help me to keep 
my aim in the right direction !  ” 
Averil Smith
Sydney , Australia
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 6
Wardrobe Basics
The Secret to French Chic
From fabulous food and fine wine to elegant fragrances and amazing clothes , the 
French have long been known for their decadent luxuries . Champagne was invented 
here , as was haute couture . Then there ' s the chocolate , paintings , and dare I say it ? 
Kisses . Small wonder exports and tourism are staples of the French economy . 
So with easy access to some of the world ' s most desirable goods , you ' d think every 
French woman would have a big waistline and a huge closet . But they don ' t . Just as 
French Women Don ' t Get Fat ,  ( according to author Mireille Guiliano )  , chic Parisiennes 
don ' t have closets full of clothes . They don ' t need them . 
The secret is moderation . 
Paris was first settled as a fishing village more than two thousand 
years ago . While it ' s been burned , rebuilt , invaded , and occupied 
many times since then , the core of the city is still hundreds of years 
old . The roads are narrow , the buildings are old , the apartments are 
small . So are the closets and bathrooms . Full size refrigerators are 
scarce and weekly food shopping trips are unheard of . Where would 
you put a week ' s worth of groceries ? For that matter , where would 
you store a season ' s worth of clothes ? 
You wouldn ' t . 
You ' d keep a small inventory of staples and add new things with care . If you buy 
something new , something old has to go . There just isn ' t space for both . 
So how can French women be so chic when they can ' t buy new things all the time ? 
They : 
1 . Learn what styles look good on them ( and which don ' t ) early on
2 . Buy a handful of good quality , neutral-colored staples that they can mix 
and match with each other for maximum wear
3 . Add one or two new trendy pieces each season and wear them out
4 . Invest in high quality everyday bags and shoes
5 . Have one or two high end scarves or other accessories that they wear all 
the time
6 . Get a facial every month to keep their skin looking good
7 . Maintain a fuss-free hairstyle
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 7
8 . Pay cash for everything
The French , like the Germans , have a history of saving and are adverse to personal 
debt . To stay in budget , they don ' t do a lot of impulse buying , and they indulge in 
their local luxuries very little or in moderation . Why buy a dozen handbags in 
different shapes and colors when one in a neutral , basic shape does the trick ? 
What ? Too boring , you say ? Not enough variety ? 
Not true ! 
All it takes is a little imagination . 
Start with basic pieces that look good on you . Find tops that fit , jackets that flatter , 
and pants and skirts that feel and look good . 
Then study the latest fashion magazines and websites to see the latest trends . Try to 
re-create or simply evoke the look with pieces you ALREADY HAVE in your closet . 
You may just need a new jacket or some updated pants to look current . Or , maybe a 
new , trendy accessory can breathe new life into your old favorites . You don ' t have to 
follow every trend . Learn which styles look best on you and just update them as the 
seasons pass . Or , pass them by if they don ' t flatter . 
This simple mantra is how the French look chic AND still manage to live within their 
budgets and with their miniscule closets . You can too . You don ' t have to have a big 
budget or a lot of clothes to dress well . All it takes is a little practice and creativity . 
Learn what styles look good on you , choose your pieces wisely , and wear them in 
many different ways until they wear out . 
Or , in the words of German designer Jil Sander ,  " Think more , buy less .  " 
Need some more help trying to determine the best looks for your 
body , lifestyle , and budget ? Download a copy of WARDROBE 
MAGIC : 

to see how easy looking good can be .  
 “ I got your ebook and I love it !  ! Your suggestions are so simple and yet 
make so much sense . I have looked into my closet a million times and said 
how can I have so many clothes and nothing to wear ? The more I read the 
more I said .  .  . Oh Yeah ! It ' s just like a light went off in my head and now I 
can ' t wait to get started . Thanks you so much , I have been praying for some 
help like this for a long time .  ” 
Cheryl Eldridge
Appleton , WI
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 8
Fashion Designer Basics
There ' s an old " I Love Lucy " episode where the 
Ricardos and the Mertzes are in Paris . Lucy , upon 
attending a Jacques Marcel runway show , decides she 
HAS to have a Marcel dress . Ricky tells her no , that 
it ' s too expensive . She goes on a hunger strike and 
Ricky caves - until he finds out that Ethel has been 
sneaking Lucy food all along . In revenge , Ricky and 
Fred present their wives with dresses made from 
potato sacks and hats made from horse feedbags and 
tell them that they were made by Jacques Marcel . The 
girls proudly wear them around Paris -- until they run 
into the designer at a café and Ricky tells the truth . 
Embarrassed , the women destroy the outfits . The 
episode ends with Marcel copying the designs and 
using them in his next collection . BarbieCollector . com
I mention this because the message in that episode is still as true today as it was 
fifty years ago : some women will wear ANYTHING , so long as they think it ' s 
designer . They ' re easily seduced by labels and blindly follow along without a second 
thought to appropriateness or appearances . 
I certainly hope you ' re not one of them . If you ' re a long-time reader of this ezine , 
you know it ' s not the name on the inside that marks you as being well-dressed ; it ' s 
how you present the clothes on the outside that delivers the final verdict . That ' s why 
some people can stop traffic in $40 worth of clothes from Walmart while others 
languish like wallflowers in $4 , 000 worth of designer apparel . It ' s also while some 
women who rely on a designer scarf or handbag to upgrade their sloppy jeans or 
sweat suits look about as foolish as Lucy and Ethel did strutting around Paris in 
potato sacks and feedbags . 
So how can you increase your designer savvy if you happen to like labels ? By 
studying the different design houses and finding the brands that work best for you . 
Let ' s start with a couple of definitions :  
* COUTURE ( koo TOOR ) is the French word for " sewing .  " Couture clothes are 
those that are fitted and sewn specifically for a client , often requiring several 
fittings for an exacting fit . The clothes may be specifically designed for the 
client , such as a one-of-a-kind wedding dress or a one-of-a-kind red carpet 
ensemble , or they may be part of a designer ' s couture collection , which are 
the pieces the designer shows that are available for custom fit . 
Couture is also known as made-to-measure or bespoke ( British )  .  
* READY-TO-WEAR , or prêt-à-porter ( prêt a poor TAY ) is designer apparel 
that ' s made ready-to-wear in standard sizes and sold through boutiques , 
better department stores , mail order , and online . While consumers can have 
pieces tailored to fit after purchase , customization is not included in the cost 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 9
of ready-to-wear apparel . When people speak of designer brands , they ' re 
most often referring to ready-to-wear . 
So now that you know the difference between the two terms , let ' s take a quick look 
at the design philosophies of different countries : 
ITALIAN designers have a long history of producing fine 
leather goods -- and of lovingly showcasing the human 
form . If you have a dynamite figure and want your 
clothes to reflect that , Italian designers like Armani , 
Versace , Prada , Ferragamo , etc .  , can help you meet 
your goal . Versace
Style . com
FRENCH designers have been trendsetters for centuries and you ' ll find both classic 
and avant-garde designs here . Whether you seek the eternal chic of Chanel , Yves 
Saint Lauren , or Valentino - or something a bit more cutting edge from , say , 
Balenciaga or Christian Lacroix -- you can find your fashion fix in Paris . 
BRITISH designers have a long tradition of producing classic silhouettes in 
sumptuous fabrics with an eye towards fit and finish . A visit to Savile Row will prove 
just how exacting their standards can be . But it ' s not all pomp and circumstance . 
From the country that gave us both James Bond AND the mini-skirt , you can find 
updated classics by brands like Burberry or Julien Macdonald - or go totally wild with 
the likes of Vivienne Westwood or Zandra Rhodes . The choice is yours . 
AMERICAN designers made a name for themselves in 
the 1940 ' s with quality sportswear , and it ' s a tradition 
that continues today with designers like Ralph Lauren and 
Anne Klein . But we ' re not just about leisure time . From 
the " ladies who lunch " in Carolina Herrera and Oscar de 
la Renta to the ladies who work in Donna Karan and 
Michael Kors , to the " of the moment designs " by Marc 
Jacobs and Proenza Schouler , we have a little something 
for everyone . Take your pick . 
Lauren by Ralph Lauren
Macys . com
AUSTRALIAN designers , like American designers , tend to lean towards the 
comfortable but fashionable instead of just fashion for fashion ' s sake . Want 
contemporary style but comfortable clothes ? Try Lisa Ho , Saba , or Collette Dinnigan 
on for size . 
As you can see , there ' s a lot out there -- because not all designers create with the 
same person in mind . Some houses excel in fine apparel , while others prefer 
contemporary or sportswear lines . So don ' t assume that just because your neighbor , 
friend , or sister bought a certain brand that you should buy that brand too . 
Everyone ' s different . Every design house is different . You need to buy based on how 
the designs suit YOU . Not the other way around . 
So if you intend to spend your hard-earned money on luxury brands , take a little 
time to find the designers who create with you in mind . Don ' t be swayed by the label 
on the inside ; buy for the look it gives you on the outside . Don ' t be another Lucy in a 
potato sack ; instead , be a connoisseur of style . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 10
Dressing the " Non-Standard " Body
What can you do if you aren ' t an " average " size ? What 
choices do you have if you ' re small , tall , petite , or plus 
size , and every clothes-shopping trip you take becomes 
an exercise in frustration ? 
For starters , don ' t give up ! 
Just because nothing in the stores seems to be made with you in mind doesn ' t mean 
that you can ' t find what you need . You just have to understand a few basic tenets 
before you head off to the mall or start clicking away online , including : 
1 . Most Retailers Only Stock Regular Sizes
The fashion industry offers the largest bulk of its merchandise in " standard sizes ,  " 
which includes Misses sizes 4-14 , for women 5 ' 4 " to 5 ' 8 " in height ( European sizes 
34-44 and 1 . 6256-1 . 7272 m )  . Because SO many women fit these parameters , this is 
the largest target market of ready-to-wear apparel . 
If you don ' t fit these categories , your choices are considerably reduced , but not nonexistent . You just can ' t go into a regular , brand-name clothing store and expect to 
find your non-standard size . If you DO find what you need , consider yourself lucky . 
Otherwise , head for specialty clothing stores that offer merchandise designed with 
you in mind . 
Some online options include : 
PETITE
 Petite Sophisticate

 The Petite Wardrobe

 Talbot ' s Petites

TALL
 Column Clothing

 Tall Classics

 Tall Women ' s Clothing

Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 11
WOMEN ' S
 Catherine ' s

 Elisabeth

 Zaftique

2 . Come to Grips with Your Body
Have a large bust but small hips ? Have large hips but no bust ? Need one size on top 
and another on the bottom ? 
Identify the parts you like and the parts you don ' t , then get busy " accentuating the 
positive " instead of lamenting over the negative . It ' s a much better use of your time 
and with a little practice , you may be able to fool others into thinking you have a 
better body than you do . 
How ? 
3 . Learn Some Sleight-of-Hand Tricks
You can appear larger or smaller depending on what kinds of clothes you choose . 
Some elements to consider include : 
Lines
Horizontal lines or details on a garment will make you look wider ; vertical lines or 
will make you look taller and thinner . 
Color
Light colors will make you look larger ; dark colors will make you look smaller . 
Texture
Smooth textures make you appear smaller ; chunky or shiny textures add bulk and 
will make you look bigger . 
4 . Experiment with Different Elements
Once you find clothes that fit your shape and size , try experimenting with different 
clothing elements to bring about the desired effect . 
For example , 
If You ' re Heavy .  .  . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 12
 Try adding a long beaded necklace or pendant to your 
ensemble to give you a slenderizing vertical line . 
 Avoid clothes that add visual bulk , like chunky 
sweaters , horizontal stripes , or light-colored fabrics . 
 Opt for monochromatic looks , blending colors from 
head to toe . Coldwater Creek
Or , If You ' re Very Thin .  .  . 
 Use gathers and soft fullness to visually add pounds . 
 Use multiple layers to create fullness and interest . 
 Wear contrasting colors on top and bottom . 
Coldwater Creek
See how easy this is ? 
Once you come to grips with your body and realize that if you wear a non-standard 
size , then you ' re probably going to have to buy clothes from specialty retailers , your 
clothes-hunting duties become a lot less frustrating . 
Make a list of stores where you know you can find clothes that fit , and stick with 
them . Ask for recommendations from family and friends . Go online and look around . 
Then , experiment to find what looks best on you . With a little practice and 
determination , you ' ll soon learn what kinds of clothes look best AND where you can 
regularly find them . 
Instead of an exercise in frustration , it could become a modern-day treasure hunt . 
Want some other suggestions for dressing the plus size body ? 
Download a copy of my seminar , Plus Size Style : A WomanSize Guide to Looking Great :  
 
 “ Yes , I ' ve been able to download the PLUS SIZE STYLE and I must tell you 
that I think , once again , that you have shown a great understanding not 
only for fashion but for the needs of women who don ' t meet the " ideal " 
figure , as it is portrayed in today ' s media or in fact today ' s world . Combined 
with lots of common sense and worded in such a way that you are " talking 
with " rather than " at " a person , makes for an informative yet encouraging 
document , and I commend you for it .  ” 
Rosemary Parry-Brock
Boronia , Victoria , Australia
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 13
How to Be Fashionable at Any Age
With so many designers and trends targeting the svelte body of the twentysomething , is it possible to look fashionable as the years pass and your body begins 
to tell the tale ? 
Absolutely ! 
In fact , with a little ingenuity and sleigh-of-hand , it ' s easy to be fashionable and
stylish regardless of how many candles are on your birthday cake . 
Now let ' s be frank : unless you work out religiously , you probably don ' t have the 
same body at 40 , 50 , or 60 that you did at 25 . Time , gravity , and pregnancy all take 
their toll on the female body , as does menopause . And when you mix a mature body 
with fashions obviously made for a younger person , it can lead to self-doubt , 
frustration , and confusion . 
But it doesn ' t have to be that way . Getting older also means getting wiser , and like a 
fine bottle of wine , you ' re improving with age . So you don ' t have the same body as 
those twenty-somethings you see in magazines or on TV . So what ? Would you 
REALLY trade everything you ' ve learned since your twenties for the body you had 
back then ? Probably no sooner than you ' d like to re-live puberty , thank you very 
much . 
So how can you be fashionable without wearing all those body-conscious clothes so 
en vogue these days ? By remembering the " 3 C ' s " when you dress : clean , classic , 
and coverage . 
CLEAN
Clean lines create a clean silhouette which makes 
the body appear more youthful by skimming the 
trouble spots instead of calling attention to them . 
Complicated cuts , seams , and details usually call for 
a killer body to pull off , so if you haven ' t got it , 
steer clear of those styles . 
Chadwicks . com
CLASSIC
Classic styles are called classic because they remain 
in style year after year . Why ? Because they look 
good on so many bodies ! Sheathes , A-line skirts , 
flat front pants - all tend to flatter a variety of 
shapes . What ' s more , because they remain in style 
year after year , classics are easier on the budget 
than trends . Chadwicks . com
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 14
COVERAGE
Covering appropriately is the key to aging gracefully . If your upper arms , thighs , and 
décolletage have all seen better days , it ' s time to cover them up a bit instead of 
sharing the wear-and-tear with the world . Now I ' m not talking about draping yourself 
in a tent for the rest of your life . Far from it . I ' m talking about wearing short sleeves 
instead of going sleeveless , Capris instead of shorts , and modest necklines instead of 
plunging necklines . 
Chadwicks . com Chadwicks . com Newport-News . com Chadwicks . com
Instead of this -- -- try this Or instead of this -- -- how about this ? 
Now I know that covering up the parts that used to turn heads and draw envy can be 
tough to take for some women . Which is precisely why beautiful jewelry and fine 
fabrics are the revenge tools of choice for many well-dressed mature women . 
So your bustline isn ' t as perky as your twenty-something daughter or 
granddaughter . So what ? Add a beautiful necklace and draw envious glances from 
women of all ages . Don ' t have the same backside you did as a teen ? Encase it in a 
fine fabric and see how many men go out of the way to hold the door open for you . 
People will look where you focus their attention , so use that knowledge to redirect 
their interest to the parts you want them to see . 
Or , as actress Cybil Shepard once said ,  " I like to flaunt what I have left .  " 
Don ' t flip through fashion magazines and bemoan the fact that you don ' t look like 
the models . Instead , look at the various fashion elements to determine what will and 
won ' t work for you . Are printed scarves all the rage this year ? Grab a few and be 
trendy . Are mini skirts the style of choice ? Pass and bank your money . 
See how easy this is ?  
 " A woman has the age she deserves ,  " Coco Chanel once said . You don ' t have to go 
under cover and dress " like a little old lady " just because that ' s what your mother or 
grandmother did . You ' re your own person . 
If you remember to dress in clean lines and classic styles and cover appropriately , 
you can still be fashionable - AND draw long , lingering glances from handsome men -
- whatever your age . And if THAT doesn ' t make you feel like a blushing girl again , 
then honey , nothing I can say will ! 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 15
Need some other ideas for maintaining a youthful 
appearance ? Download a copy of the AGELESS STYLE seminar 
at : 

to see how easy looking great at any age can be .  
 “ I just finished listening to your seminar on Ageless Beauty . It contained 
exactly the type of information I ' ve been looking for . I ' m 55 and struggling to 
look as young as possible for all sorts of occasions . It ' s been particularly 
difficult since I work at Nordstrom and the Encore department ( my size ) sells 
almost exclusively bare sleeveless dresses , no jackets to cover the shoulders 
or arms . Tops are often baby doll style making many of us look pregnant . 
I ' m searching other stores for appropriate classic clothing in plus sizes , and 
it ' s fun and a challenge . Can ' t wait to read your Wardrobe Magic book .  ” 
Denise Ottie
Alexandria , VA
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 16
Accessorizing
Are Your Accessories " In the Mood ?  " 
Over the weekend I happened to catch a popular actress promoting her latest movie 
on one of the morning talk shows . Since this woman happens to be an A-lister known 
for her fashion sense , I was a little surprised to see what she was wearing : a 
sleeveless floral print silk dress - and black leather boots . 
Now I know this flimsy sleeveless top / leather boot combination is gaining in 
popularity . I ' ve seen it several times in recent months and cringe every time because 
frankly , the aesthetic just doesn ' t work . In the actress ' case , her whole ensemble 
smacked of an ignorance that I thought her well beyond , given her fashion icon 
status . 
So what was wrong with it ? 
A couple of things : 
1 . While it happened to be relatively warm that day , it was still early March , 
which means that technically , it ' s still winter ( she was also in New York )  . The 
boots fit the season ; the dress did not . 
2 . Filmy sleeveless tops require skimpy shoes ( like sandals or sling backs ) for 
visual balance . Boots require weighty sleeved tops for balance . 
LaRedoute . com
Bare upper arms + heavy footwear 
and covered lower leg ISN ' T 
visually balanced
LaRedoute . com
Bare upper arms + light footwear 
and bare lower legs IS visually 
balanced
LaRedoute . com
Covered upper arms + heavy 
footwear and covered lower legs IS 
visually balanced
3 . Leather boots and silk florals don ' t have the same mood ; leather boots call 
for heavier , more casual fabric ; a silk dress requires lighter , more formal 
footwear . 
Now true , this is kind of advanced stuff if you ' ve never given the matter much 
thought before . But if you ' ve ever seen someone dressed in a combination that just 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 17
missed the mark for some reason , chances are the accessories didn ' t match either 
the season or the mood of the garment . 
Here are a couple of combinations I ' ve seen recently that further demonstrate this 
type of mismatch : 
Problem : Summer floral dress , sandals , dark felt hat
Solution : Swap the felt hat ( cool weather ) for a straw hat ( warm weather )  . 
Problem : Fine lace top , chunky turquoise jewelry
Solution : Swap the chunky jewelry for finer , more delicate jewelry to match 
the mood of the top . 
Problem : Cable knit sweater , jeans , flip flops
Solution : Swap the flip flops for closed toe , cool weather footwear . P . S . 
Unless you live in the tropics , flip flops are NOT year ' round shoes . 
Problem : Evening gown , strappy sandals , leather shoulder bag 
( I saw this on the red carpet at the Oscars a few weeks ago ) 
Solution : Swap the shoulder bag for an evening clutch or min-audière . 
Problem : Business suit , pumps , quilted flower tote
Solution : Swap the fabric tote for a leather handbag , tote , or briefcase . The 
quilted tote is too casual for the formal business attire . 
See how this works ? 
Once you understand a little bit about clothing , materials , and levels of formality , 
flagrant violations all but leap out at you . Now true , there are no fashion police any 
more ( do an online search for sumptuary laws to learn more )  , but there are still 
basic fashion tenets that , when followed , offer a pleasing aesthetic . When not 
followed , they give you a " what ' s wrong with this picture ?  " effect . 
It ' s kind of like having people over for dinner and serving spaghetti , meatballs , and 
sauerkraut . Or barbecued chicken , potato salad , and escargot . How about egg rolls , 
won ton soup , and grits ? What ? Those combinations have you puckering your face in 
horror ? That ' s because taste-wise , they just don ' t go together . 
Neither do sleeveless tops and boots or evening gowns and shoulder bags . 
Our favorite food combinations are the result of thousands of 
years of cooking trial-and-error to determine which types of 
foods and seasonings compliment each other . The same is 
true with clothing and accessories . When you match your 
accessories to the color , fabric , season , and mood of your 
garments , you get a satisfying aesthetic . When you don ' t , 
you get people furrowing their brows at the combination , or 
worse yet ,  " dissing " your clothing ignorance . 
The belt and slides coordinate with each other
and the mood of the garment . LaRedoute . com
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 18
So don ' t just slap on accessories without a second thought . Take the time to consider 
how well the pieces really work together . Do they compliment your ensemble , adding 
just the right " seasoning ?  " Or , like a scruffy bag worn with a sharp suit , do they give 
you that " spaghetti and sauerkraut " effect ? 
Think BEFORE you accessorize . It ' s the easiest way to polish your look - or ruin it 
completely . The choice is yours . 
Need some other tips on how to accessorize ? Download a 
copy of ACCESSORY MAGIC to see how easily you can use 
accessories to define your style and stretch your budget . 
www . AccessoryMagic . com 
 " Yes , I was able to download ACCESSORY MAGIC without any problems thank 
you . I must congratulate you on publishing such an informative book . While I 
am still in the process of reading it , it has already made me look a lot more 
closely at many of the accessories I have owned for years but never really 
used to their full potential . I believe that ACCESSORY MAGIC AND WARDROBE 
MAGIC are invaluable and essential resources for every woman . Thank you , 
Diana .  " 
Judy Salter
Hamilton , New Zealand
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 19
Business Attire
How to Use Clothing to Establish Your Authority
Have you ever found yourself in a situation where you thought you ' d be taken 
seriously , but weren ' t ? Like during a business meeting , in the classroom , at a 
community event , or in some other setting in which you were playing a prominent 
role ? You went in thinking you ' d make an impact , but then received either a tepid 
reception or were outright ignored . When all was said and done , you were left 
scratching your head , wondering what went wrong . 
Sound familiar ? 
If so , you ' re not alone . I ' ve seen both men and women step in front of a group of 
people to teach , preach , demonstrate , or debate , only to be overlooked or dismissed . 
And almost every time , it was because of what they were wearing . 
Or rather , what they weren ' t wearing : authority pieces . 
Authority pieces are clothing items that establish credibility and point to your 
aptitude and include key elements like collars , sleeves , and jackets in firm fabrics 
and neutral colors . Authority pieces lend substance , then instantly fade into the 
background to allow your audience to focus on your words or abilities . With them , 
you ' re viewed as competent enough to command attention ; without them , you ' re 
not . In fact , you may even be ridiculed or overlooked , depending on the situation . 
Judith Rasband of the Conselle Institute was the first to describe these “ power 
pieces .  ” Let ’ s look at them in a little more detail : 
Collar
Since collars go around the neck , collared shirts 
and tops are generally among the most modest 
of garments . They cover up the torso , framing 
and forcing attention to the face . Collars have 
long been part of the well mannered person ' s 
wardrobe , and are still required today on private 
golf courses , polo fields , and in traditional 
business settings . LaRedoute . com
Attention goes right to 
the neck and face
LaRedoute . com
Attention lingers on 
bustline and waist
Sleeves
The more skin you show , the less formal it becomes , and sleeves are no exception . 
While killer biceps might earn you respect at the gym , they ' ll pull attention away 
from your words ( and perhaps draw envy ) just about everywhere else . If you keep 
your upper arms covered , you ' ll have a better chance of keeping attention on your 
face . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 20
Jacket
Jackets have been a part of the effective business 
wardrobe for nearly five hundred years with good reason : 
they command respect like no other garment . Whether you 
wear a power suit every day or wouldn ' t be caught dead in 
one , make sure your basic wardrobe includes one 
classically-styled jacket that you can put on any time you 
want to add gravitas , like meetings , presentations , semiformal dinners , or even funerals . Whether you wear it over 
an expensive skirt or a t-shirt and jeans , a jacket has 
impact . Remember that . 
LaRedoute . com
Classic Skirt or Trousers
A basic A-line or pencil skirt in a neutral color that fits you properly can take you just
about anywhere in the world you need to go , like a business meeting , a school board 
meeting , the ballet , or a bar mitzvah . A pair of neutral-colored classically styled 
trousers will do the same . They both offer simple silhouettes that cover 
appropriately . 
Firm Fabrics
Firm fabrics like cotton , wool , ramie , and rayon lend substance to your apparel and 
to your silhouette . Clothes that hold their shape without being too sheer or too fussy 
will help reinforce your no-nonsense agenda . 
Neutral Tones
Navy , black , brown , red , gray , and tan tend to draw more 
favorable responses from audiences than most other 
colors . Call them boring , call them uninspired , but they ' re 
still tops in winning people over . 
What ? You want to shock ' em with your hot pink suit ? You 
probably will , and they ' ll talk about it for weeks to come . 
But they probably won ' t remember a word you said . So 
bear that in mind before you search high and low for a 
shocking pair of pink shoes to match . 
Lew-Magram . com
If you want to be seen as an authority figure in your work , church , or community , 
you need to dress the part - especially if you don ' t have a commanding voice or 
presence to help you reach your goal . True , you may sometimes find yourself in 
impromptu leadership situations where you won ' t have time to plan your apparel , but 
when you do have that luxury , make good use of it . Choose simple , classic pieces 
that offer good coverage and force attention to your face so that others will heed 
your words . It ' s the easiest way to be taken seriously . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 21
Want some other guidelines for how to use your clothing to 
ensure success ? Download a copy of Business Wear Magic

to see how easy dressing appropriately for business can be 
- whatever industry you happen to be in .  
 “ I just wanted to let you know that your information is so inspiring to me . Dressing for 
success is very important to me . I have developed a workshop to aid low 
income women . My research has come from many resources , but your information 
covers everything !  !  !  ” 
Connie Mason
Florence , South Carolina
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 22
How Wearing Makeup Can Increase Your Earnings
A recent report by WGSN , a London-based fashion news service , revealed something 
that image consultants have known for years : that wearing makeup increases a 
woman ' s chance of getting a job more than the usual criteria of a strong resume , 
obvious intelligence , and a pleasing personality . 
In fact , the article , based on survey results from 100 UK companies , reported that :  
 " One in four managers admitted they were more likely to hire a woman who 
wore makeup than one who did not , despite political correctness and the 
multitude of laws against workplace discrimination and equal job 
opportunities .  " 
Shocked ? 
Don ' t be . 
In fact , based on my experience in working with a variety of companies , I ' d say 
those one-in-four numbers are low . That only 25% of those surveyed answered 
honestly while the others may or may not have . Chat with those same 100 managers 
informally - say after a few rounds at the pub , for example - and those numbers 
would be a lot higher , probably two-in-four or even three-in-four . Because what 
people say and what they think and do are usually two different things . 
Marketers have known for years that slick packaging can make a huge difference in 
what people buy , whether it ' s cars , cosmetics , or candidates for a job . All else being 
equal , people will pick the shiny apple over the less shiny one every time . 
Think I ' m kidding ? 
Consider your own actions : 
 When you buy fruit at the market , do you usually sort through the apples , 
pears , oranges , or whatever , to find the ones with the fewest blemishes ? 
 How about packages on the shelf ? If you grab a box with a mashed-in corner , 
do you put it back and look for the same product in a better box ? 
 Or magazines ? Have you ever thumbed through a glossy while waiting at the 
checkout stand , decided to buy it , then put the thumbed-through copy back 
on the rack in exchange for a pristine one from the back of the pile ? 
They ' re silly , everyday actions that we all do almost without thinking . We want value 
for our money and usually equate blemished packaging with inferior quality . 
So why would it be any different when it comes to big-ticket items like houses , cars , 
or candidates for a job ? All other things being equal , we tend to gravitate toward the 
one we find the most appealing . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 23
Good or bad , right are wrong , you can argue the injustice of it all - or you can use 
this insight into human behavior to your own advantage and make out like a bandit . 
It ' s your choice . 
So how can you use makeup to increase your salary ? 
1 . Make Sure It ' s Current
Like clothes , hair and makeup styles change roughly every six months . If you 
haven ' t changed the way you put on makeup in years , it ' s time to revisit this 
routine . Why ? Because in business , outdated hair and makeup styles often 
suggest outdated skills as well . Definitely not the message you want to send if 
you ' re up for a new job or promotion . 
2 . Make Sure It ' s Appropriate
If you ' re in a traditional business like banking , law , or finance , you should opt 
for subtle and more muted colors than if you work in an " artsy " occupation 
like advertising or design . Bold strokes of face color might be admired in a 
design studio , but they ' d be regarded with suspicion and alarm in a court of 
law , for example . 
3 . Make Sure It ' s Not Overdone
Tammy Faye . Dolly Parton . Dame Edna - er , I think you get the point . 
Dramatic is okay for television , but definitely not for everyday business . If 
you make up your face like you ' d spackle a wall , then set down those 
brushes , back away from them slowly , and find someone to give you some 
makeup lessons . Once you lose the mask , you ' ll be surprised at how your 
prospects increase . 
What ? You ' re just not a makeup kind of gal ? 
Don ' t despair . There are some very simple tricks you can use to increase your 
effectiveness without buying a lot of products . 
For example : 
1 . Use a Tinted Moisturizer
There are several moisturizers on the market that tint your skin a bit and 
even out your skin tone , like a base makeup , without the additional layer . In 
fact , in warm climates and during warm weather , many women opt for tinted 
moisturizers instead of base makeup to give them the evenness without the 
heaviness . 
2 . Use a Touch of Mascara
Mascara is a fast , easy way to open up the eyes and brighten the face . Many 
women I know use only mascara before they head out the door every 
morning . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 24
3 . Dust on Some Loose Powder
If your skin is clear but tends to get a bit shiny , dust on some loose powder to 
absorb the oil and diminish the shine . 
4 . Wear Lipstick
The only makeup my mother wore at her wedding was lipstick , a dark red 
matte that made her look very glamorous . If you have nice lips and want high 
impact , try a dark color that works nicely with your skin tone . People will 
watch your mouth when you speak . 
If you ' re looking for an easy " edge " at work , take a good look at your makeup 
routine . A current , appropriate style makes you look polished and puts you in a 
favorable light that others can ' t help but respond to . It could even increase your 
earnings . 
Need some more help finding a makeup routine that ' s 
right for you ? Then download a copy of BEAUTY AT ANY 
AGE to learn how to use makeup to look good , feel good , 
and get what you want . 
www . fashionforrealwomen . com / beauty /  
 “ I wanted to send a short thank you for ' Beauty at Any Age '  . So far I have 
only had time to read section 1 on hair , but in just three days I ' ve gone from 
hating my natural ( and disobedient ) curls to loving them , and getting 
complements on them , simply by following the information and link in your 
new e-book . This is after just reading 29 pages of your book . There are still 
120 pages to go . I can ' t wait until I get a chance to read more !  ” 
Sue Frelick 
Nova Scotia , Canada
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 25
Executive Training : Your Fast Track To Success ? 
Should you consider executive training ? 
It ' s a question that ' s been hitting my inbox a lot of late , mostly from women who 
have read and implemented the information in my image ebooks and now find that 
their polished appearance has gained them access to groups of people who are 
polished in appearance , manners , and culture . While these women are enjoying the 
attention and respect of these circles , some are feeling a little unsure of themselves 
in the cultural areas and are wondering if executive training is worth the time and 
expense . 
My answer ? 
Absolutely ! 
Executive training , also known as executive finishing school , teaches people how to 
drink , dine , converse , correspond , and behave appropriately in various cultures and 
situations . From learning which fork to use to what gifts to give when , executive 
training offers polish to those " diamonds in the rough " so they can shine brilliantly 
wherever they go . 
But it ' s not just for executives . Sales people , entrepreneurs , politicians , rock stars , 
and athletes - anyone who feels awkward in social situations -- can benefit from 
executive training . So can you . Did you know that Sean Connery underwent similar 
training in order to play James Bond ? He did - with great success . 
But training can be expensive and time consuming , depending on what skills you 
seek . Here are your options : 
Swiss Finishing Schools
The legendary Swiss finishing schools offer the most complete , well-rounded cultural 
education available in the world . You ' ll learn how to dress properly , run a household , 
entertain , observe protocol , employ staff , converse in multiple languages , organize 
large events , and use public relations to your advantage . 
You ' ll also study architecture , interior design , antiques , music , theater , and art , with 
frequent field trips around Switzerland and to surrounding countries . By the time you 
leave , you ' ll not only be able to set up and run a large household ( some of which , 
like embassies or centuries-old estates , are the size of small corporations ) you ' ll also 
know how to entertain for various business or social or functions , hostessing five or 
five thousand with equal finesse . Royals , aristocrats , diplomats , and wealthy 
business owners have been sending their daughters to Switzerland since the 1950 ' s 
to partake of this crème de la crème training . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 26
Institut Villa Pierrefeu , Switzerland
Length of study : 3-9 months
Location : Switzerland
Cost : Approximately US $50 , 000
Executive Training
Executive training consultations , classes , and seminars are offered by various people 
and organizations around the world and present an abbreviated version of the Swiss 
finishing school : they take out the home management and fine arts lessons and 
focus on personal appearance , etiquette , fine dining , and protocol . Classes can last a 
day , a weekend , a week , or meet weekly for six or eight weeks , depending on the 
trainer . 
You can find image and etiquette consultants locally , nationally , or internationally , 
depending on where you live . Just go to your favorite search engine and type in 
 " executive training + your state ( or country )  " and begin your due diligence search . 
Check curriculum , training , and testimonials . There are plenty of good programs out 
there , so you should be able to find one suited to your needs . 
Length of study : Varies ; can be days or weeks
Location : Varies
Cost : Approximately US$450-$15 , 000 depending on program length and content
Do-It-Yourself
You can also undertake your own executive-style training by reading books and 
attending classes that pertain to your areas of interest . Take makeup classes , read 
wardrobe management books , attend a wine tasting or take a wine class , try your 
hand at French cooking , take a flower arranging class , go to the ballet , opera , and 
theater , and visit museums to learn about different artists and periods . Take 
speaking and acting classes to feel comfortable in front of large groups . You can 
work at your own pace and as your budget allows , taking more time in areas that 
interest you more , less in areas that don ' t . 
Length of study : Varies ; can last a lifetime
Location : At home , libraries , museums , theaters , etc . 
Cost : 0 - thousands , depending on your interests
Yes , doing it yourself is the least expensive , but it ' s also the most time consuming , 
as it may take you years to learn everything . When you turn to professionals and 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 27
structured programs , you ' re paying for the shortcut . So don ' t discount it if you ' re in a 
hurry to learn . 
Whichever approach you choose , DO invest in yourself by learning how to dress , 
speak , and behave in various situations . You ' ll not only have more confidence in 
yourself , you ' ll also garner the respect and confidence of others , which almost 
always leads to more opportunities . 
Want some other guidelines for how to use your clothing to 
ensure success ? Download a copy of Business Wear Magic

to see how easy dressing appropriately for business can be -
whatever industry you happen to be in .  
 “ I am and executive with 20 + years of experience in corporate training
and human resources . Your business selections of books are a wonderful
tool for managers to use in training young executives . Your package
provides excellent modern information in business expectations , from
dress to etiquette to office structure . It is an excellent training tool
for an organization who wants to help build a culture of professionalism
without the structure of uniformity .  
 “ I find your materials helpful especially as they appeal to the younger 
employee who these days is not willing to forego fashion to move ahead as 
perhaps my generation did . As an older woman it is difficult for me to be able 
to adequately communicate to the younger employees , without skepticism 
and difficulty that professionalism is still important in the workplace and 
distinct choices between what you wear to the office and what you wear to 
the clubs are different .  
 “ Your information was well received and appreciated as it came from a model 
and put business AND fashion together in preparing for work . Your 
information helps to guide people between making a personal statement with 
your professional presence and feeling good about yourself while not going 
across the line to un-professionalism . Thank you , your materials are very 
helpful to me as a leader and I look forward to more information .  ” 
Tammy Carr
Vice President
Corporate Training & Development
PODS Enterprises Inc . 
Clearwater , FL 33760
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 28
Special Occasion Dressing
Social Wardrobe Overview
What should be in your social wardrobe ? 
Before I answer that , let ' s define exactly what social clothes are . Social attire , unlike 
casual and business wear , is typically very formal and is made of fine fabrics like silk , 
velvet , and lace . It ’ s worn on the dressiest occasions of life , like : 
 Garden Parties
 Cocktail parties
 Formal dinners
 Formal dances
 Engagement parties
 Weddings
 Baptisms
 First Communions
 Bar Mitzvahs
 Other Religious Ceremonies
 Galas
 Graduations
 Award ceremonies
 Movie premieres
Social day wear , which includes knee or calf-length 
suits , dresses , skirts , or pants , usually features 
festive colors , patterns , and trims in a modest style , 
and may be worn with a hat and matching 
accessories . Day wear is typically worn to functions 
that begin late morning or early afternoon , or before 
5 pm . 
Social evening wear includes cocktail dresses , full 
length gowns , or separates in flowing , shiny , or 
beaded fabrics in either modest or shoulder-baring 
styles . Evening wear is typically worn to functions 
that begin late afternoon or early evening , or after 5 
pm . 
Daywear
Before 5 pm
Eveningwear
After 5 pm
Both dresses from
Chadwicks . com
A good social wear selection for an average lifestyle includes : 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 29
Tops
1 fun day
2 flirty night
Pants
1 evening
Skirts
Evening pants
LBCatalog . com
1 all season day
1 summer evening
1 winter evening
Dresses
1 all season day
1 summer evening
1 winter evening
Suits
1 daytime
1 evening Daytime suit
Roamans . com
Jackets
1 pastel for summer
1 velvet for winter
Outerwear
1 evening jacket
1 light wrap
Bag
1 evening clutch Light wrap
Newport-News . com
Shoes
1 pair dress sandals
1 pair closed toe evening heels
1 pair strappy metallic sandals
Now as you look over this list , you may think it ' s a bit excessive for your needs . 
That ' s fine . Again , this is for an average lifestyle . If you live a quiet life , an all season 
skirt and evening bag may be all you need . If you ' re a socialite or are in the public 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 30
eye a lot , this may not see you through a fortnight of events . Again , adjust 
accordingly . 
So how can you cheat if you need a few pieces to do a lot of things ? In a word : 
SEPARATES . 
Mixing pieces will make you look like you have a lot more than you really do . You can 
even pull pieces from your casual or business wardrobes to use for social events , so 
long as you add an appropriate top and accessories . 
Have 3 or 4 events coming up that you need to dress for ( graduation , wedding , 
cocktail party , bridal shower )  ? If you ' ll be with different people each time , you could 
wear the same outfit to each . If you ' ll be with the same people , wear the same base 
outfit ( suit , blouse and skirt ) but change the accessories or your hairstyle . 
If you ' ll be traveling out of town to an event ( graduation , wedding , movie premier )  , 
be sure to check with your host as to what ' s appropriate . Generally , the bigger the 
town , the more formal the attire ; the smaller the town , the less formal . This is 
important . If you ' ve ever gone somewhere and felt like a " city slicker " or " country 
comes to town ,  " you know what I ' m talking about . If you want people to talk to you , 
dress like the locals ; otherwise , you may travel a long distance and get a chilly 
reception for your trouble . 
So what ' s the bottom line with putting together an appropriate social wardrobe ? With 
a few well-chosen pieces , a few jokes in your back pocket , and a kind word for 
everyone , you could soon find your social life sizzling with non-stop invitations . 
Match your clothing with the occasion , and like a fine vintage paired with a tasty 
entrée , you could soon become a special occasion favorite . 
Need some more help in learning exactly what to wear 
when ? Download a copy of OCCASION MAGIC : 

to see how easy dressing well for any occasion can be .  
 “ I received it [ Occasion Magic ] and had no problems . All I can say is WOW ! I 
think this is the best one yet . Thanks so much for this e-book ! I was pretty 
much clueless about what to wear beyond my work wardrobe ! Thank you , 
thank you , thank you !  ” 
Deborah A . Groenendyk
Jacksonville , FL
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 31
Fun Stuff
10 Great Fashion Websites
Where can you go to learn about the latest trends ? The history of fashion ? Clothing 
care and maintenance ? 
Online , of course ! There are lots of great sites out there that you can get lost in , 
reading about everything from celebrity fashion to haute couture . 
Here are a few of my favorites : 
Style . com 

The home of W and Vogue on the web , Style . com has 
made many of my fashion magazines subscriptions 
obsolete . You can learn about trends , runway reports , 
fashion icons , fashion designers and more just by perusing 
this site . Take a look . 
First View

Wish you could have a front row seat to all the best fashion shows in the world ? 
Well , here ' s the next best thing . Look at the current and past collections from 
famous designers from all over the world , and see the " who , what , where , when " of 
upcoming fashion shows . 
Mode à Paris

Want to " dive right in " to the world of French fashion to learn about fashion history , 
designers , and upcoming shows ? Then this site is for you ! Find out which fashion 
houses meet the rigorous standards of the Chambre Syndical de la Haute Couture , 
and learn where you can study for a career in French fashion . 
The Sartorialist

Scott Schuman is a former fashion marketer and retail store owner who combined 
his love of great tailoring with fashion photography to create " The Sartorialist " blog . 
Sartorial , which is a term used to describe tailoring and the tailoring trade , is the 
main focus of Scott ' s quest as he seeks to photograph well-dressed people on the 
street . What began as a fun way to share his photos just two years ago has turned 
into a fast-paced fashion career that sends him all over the globe as a reporter for 
Style . com and as a speaker to fashion and tailoring groups . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 32
MSN Beauty and Fashion

MSN has lots of in-depth channels , like finance , food , gardening , and health . Their 
fashion channel is excellent , offering behind-the-scenes videos , interviews , and 
articles that you don ' t see anywhere else . 
If you like snarky celebrity fashion reviews , then 
MSN entertainment writer / fashion critic Kat Giantis 
will have you laughing out loud . Her reports are not 
kind , but they do show how celebrities can still 
stumble fashion-wise even when they have an army 
of stylists at their disposal . Check out her 
 " Undressed " reports here : 
Sienna Miller and Claudia Schiffer are 
 " Undressed " 
by Kat Giantis
Instyle

INSTYLE Magazine ' s website has come a long way from the days when you could just 
go there to subscribe to their magazine . You can still do that , but you can also look 
at trends , get ideas for entertaining , vote on you favorite celebrity looks , and even 
learn where to copy those looks for less . It ' s a fun site , especially if you ' re into 
celebrity fashion . 
Ralph Lauren

One of the things I like about the Ralph Lauren 
site is that it understands what people are looking 
for online . While many other designer sites take a 
long to time to load , are bloated with graphics , 
and don ' t sell directly from their site , 
RalphLauren . com loads relatively quickly and is 
easy to navigate . You can buy clothes , subscribe 
to the ezine , and get TONS of styling ideas from 
the gorgeous pictures . They also have a style 
section to show you how to put things together . 
Awesome ! Would that other designers would take 
some notes from Ralph .  .  . 
Get great fashion styling ideas at
RalphLauren . com
Fashion Era

Love fashion history ? Want to see which trend-setters have influenced fashion over 
the centuries ? Need to do research on what people wore in 1800 ? 1900 ? 2000 ? Then 
this is THE place to find out . This comprehensive site is one of the most popular on 
the web , with good reason : it has TONS of information ! 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 33
Fabric Link

Want to learn more about different types of fabrics ? Need to know how to maintain 
the fabrics you have ? Fabric Link can help . Take a good look around their " Fabric 
University ,  " and you ' ll learn everything you need to know about taking care of most 
fabrics . 
Biz Rate

Looking for something in particular , like a black cocktail dress or sweet deals on 
Christian Louboutin shoes ? Just go to Bizrate . com , type in your item , and it will find 
places on the web that are selling what you seek . It also lists price and costumer 
reviews . What a time saver ! 
So there you have it . Take some time to click around to these sites when you have 
some time , and either bookmark them or keep this list handy for future reference . 
You never know when these sites will come in handy .  
 “ I am SO excited about the link to FirstView . com ! My daughter is a model 
and her first season was Spring 2007 . There was a show that I could never 
find and found the whole show on the [ First View ] web site !  !  !  !  
 “ I know , stage mother , proud mother and all but it is really something else to 
see your child doing this and you helped to locate the one show I never could 
find 
anywhere else .  
 “ Thank you for all the great links !  ” 
Susan Helena
Beaufort , SC
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 34
The Allure of Vintage Clothing
My sister and I finally got around to taking in the Elsa Schiaparelli ( pronounced 
Scap-a-relly )  " Shocking !  " exhibit at the Philadelphia Museum of Fine Arts , which ran 
through January 4th . Packed in with hundreds of other fashion enthusiasts , many of 
whom were from all over the East Coast , it was an amazing experience . Not the least 
of which because the clothes were absolutely fabulous . 
Born in 1890 in Italy , Elsa Schiaparelli was not an attractive woman . Short and a yoyo dieter , she learned early on how to use apparel to disguise and detract from her 
less favorable parts . Her clothing collections clearly illustrated this knack , allowing 
women of all shapes and sizes to look chic and well-dressed . 
Designing during the height of the surrealism period in 
Paris in the 1920 ' s and 30 ' s ,  " Schap "  ( as she was known 
by her friends )  , was heavily influenced by her artist 
friends , most notably Salvador Dali . Pieces from the 
collection included painted lobsters , butterflies , bunnies , 
and circus clowns , as well as one of her most famous 
accessories , a hat in the shape of a shoe . Schiaparelli Sweater , 1928
Philadelphia Museum of Art
Her sense for the theatric won over a wide audience , and she dressed people like Zsa 
Zsa Gabor and Mae West for the movies and Marlene Deitrich and the Duchess of 
Windsor in real life . 
While her archrival Coco Chanel was designing signature gold-button suits , 
Schiaparelli was creating necklaces adorned with plastic insects , evening apparel 
inspired by Indian saris , gloves with red snakeskin " fingernails ,  " and short boots 
made from monkey fur . 
Yet as exotic as these items were , she also created beautiful everyday wear , 
including tweed suits and wool wrap dresses that are as relevant today as they were 
seventy years ago . Which just goes to show you that classic lines never go out of 
style . 
So why does vintage clothing like Schiaparelli ' s continue to create allure ? 
Before I answer that , let me note that while many people refer to " vintage " as 
anything that ' s older than current season , that ' s technically not correct . To recap : 
 ANTIQUE clothing is generally regarded as anything made prior to 1920 . 
These clothes are usually bought to display and not to wear . 
 VINTAGE clothing is apparel that was made from 1920 to roughly 1979 , or 
that ' s more than 25 years old . It is often bought to wear . 
 CONSIGNMENT pieces are current or near-new styles , usually less than 
three years old . Many consignment shops also have a vintage section . 
So why do vintage clothes enjoy enduring popularity ? 
I think there are several reasons . 
Secrets of Well-Dressed Women
© Diana Pemberton-Sikes FashionForRealWomen . com Page 35
1 . It ' s Unique
If you like to make a statement with your clothes or want to guarantee that 
you won ' t see any duplicates wherever you go , vintage gives you that edge . 
This is one of the biggest reasons vintage pieces are so popular on the red 
carpet , so celebrities know that they won ' t show up at an event wearing the 
same thing as someone else . 
2 . It ' s Typically Well Made
This is especially true of clothing made prior to 1970 , and one of the most 
obvious things I noticed at the Schiaparelli exhibit . The quality of materials 
and workmanship was unmistakable . Clothes lasted in those days , which is 
why they ' re still around today . You ' d be hard-pressed to find apparel that fell 
apart in the wash after one or two wearings in the 30 ' s or 40 ' s , and given the 
washing machines they used in those days , that ' s really saying something .  
( You should , of course , learn the best way to launder any vintage piece you 
buy .  ) 
3 . It ' s Budget-Friendly
This isn ' t always true , given the origin and current condition of the piece , but 
you can usually find vintage designer apparel at a fraction of the cost of 
current designer clothes . Which means , of course , that you can dress well for 
less . 
4 . It Shows Your Fashion Knowledge
True fashion lovers tend to know a lot about the field , including fashion 
history . If you say ,  " It ' s a Mainbocher ,  " or " A Lelong ,  " or " An Adrian " to the 
average label snob , they ' ll assume you ' re slumming it because they don ' t 
know those names . Say them to a learned fashion-lover , however , and she ' ll 
say " Oooh !  " and take a second look . 
5 . It Offers a Glimpse at a Forgotten Lifestyle
Back before television , the Internet , and cellular phones , people actually used 
to go out and co-mingle with other people at parties , clubs , restaurants , and 
the like on a regular basis . Cocktail and evening apparel were staples in many 
households , and as important to one ' s elegant entertainments as good china 
and sterling silver flatware . Today , few people entertain regularly , and most 
people ' s idea of dressing up to go clubbing is putting on their " good " pair of 
jeans . My , how times have changed ! 
Vintage clothing remains popular because people like well-made , unique clothing that 
doesn ' t cost a fortune . If you want to break from the mainstream without breaking 
your budget , educate yourself a little by learning about styles and designers from the 
period you like the best . Then , look around your hometown or online for reputable 
vintage dealers . With everyone cleaning out her attic hoping to score big on eBay , 
you may be surprised and delighted by what you come across . 
