SOFE HANDBOOK
COLLABORATIVE PRACTICES 
& ENTREPRENEURIAL SKILLS 
FOR THE FUTURE OF 
FASHION
ERASMUS + 
Fashion is a steadily rising , profitable , highly competitive and truly 
global industry . It is characterised by the high complexity of its 
supply chains which spread along countries and continents and 
make it almost impossible to have certainty over where garments are 
being produced , and how . This lack of transparency along with 
fast-fashion have led to a series of human rights violations . At the 
same time , Europe finds itself in the need of creating new jobs , after 
a surge of unemployment following the 2007 economic crisis . 
Re-localizing industry production as well as fostering 
entrepreneurship have the potential to significantly stimulate 
Europe ’ s growth . 
SoFE builds on both . 
We started this project with the objective to develop , organise and 
evaluate an experimental pedagogical plan for the training and 
incubation of the future fashion entrepreneurs . We hope to support 
local designers , the young and structurally unemployed , those 
looking for opportunities along the fashion entrepreneurial value 
chain , as well as early stage existing fashion entrepreneurs . 
By introducing case-based learning , skills training , action learning 
and e-learning methodologies as well as off-line mentoring , SoFE 
aims to stimulate the practices , skills and networks needed to 
develop financially sound fashion and creative industry enterprises 
that are dedicated to environmental sustainability and social 
inclusion . 
SoFE offers a training and incubation platform for the future 
sustainable and ethical fashion entrepreneurs . The project is 
developed by seven institutions from five European countries in the 
framework of the Erasmus + Program . The aim of SoFE is to provide 
PREFACE
COLLABORATIVE 
PRACTICES & 
ENTREPRENEURIAL 
SKILLS IN YOUR 21ST 
CENTURY FASHION 
START-UP . 
ACHIEVING 
PERSONAL MASTERY 
& SOCIETAL VALUE
THROUGH YOUR 
FASHION 
ENTERPRISE . 
i
insights in the best practices of sustainable fashion entrepreneurs with a focus on co-creation and 
collaborative skills . 
The SoFE project consists of three components building on each other : 
1 . This HANDBOOK that provides the foundation for understanding co-creation and collaborative skills 
needed for developing successful sustainable fashion enterprises . 
2 . The SOFE E-LEARNING PLATFORM with courses for social and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs 
specifically geared towards co-creation and collaborative skills . 
3 . OFF-LINE NETWORK and TRAINING EVENTS that support local community building of sustainable 
fashion entrepreneurs and taps into an extensive European network of experts . 
The SoFE HANDBOOK encompasses the following : 
1 . A COLLECTION OF BEST-PRACTICE CASES in five European countries displaying co-creation and 
collaborative skills for social and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs . 
2 . CASE-BASED LEARNING ON CO-CREATION and COLLABORATIVE PRACTICES as well as 
ENTREPRENEURIAL and 21st CENTURY SKILLS .  
 “ Innovation provides real benefits for us as fashion industry stakeholders… to creating more jobs , building a 
greener society and improving our quality of life , but also to maintaining our competitiveness in the global 
market .  ” 
- Nov 2012 EU ‘ Rethinking education ’ 
Thereby , proposing to combat youth unemployment through developing vocational training and 
education to ensure relevant training and skills that lead to a competitive advantage , for local prosperity . 
SoFE promotes a cross-disciplinary approach in the fashion industry incorporating professionals from 
fashion designers to buyers and from fashion bloggers to digital artists . It fulfils the objective of the 
Erasmus + Program by contributing to the development of the EU as an advanced knowledge-based 
society . 
ii
iii
Authenticitys Experiences S . L . 
Barcelona , Spain
Founder Elena Rodriguez Blanco & Sandra Astrid Schoeber . 
Wageningen University
Amsterdam , The Netherlands
Dr . Kim Poldner 
Athens University of Economics and Business - Research Centre
Athens , Greece
Professor George Ioannou & Associate Professor Klas Eric Soderquist . 
The Nest Social Cooperative Enterprise 
Athens , Greece
Founder Dr . Fiori A . Zafeiropoulou & Christianna Vasiliadou . 

Eolas S . L . 
Extremadura , Spain
Founder Manon van Leeuwen . 
Społeczna Akademia Nauk
Lodz , Poland
Marta Kędzia & Emilia Szczygielska
ORGANISATIONS & CONTRIBUTORS
iv
The collapse of Rana Plaza factory in Dhaka , Bangladesh in April 2013 , where thousands of fashion workers 
lost their lives , was yet another spur for the revelation of the terrible crimes happening in the sumptuous 
name of fashion . The fashion industry follows the sex industry in modern slavery . The increasing awareness 
of the destructive impact of the fashion industry has given rise to a global movement of people active in 
 ‘ sustainable fashion ’  . There is a tremendous need in society for fashion entrepreneurs that are both socially 
value driven and environmentally conscious . Unlike the conventional homo economicus , these 
entrepreneurs aim to deliver positive societal impact through the protection of the environment and 
human rights . We call these people “ Social and Sustainable Fashion Entrepreneurs ”  . 
Social and Sustainable Fashion is a concept lacking a universal definition . A widely used definition for 
sustainable development , taken from the World Commission on Environment and Development report 
1
SOCIAL & SUSTAINABLE FASHION 
ENTREPRENEURS
5 
 ‘ Our Common Future ’  ( 1987 )  , defines it as “ development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs .  ”  ( 1 ) 
According to the ( EFF ) Ethical Fashion Forum ’ s definition is fashion which maximises benefits to people 
and communities and minimises impact on the environment . For the EFF , the meaning of ethical goes 
beyond ‘ doing no harm ’ and represents an approach , which strives to take an active role in poverty 
reduction , sustainable livelihood creation , minimising and counteracting environmental concerns .  ( 2 ) 
In defining sustainable fashion , we should take into account what fashion designers have to say . On 5 
February 2010 , the Financial Times published the article :  ” Sustainable Fashion : what does green mean ?  ”  
( Friedman , V .  ) where it explored the meaning of sustainable fashion according to fashion designers . To 
them local , traditional techniques and the ecological footprint are key elements . Designer Oscar de la 
Renta declares that :  “ Sustainable fashion implies a commitment to the traditional techniques , and not just 
the art , of making clothes .  " 
For Anya Hindmarch , designer and initiator of “ I am not a plastic bag ”  , sustainable fashion is “ locally 
sourced materials that don ’ t pollute in their creation or demise ( preferably recycled ) and with limited 
transportation to achieve the completed product .  ” Designer Dries van Noten highlights the importance of 
supply chain transparency :  “ Though cotton may be unbleached , we need to examine how it arrives to the 
manufacturer or to us the wearer . What was the ‘ carbon imprint ’ of its delivery , for example ?  ”  ( 3 ) 
Fashion entrepreneurs and people working in the fashion industry give their own meaning to sustainability . 
Orsola de Castro , Co-Founder and Director of Fashion Revolution emphasises that :  “ Sustainability provides 
that kind of platform of curiosity whereby young designers and young consumers can actually question the 
clothes that they wear , design , or buy .  ” 
Sarah Ditty ( Editor-in-Chief at “ Ethical Fashion Forum ”  ) defines sustainability as the capacity to endure . She 
suggests three elements you need to sustain : your profits , your human resources and your natural material 
resources : 
6 
 “ Sustainability is about trying to balance different and often competing needs against an awareness of the 
environmental and the social issues we face as a society . The impacts of the decisions we make every day 
have very real consequences for people ’ s lives and for the environment .  ” 
- Sarah Ditty 
A Social and Sustainable Fashion Entrepreneur does more than focus on minimising environmental harm , 
but tries to achieve transformative societal change . With innovation and a true consciousness of the 
industry ’ s negative impact , they try to overcome economic and social inequalities by promoting ethical 
manufacturing at ‘ no one ’ s expense ’ and by promoting inclusive employment and integration of vulnerable 
groups . Ultimately , contributing to the reduction of poverty and inequality . 
To wrap up , Deborah Campbell ’ s ( womenswear designer ) puts it well :  
 “ Sustainability to me means ensuring that we don ’ t impoverish the planet for future generations .  ”  ( 4 ) 
7
1 .  ( 1987 )  . Report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development : Our Common 
Future , page 16 [ pdf ] Available at 
. 
pdf [ Accessed : 17 July , 2017 ] 
2 . Ethical Fashion Forum . com . What is Ethical 
Fashion ?  [ online ] Available at 

hical-fashion [ Accessed : 6 Sept . 2016 ]  . 
3 . Friedman V .  ( 2010 )  . Sustainable fashion : what 
does green mean ? Financial Times ,  [ online ]  . 
Available at 

6e3-00144feab49a ? mhq5j = e2 [ Accessed : 6 Sept . 
2016 ] 
4 . How to build a Sustainable Fashion Business , 
what is “ sustainable fashion ?  ”  , Chapter 1 . 4 .  ( video ) 
Future Learn . Available at 

shion / 0 / steps / 13529 [ Accessed : 30 Aug . 2016 ] 
REFERENCES
8
The global apparel market is valued at 3 trillion dollars , and accounts for 2% of the world ' s Gross Domestic 
Product ( GDP )  , making it one of the largest and most profitable sectors in the world ( Fashion United )  . 
Indicatively the number of people employed in apparel manufacturing was 24 . 8 million , 33 . 0 million in 
textiles and 57 . 8 million in textiles & clothing in 2014 .  ( 1 ) 
The textiles and clothing sector plays a crucial role in the European economy , directly employing 1 . 7 
million workers , 70% of whom are women .  ( 2 ) 
We are witnessing the sector undergoing radical changes due to technological advancements , changes 
in production costs and the emergence of important international competitors ( 3 )  . The changes in 
2
FASHION INDUSTRY CHALLENGES
9
consumer behaviour and the consequent demand for the latest trends has given rise to a phenomenon , 
now commonly referred to as fast-fashion ( 4 )  .  “ It needs to be fashionable , it needs to be cheap , it needs to 
be accessible ”  . A greater need to keep up with trends is resulting in more and cheaper purchases . 
This consumption behaviour has borne radical changes in the supply chain creating a “ buyer-driven chain ”  . 
Large retailers , marketers , and traders drive the market as they determine where to produce , what to 
produce and at what price . This phenomenon results in large-scale production in countries such as 
Bangladesh , Vietnam , India , Pakistan , Cambodia and Thailand where the cost of labour is particularly low 
and garment workers are confronted with poor working conditions . The inequality between the production 
and the retail sections of the garment industry can be best illustrated by the huge disparity in wages 
between retailers and those who make the clothes . For instance , in Bangladesh , the minimum wage is 
5 , 300 Taka / month ( 68 USD ; 54 EUR ) which is amongst the lowest in the world while a retail worker in the 
lowest retail position earns 9 USD ; 7 EUR / hour . The retailers and brands are typically situated in developed 
countries in the EU and the US , where they develop the branding , design and marketing . While the most 
intensive labour parts of the chain are situated in developing countries with Asia dominating the garment 
production ( 5 )  .  
 ‘ Fast-fashion ’  , refers to expediting the production processes in order to get new fashion trends to the 
market as quickly and cheaply as possible , encouraging consumers to buy more at a cheaper price ( 6 )  . The 
positive response of consumers led to the growth of the fast-fashion industry . Small fashion brands can ’ t 
deliver the high and continuous demand due to high costs . As stated in EFF , an increase in the amount of 
clothes people consume has severe consequences for the environment ( 7 )  . 
10
Environmental Challenges
Concurrently , the Danish Fashion Institute , published a study in 2013 naming the fashion industry as one of 
the most polluting in the world , ranking second behind the oil industry . In addition , Europa states that 25% 
of chemicals produced worldwide are used for textiles and the industry is often noted as the number two 
polluter of clean water – after agriculture ( 8 )  . 
Modern Slavery
With the emergence of fast-fashion , consumers expect to pay less per item purchased . Low prices require 
low production costs to maintain a margin for the industry players . This is achieved by producing in 
low-regulation and low-wage economies . This set-up allows companies to exploit their direct and indirect 
work-force ; the fashion industry is highly related to ‘ trafficking ’ for forced labour . Human trafficking is 
modern-day slavery and involves the use of force , fraud , or coercion to obtain some type of labour or 
commercial sex act ( 9 )  .  ‘ The International Labour Association ’  ( ILO ) highlights that the Textile , Clothing , 
Leather and Footwear ( TCLF ) sector today is characterised by high volatility , low predictability , and 
generally low profit margins . Additionally , the sector remains among the most labour-intensive industries , 
despite advances in technology and workplace practices ( 10 )  . 
The Global Slavery Index 2016 estimates there are 45 . 8 million people subject to some form of modern 
slavery in the world today6 . Modern slavery refers to situations of exploitation that a person cannot refuse 
or leave because of threats , violence , coercion , abuse of power or deception , with treatment akin to a farm 
animal ( 11 )  . In terms of absolute numbers , India remains the country with highest number of people in 
slavery ( 18 . 35m )  ( 12 )  . Nabita , a clothing factory worker in New Delhi said :  " He offered me $75 , a mobile 
phone and told me to get into bed with him if I wanted work ,  "  . Asia accounts for more than 60 percent of 
the world ' s garment production , with the industry employing more than 15 million people directly , most of 
them women ( 13 )  . Europe now imports about half of the world ' s entire clothing production with China 
manufacturing an estimated 65% of the world ' s textiles ( 8 )  . Also , Asia has an estimated 66% of the total 
number of people in modern slavery . This region provides low-skilled labour for the production stage of 
global supply chains for industries including food production , garments and technology ( 11 )  . 
Europe has the lowest regional prevalence of modern slavery in the world . Nevertheless , it remains a 
source and destination for forced labour and commercial sexual exploitation . As has been reported in the 
Global Slavery Index 2016 , Europe counts 1 , 243 , 400 people in slavery or 2 . 7% of the global total ( 45 . 8 
million )  .  ( 6 ) 
11
Made in… Where ? 
Furthermore ,  ‘ made in ’ indicates a key role between fashion industry and forced labour .  “ Made in ” labelling 
is an indicator of the regulations and health , safety and wage standards under which a good has been 
produced . The developed countries choose countries such as China , India , Bangladesh to produce their 
products due to their cheap labour . For instance , a jacket sold by a European brand can be manufactured 
in a cheap and relatively unregulated labour market like China , but finished and packaged in France or 
Italy , thereby earning a ‘ Made in France ’ or ‘ Made in Italy ’ label . Therefore , Fair trade and Certified 
Organic , have emerged , offering companies new tools for communicating manufacturing standards to 
consumers , who are increasingly concerned with the provenance of their goods ( 14 )  . 
Opportunities
Transparency is often considered the first step to reducing human rights violations and environmental 
hazards along the fashion industry ’ s supply chain . A commitment to transparency could ensure that brands 
know who produces their clothes , under what conditions , where the fabrics come from and how they are 
made and treated and could subsequently communicate this to their customers , to their shareholders , staff 
and other partners across their supply chain . A lot of businesses fear transparency because it might 
jeopardise their competitiveness or reveal issues they don ’ t know how to resolve ( 15 )  . 
It is noteworthy that despite the high demand for fast-fashion , consumers are becoming more 
environmentally and ethically conscious . But naturally , the consumers ’ eco conscience is outranked by 
other 
concerns . 
More than 
9 in 10 
say 
factors 
like fit 
( 98% )  , 
comfort 
( 97% )  , 
quality 
( 95% )  , 
price 
( 95% )  , 
and 
12
durability ( 93% ) are important in their apparel purchase decisions , according to the Cotton Incorporated 
2014 Environment Survey . As it stands , just 38% of all consumers say they put an effort into finding 
environmentally friendly apparel for themselves , according to Environment Survey statistics . However , 
nearly 7 out of 10 ( 69% ) would be bothered if they found out an item they purchased was not so . Further , 
39% would hold the manufacturer responsible ( 16 )  . 
The fashion and high-end sectors face several challenges , including the increased prevalence of 
counterfeit goods , increasing shortages of skilled workers , environmental issues and difficulties for fashion 
small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to access finance ( 17 )  . The European Commission works on 
initiatives to strengthen the competitiveness of the fashion and high-end industries , such as measures to 
protect intellectual property rights , to fight fake goods , and to help fashion SMEs access finance and 
stimulate creativity and innovation ( 18 )  . 
13
1 . Fashionunited . com . Global fashion industry 
statistics-International apparel .  ( online ) Available 
at 

y-statistics [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ]  . 
2 . Euractiv . com ,  ( 2016 )  . European Textiles and 
Fashion : Facts & Figures .  [ online ] Available at 

stry / infographic / european-textiles-and-fashion-fa
cts-figures /  [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ]  . 
3 . European Commission ,  ( 2016 )  . Growth , 
Sectors / Textiles Fashion and Creative Industries / 
Textiles and clothing industries / Textiles and 
Clothing in the EU .  [ online ] Available at 

tiles-clothing / eu_en [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ]  . 
4 . Stotz L .  & Kane G .  ( 2015 )  . Facts on the Global 
Garment Industry .  [ pdf ] Global Garment Industry 
Factsheet . Available at 

ons / factsheets / general-factsheet-garment-indus
try-february-2015 . pdf [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ]  . 
5 . Investopedia . com . Definition of Fast Fashion .  
( online ) Available at 

n . asp [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ] 
7 . Ethical Fashion Forum . com . Fast fashion ,  “ value ” 
fashion .  ( online ) Available at 
 
/ fast-fashion-cheap-fashion [ Accessed : 13 July , 
2016 ]  . 
8 . Ditty , S .  ( 2015 )  . Europe in the World : The 
garment , textiles & fashion industry .  [ online ] 
Europa . eu Available at 

n / posts / europe-world-garment-textiles-and-fash
ion-industry [ Accessed : 26 June , 2016 ]  . 
9 . International Labour Organization . Textiles , 
clothing , leather and footwear sector .  ( online ) 
Available at 
 
/ textiles-clothing-leather-footwear / lang--en / inde
x . htm [ Accessed : 26 June , 2016 ]  . 
10 . The Global Slavery Index .  ( 2016 )  . Findings .  
[ online ] Available at 
 
[ Accessed : 26 June , 2016 ]  . 
11 . The Global Slavery Index .  ( 2016 )  . Country / India .  
[ online ] Available at 

a /  [ Accessed : 26 June , 2016 ]  . 
12 . Nagaraj , A .  ( 2016 )  . New Documentary calls for 
 ' Dignified Life ' for Asian Garment Workers .  
[ online ] Reuters . Available at 

ages-idUSKCN0YW1W7 [ Accessed : 24 August , 
2016 ] 
REFERENCES
14
13 .  ( 2015 )  . Does ' Made In ' matter ? Business of 
Fashion [ online ] Available at 

voices / discussions / does-made-in-matter 
[ Accessed : 26 June , 2016 ]  . 
14 . Salfino C . Ethical matters-When doing good is 
good business . The Cotton 
Incorporated Lifestyle Monitor ,  ( online )  . 
Available at 

ters /  [ Accessed : 14 July , 2016 ]  . 
15 . European Commission ,  ( 2016 )  . Growth , 
Sectors / Textiles Fashion and Creative Industries / 
Fashion and high-end industries / EU support for 
fashion and high-end industries .  [ online ] 
Available at 

h-end-industries / eu-support / index_en . htm 
[ Accessed : 14 July , 2016 ] 
15
Current situation in Europe
In light of stagnating economic growth , and persistently high youth unemployment triggered by the 2007 
economic crisis , as well as the very recent accession of refugees , the European Union faces a range of 
political and economic pressures ( 1 )  . 
Continually slow growth has a direct impact on the working conditions in Europe , characterised by a 
reduction of jobs and working hours , wage freezes and wage cuts . The increased pressure on businesses 
also transfers to greater job insecurity leading to increased stress , and a greater risk of harassment , as well 
as growth of the informal economy ( 2 )  . The ILO states : informal workers ‘ are not protected under the legal 
and regulatory frameworks ’ and are ,  ‘ characterised by a high degree of vulnerability ’  ( 3 )  . 
3
EUROPEAN CHALLENGES OF 
INTEGRATION
16
Eurostat estimates that 21 . 224 million men and women in the EU-28 , of whom 16 . 420 million from within 
the EA-19 , were unemployed in April 2016 . Since the economic crisis in 2007 / 8 , youth unemployment has 
risen drastically , currently holding at around twice the overall unemployment rate among the EA-19 
Countries . In April 2016 , 4 . 235 million young persons ( under the age of 25 ) were unemployed in the 
EU-28 , 2 . 932 million of whom from the EA-19 ( 4 )  . 
17
Challenges
Some of the most prevalent challenges underlying the consistently high unemployment are skill gaps and 
skill mismatches ( 5 )  . Whereby , skill gaps are defined as the difference between the skills people have and 
what the labour market needs ( 6 )  . And Skill mismatches hinder productivity and growth and affect Member 
States ’ resilience to economic shocks . The combination leads to lowered productivity and a lacking 
exploitation of potential employment opportunities and economic growth ( 5 )  . 
Skill gaps have a striking presence in the European market : 40% of European employers have difficulty 
finding people with the skills they need to grow and innovate . The challenge goes beyond identifying 
occupation-specific skills ; employers are increasingly demanding transferable skills , such as the ability to 
work in a team , creative thinking , problem solving or learning to learn , financial literacy and 
entrepreneurship to ensure employees possess the skills to adapt to a more rapidly changing work 
environment ( 5 )  . 
Additionally , the European Commission ( 2016 ) states that 70 million Europeans lack adequate reading and 
writing skills , and even more have poor numeracy and digital skills , putting them at risk of unemployment , 
poverty and social exclusion . More than half of the 12 million long-term unemployed are considered 
low-skilled ( 5 )  . 
The digitisation is reshaping the way companies are run , the opportunities for growth that arise and the 
demand on employees . Almost all jobs require some level of digital skill . The demand for digital 
technology professionals has grown by 4% annually in the last ten years , and is persistently one of the 
leading trends that influences all aspects of our life . Yet , digital skills are staggeringly poor among 
European professionals , with almost 50% lacking basic digital skills . Some of these skills are particularly 
vital for those starting their own business , and many underestimate the importance of contemporary skills 
and an entrepreneurial mind-set ( 5 )  . 
Identifying and validating these skills is pertinent for people with lower qualifications , like the unemployed 
or those at risk of unemployment , as well as for people who need to change career path and migrants . 
Skills training can not only create new employment opportunities for vulnerable groups , but support them 
in showcasing their experience and talent , identifying further training needs , talents and identify 
opportunities for re-qualification ( 5 )  . 
18
Differences between education and training systems in the EU , however , make it difficult for employers to 
assess the knowledge and skills of those who have qualifications from another country and educational 
system than their own . Approximately , 25% of the non-EU nationals are highly-skilled . However , within the 
group of highly-skilled , around two-thirds are inactive , unemployed or overqualified for their jobs . In 
addition , some migrants already residing within the EU , as well as those who have recently arrived , 
including refugees , may have limited knowledge of the host country language , creating additional barriers 
to employment ( 5 )  . 
Implications
Europe faces challenges of integration , with skills gaps and mismatches paying an important role in 
precluding certain parts of the population ; particularly women , youth , immigrants , ethnic minorities and 
people with disabilities are exposed to increased risk of poverty and social exclusion ( 7 )  . Eurostat 
emphasises that in 2014 , 24 . 1% of the EU population were still at risk of poverty or social exclusion . In the 
same year , more than 30% of young people aged 18-24 , 27 . 8% of children aged less than 18 and 66 . 7% of 
the unemployed were at risk of poverty in the E . U . Moreover , 40 . 1% of adults born in a country outside the 
EU-28 and 24 . 8% of those born in a different EU-28 country than the reporting one were at risk in 2014 ( 8 )  . 
19
Opportunities
According to ILO it is estimated that over 600 million new jobs need to be created by 20308 in order to 
deal with the high levels of unemployment ( 9 )  . 
The Textile , Clothing , Leather and Footwear ( TCLF ) sector is characterised by geographically dispersed 
production and rapid market-driven changes , providing employment opportunities to millions of workers 
worldwide , especially for young women . Due to the scale and the profile of workers employed , the sector 
offers great potential to contribute significantly to economic and social development ( 10 )  . 
The textile and clothing sector accounts for approximately 4 . 5% of EU manufacturing production and 7 . 5% 
of manufacturing employment ( 11 )  . The vast majority of companies in the sector are small and medium 
enterprises , with 86% of them employing fewer than 10 people and 3% employing more than 50 . Also , 
women represent more than 70% of all employees in the sector ( 12 )  . 
20
Job openings
It is estimated that , until 2025 , nearly 600 . 000 job openings are anticipated in the textile and fashion sector 
in the EU . Therefore , talented skilled employees are crucial for this sector such as sewing machine 
operator , production machine operator , clothing product designer , textile technologist , garment 
pattern-maker , textiles environmental manager , clothing manufacturing engineer , textile product 
developer , production manager ( 12 )  . 
In order to compete in the fashion industry job market today , a job seeker must have an overall perception 
of things . The knowledge must extend from designing and manufacturing to marketing and business 
planning . Being aware of the Fashion Industry Structure gives you the ability to have the control in the 
production chain , from the source of your material to the final product . Consequently , you can identify the 
production chains that violate human rights or recognise the high costs of quality control and try to make a 
change in the Fashion Industry . 
Conclusions
The textile industry offers opportunity for improvement , employment and innovation . With its global 
significance , addressing issues of human-rights violations and environmental harm are pertinent to a 
healthy development of the sector . European countries are challenged with massive unemployment , 
changing demands and the social exclusion of minorities . Opportunities abound in providing skills training 
and fostering a community of fashion entrepreneurs that provide sustainable jobs . Collaborative practices 
are crucial in building strong and resilient networks of creative industry entrepreneurship . With innovative 
approaches to what fashion entrepreneurship means today , the sector offers immense potential for 
prosperity and social inclusion in Europe . 
21
1 . Archick , K .  ( 2016 )  . The European Union : 
Current Challenges and Future Prospects .  [ pdf ] 
Library of Congress . Congressional Research 
Service . Available at 
 
[ Accessed : 27 June , 2016 ] 
2 . Van Gyes , G . and Szeker , L .  ( 2013 )  . Impact of the 
crisis on working conditions in Europe .  [ pdf ] 
European Foundation for the Improvement of 
Living and Working Conditions . Available at 

iles / ef_files / docs / ewco / tn1212025s / tn1212025s . 
pdf [ Accessed : 15 July , 2016 ] 
3 . Stotz L .  & Kane G .  ( 2015 )  . Facts on the Global 
Garment Industry .  [ pdf ] Global Garment Industry 
Factsheet . Available at 

ons / factsheets / general-factsheet-garment-indust
ry-february-2015 . pdf [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ]  . 
4 . Europa . eu ,  ( 2016 )  . Unemployment statistics .  
[ online ] Available at 

index . php / Unemployment_statistics [ Accessed : 
27 June , 2016 ]  . 
5 . European Commission .  ( 2016 )  . A NEW SKILLS 
AGENDA FOR EUROPE .  [ pdf ] COM ( 2016 ) 381 
final .  [ Accessed : 15 July , 2016 ]  . 
6 . Cedefop ( 2015 )  . Tackling unemployment while 
addressing skill mismatch : lessons from policy 
and practice in European Union countries . 
Luxembourg : Publications Office . Cedefop 
research paper ; No 46 .  
 [ Accessed : 24 
June , 2016 ]  . 
7 . Tillmanns , A .  ( 2016 )  . Tackling Poverty and Social 
Exclusion in Europe . Conference organised by 
 “ Public Policy Exchange ”  ( PPE )  .  [ pdf ] Available at 

ds / 2016 / 03 / Tackling-Poverty-and-Social-Exclusio
n-in-Europe_report-by-Sr . -Andrea-Tillmanns-RGS 
. pdf [ Accessed : 27 June , 2016 ]  . 
8 . Europa . eu ,  ( 2016 )  . Europe 2020 
indicators-poverty and social exclusion .  [ online ] 
Available at 
 
/ index . php / Europe_2020_indicators_-_poverty_
and_social_exclusion [ Accessed : 27 June , 2016 ]  . 
9 . International Labour Organization . Decent work 
and the 2030 Agenda for sustainable 
development .  ( online ) Available at 

-en / index . htm [ Accessed : 27 June , 2016 ]  . 
10 . International Labour Organization . Textiles , 
clothing , leather and footwear sector .  ( online ) 
Available at 
 
/ textiles-clothing-leather-footwear / lang--en / inde
x . htm [ Accessed : 27 June , 2016 ]  . 
REFERENCES
22
11 . Sanz de Miguel , P .  ( 2013 )  . Representativeness of 
the European social partner organizations : 
Textiles and clothing sector .  [ pdf ] European 
Foundation for the Improvement of Living and 
Working Conditions . Available at 

iles / ef_files / docs / eiro / tn1302024s / tn1302024s . p
df [ Accessed : 15 June , 2016 ]  . 
12 . Euractiv . com ,  ( 2016 )  . European Textiles and 
Fashion : Facts & Figures .  [ online ] Available at 

dustry / infographic / european-textiles-and-fashi
on-facts-figures /  [ Accessed : 13 July , 2016 ]  . 
23
To address the multifaceted challenges surrounding the activities of fashion entrepreneurs in Europe , 
entrepreneurs have different options to create a positive social and environmental impact along the value 
chain of fashion production . Fashion entrepreneurs can engage in a range of practices to minimise their 
environmental impact and maximise their social impact . 
4
IMPACT DIMENSIONS
24
1 . Eco-Friendly
Produce , purchase , use , and sell ecological materials to minimise negative environmental impact . This 
potential for positive impact is about reducing the negative impact of the production process , typically 
including , but not limited to : reduced waste and pollution on water , air and soil , garment durability , 
suitable for recycling and up-cycling , and energy efficient production processes . 
25
2 . Ethical
Ensure fair working conditions and pay for all actors involved in the production and sales process . This 
potential for positive impact is about reducing the human rights violations common in the production 
process , typically including but not limited to : fair pay , limiting working hours , and overtime pay , granting 
sick leave and breaks and safe work environments . 
26
3 . Local
Ensure proximity to support local economic growth , job creation and minimising the negative 
environmental impact . This potential for positive impact is about fostering the local economic system by 
producing and selling in proximity to one another , with the consequence due to existing legal restrictions , 
the environmental impact is reduced and working conditions are regulated to minimise human rights 
violations . 
27
4 . Social Inclusion
Ensure economic and social integration by Including vulnerable groups in your supply chain . This potential 
for positive impact is about creating economically sustainable inclusion mechanisms for people 
considered at increased risk of social exclusion . This group encompasses , but is not limited to , youth 
unemployed , immigrants , refugees and people with physical or mental disabilities , as well as the ageing 
population and the structurally unemployed . 
28
Sustainability and ethical production in fashion is still a niche , but each ecosystem is driven by a handful of 
entrepreneurs , governmental initiatives and supporting organisations most of which are active locally 
offering direct support to their communities . The eco-systems are formed by an interplay between private 
actors , such as entrepreneurs , associations and foundations offering support mechanisms for 
entrepreneurs ; public and governmental bodies facilitating sustainable practices or local economic 
activity , promoting upcoming designers and socially inclusive practices ; and entrepreneurs along the value 
chain . 
Ideally , the ecosystems create a strong support network for established and upcoming brands , consumers 
looking to educate themselves as well as suppliers , production facilities and sales outlets . Across our 
ecosystems , we have identified a few of the most active participants in each network . 
International Initiatives 
Among some of the most prominent drivers of social and sustainable fashion area handful of international 
organisations offering education , certification and professional networks . 
1 . The Fair Wear Foundation operates internationally providing certification for monitoring fair labour 
standards in the textile supply chain . 
2 . Fashion Revolution is a global movement , created after the collapse of Rana Plaza in 2013 , and an 
international frontrunner in promoting transparency across the supply chain , with chapters active in 
multiple cities across Europe and beyond . 

3 . Made-By is an internationally operating ‘ shadow label ’ organisation supporting brands to produce more 
sustainably by offering labels to incorporate their track and trace system . 

4 . The Sustainable Apparel Coalition is an international alliance between large companies in the textile 
industry collaborating on certification standards and indices . 

5
EUROPEAN ECOSYSTEMS & BEST 
PRACTICE
29
Greece is still a young ecosystem for sustainable fashion . Though 
private organisations and a few brands have made a name for 
themselves , governmental support and production focused on 
social inclusion remains limited . The customer base is not yet as 
sensitive and many of the transparency and education activities are 
led by international organisations and traditional fashion schools . 
GREECE
30
Best Practice
1 . ARTEMEIS
ARTemeis started from a training program for people with disabilities and vocational rehabilitation in 
Greece . Part of vocational rehabilitation was the creation of a social cooperative enterprise : ARTemeis . 
Together with the support of volunteers , the team built up a production site where the disabled people get 
the possibility to be involved in the manufacturing process of presents , wedding invitations and jewellery . 
For the future , they aim to build up a sustainable commercial cooperative enterprise . 
ELEPAP-Rehabilitation for the disabled has six branches throughout Greece and more than 77 years 
of history . The organisation supports the development of children with physical disabilities and 
developmental difficulties and at the same time provides support to their families . Particular emphasis is 
placed on early diagnosis of childhood disability and developmental issues as well as early intervention for 
children belonging to risk groups . ELEPAP through the foundation of the Social Cooperative 
Enterprise-ARTemeis in the production sector of presents , wedding gifts , jewellery and invitations , it 
supports work integration , creative work and social inclusion of its alumni adults . 
ARTemeis started from the program “ TOPEKO ”  , which ELEPAP had developed for training people 
with disabilities and vocational rehabilitation . Part of vocational rehabilitation was the creation of a Social 
Cooperative Enterprise called ARTemeis . Initially the project was undertaken by a volunteer . Ms . 
Diamantopoulou , President of ARTemeis , is a sociologist from the Department of European Programs and 
adults and had been working for ELEPAP for 18 years . Ms . Ieronimou , Sales Manager , is retired and started 
as a volunteer in ELEPAP for five years now and in ARTemeis for 2 , 5 years when she joined in more 
substantially and became in charge of the production and sales . ARTemeis ’ ultimate goal is vocational 
rehabilitation of disabled people in order to have an equal treatment and equal rights in employment . 
ARTemeis provides occupation only to people with disabilities , the rest of them are volunteers . 
ARTemeis plans on the handicrafts construction as well as the commercialisation of products of high 
quality and aesthetics , such as jewellery , ornaments and wedding invitations from environmentally friendly 
materials . The construction of artisan craft is part of occupational therapy acting beneficial to physical and 
mental health of people with disabilities . ARTemeis aims to build a sustainable commercial cooperative 
enterprise that can create jobs for people from vulnerable groups , utilising the special skills of disabled . 
31
2 . SOFFA
SOFFA stands for Social Fashion Factory and is a spin off from a Greek social cooperative . The vision 
is to be an industry disruptor leading in producing and manufacturing ethical fashion through empowering 
people and ideas for ethical and sustainable industrial transformation . For their production line of clothing , 
footwear and accessories , the use sustainable and recyclable materials and employ trafficked women and 
refugees to ( re ) integrate them in a work environment . 
SOFFA stands for Social Fashion Factory and is a spin off from the Nest , a social cooperative that was 
established in March 2014 . Its primary target is to transform and disrupt the fashion industry . Dr Fiori 
Zafeiropoulou , Founder & CEO of SOFFA , is a visiting Lecturer & Post-Doctorate Researcher on Social 
Investment Market for Social Entrepreneurship at Athens University of Economics & Business . She holds an 
award winning PHD on Social Entrepreneurship , MBA , BSc ( Ec )  . She is Co-founder of the global movement 
 “ Fashion Revolution ” in Greece and the Founder & President of the Nest Incubator . She founded her first 
company Zita Social in London in 2003 . Stratis Camatsos is Co-founder and Head of Legal & Work 
Integration . He is a certified lawyer in New York City and has years of experience in Brussels on European 
law . He has , also , established a company , Evo3 olive farms , with a social and environmental impact in the 
food industry . He is a 3-time award winner and social entrepreneur with his brand Evo3-Plant A Tree in a 
deforested area in Africa , for every product sold . Nicholaos Moustakas is Co-founder and Head of 
Production Footwear designer and Maker with extensive knowledge in the footwear industry . He has a BA 
Product and Furniture Design and Diploma in Footwear Design Cordwainers College . Currently he is 
working as a bespoke shoe maker in the West End of London . 
The vision is to be an industry disruptor leading in producing and manufacturing ethical fashion 
through empowering people and ideas for ethical and sustainable industrial transformation . 
SOFFA has three tiers : 
1 . SOFFA Factory ; a production line for clothing , footwear and accessories made from sustainable 
recyclable materials ,  ( re ) integrating trafficked women and refugees in a work environment , aiming for 
the repatriation of production in Europe . 
2 . SOFFA Textile ; a sustainable textile marketplace providing for the livelihoods of producers and 
fighting for transparent and ethical supply chains that respect workers ’ rights , battle against human 
trafficking , forced labour and child labour while at the same time acting for the preservation of our 
planet . 
32
3 . SOFE Hub which is funded by the European Commission Erasmus +  ; a fashion incubator 
providing training and education for trafficked women , refugees and youth unemployed in Europe 
offering integration into work or entrepreneurship . It ’ s an online sustainable designers ’ marketplace to 
reach international markets . 
SOFFA ’ s partners are NGO Treads of Hope in Athens and NGO A21 in Thessaloniki , which are saving 
modern slaves and trafficked women , providing shelter and support . The list of partners goes on with Zita 
Group , Fashion Revolution , University of Zurich , Brunel University , Athens University of Economics and 
Business , Spoleczna Academia Nauk , The Nest Social Coop , Authenticitys and Eolas . 

33
Spain , is what many consider the birthplace of fast fashion , with 
Inditex overwhelmingly dominating the market and a customer base 
with growing yet limited consciousness and care for the 
environmental and ethics of many of the industry ’ s big players . Yet , 
the foundations and networks , though often times informal create a 
tight-knit community of entrepreneurs hoping to change the fashion 
industry from within . The targeted governmental support is limited , 
but with Barcelona specifically placing a lot of pride in its design 
schools and talent the shift is starting to show , in curricula and 
themes for industry get-togethers . 
SPAIN
34
Since Spain was once a textile and garment producing market , the potential to support production 
locally is quite apparent , and both Planeta Moda as well as some of the social and sustainable fashion 
entrepreneurs have started pushing for the rebirth of the Spanish textile industry . The most prominent pain 
points for the entrepreneurs remain an uninformed customer base and very limited governmental support 
for entrepreneurs as a whole , and thus neither specifically for fashion . While associations and informal 
networks as well as markets and fairs are both popular and offer great platforms for entrepreneurial 
exchange . 
Best Practice
3 . CO-SHOP
To re-establish local fashion production in Spain , Co-Shop offers a working space and local 
production possibilities to small-scale designers . In this network , they work together with local workshops 
that employ vulnerable groups , like former prisoners . Moreover , the team of Co-Shop shares their 
expertise of branding and customer relationship with the designers to help them building up a brand . 
Co-Shop offers shelf-space to designers committed to local production . Nieves Torres Ayala , the 
founder of Co-Shop - an engineer gone local fashion entrepreneur - has the vision that local production 
can ensure that working conditions adhere to a European standard of fair working conditions and 
environmental restrictions . Additionally , local production creates local jobs and fosters the local economy . 
She has recently opened her fourth shop in Barcelona ( End of May 2016 ) and would like to see a Co-Shop 
in every city in Spain .  

Co-Shop has expanded its services to small-scale designers by offering them access to a workshop in 
which they themselves can produce their collection . This space is shared with a professional photographer 
whose service the designers can employ at a very low cost . Furthermore , Nieves and her team offer their 
expertise in branding and the knowledge of their customers to help designers reach their target and build 
their brand . She is dedicated to helping designers benefit from their creation rather than that their talents 
are exploited by a large label . 
35
Co-Shop is connected to a series of small , local workshops , which produce clothes locally , thereby 
offering designers recommendations on local production possibilities . Three of the workshops Co-Shop 
collaborates with employ vulnerable groups :  ( 1 ) is a mid-scale producer employing former prisoners ,  ( 2 ) is 
a small-scale producer employing former sex-workers ,  ( 3 ) is a producer of bags and pieces made of more 
durable materials employing people with disabilities . 

Access to textiles at a small scale as needed by starting designers comes at a penalty price . Thereby , 
Co-Shop buys a few materials in medium quantities to ensure that designers have access to at least some 
fabrics for production . Local production is a prerequisite for the Co-Shop designers , but sustainable 
sourcing is not yet . Nieves pointed out that certified materials are extremely expensive and even more so 
when needed at a small scale . Yet , Co-Shop collaborates with a few textile suppliers that offer organic and 
locally dyed textiles . 

4 . Bao Bag
One of the brands selling with Co-Shop is Bao Bag , Marc and Joan started printing illustrations on 
jute bags using artisan methods . A collaboration with an NGO has resulted in them co-owning a workshop 
where people with disabilities are engaged in printing the fabrics , while receiving training and support 
from their partner organization . Bao Bag is now offering their printing services to other entrepreneurs who 
want to produce with a social impact . 

5 . MTS - Moves to Slow Fashion
Moves to Slow fashion ( MTS ) is an online platform for sustainable fashion and was the first of its kind 
in Spain . MTS has the objective to demonstrate that fashion and ethical and responsible consumer choices 
are compatible . The founding team of MTS works from a small office in Barcelona where they are 
surrounded by a diverse group of entrepreneurs . They hope to see MTS evolve into a catalogue for a 
sustainable and ethical lifestyle . 

Moves to Slow fashion ( MTS ) is an online platform for sustainable fashion and was the first of its kind 
in Spain . MTS has the objective to demonstrate that fashion and ethical and responsible consumer choices 
are compatible . Rosa Bernier and Mónica Melero make up the founding team of MTS and work from a 
36
small office in Barcelona where they are surrounded by a diverse group of entrepreneurs . Mónica hopes to 
see MTS evolve into a catalogue for a sustainable and ethical lifestyle . MTS is based on three principles :  ( 1 ) 
ecological choices ,  ( 2 ) ethical choices regarding both the environment and the working conditions in the 
supply chain and ( 3 ) proximity , referring to the point of production to the point of sale . As active members 
in the sustainable fashion community , they have created trust and understanding amongst the designers 
and they dedicate themselves to selecting aesthetic , high-quality choices . Their portfolio currently contains 
more than 50 brands and they have started to include cosmetics , creating synergies for all participating 
stakeholders . 

Designers interested in selling their pieces on the platform must adhere to the standards imposed by 
MTS to be eligible . According to the MTS guidelines , the designer is in charge of production and sourcing . 
MTS provides feedback , contacts and has access to a network that is able to support like-minded 
designers . The vision is that if they can nudge consumers to change their consumption habits , everyone 
wins . 
MTS realised that most small labels lack professional photographs and don ’ t have a clear online 
presence . Therefore , they provide a model and photographer to ‘ their ’ brands , to develop unique brand 
consistency and appearance that enables the brands to have access to the services needed to present , 
promote and sell online . Designers benefit from having control of their stock and products , until an order 
arrives via the MTS platform . Additionally , MTS acts as a network and support system for like-minded social 
and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs committed to quality and aesthetics . 

6 . Miu Sutin
One of the brands selling on MTS is Miu Sutin , after years of experience in fast-fashion , Noelia 
decided that it was time for her to become an entrepreneur , but differently . Her brand is dedicated to 
ecological fabrics and local production and in collaboration with a range of work-shops and production 
networks that focus on social inclusion of seniors , former sex workers and people with disabilities . She is 
currently preparing to expand outside of Spain . 

37
The Netherlands is a relatively mature ecosystem for social and 
sustainable fashion entrepreneurs , this is easily noted simply by the 
amount of locally targeted programmes aimed at supporting social 
entrepreneurs and sustainable design and production . Additionally , 
the relatively higher ratio of disposable income makes customers 
slightly less price sensitive and the overall conscientiousness of both 
environmental and human abuse is higher than in the south of 
Europe . 
THE 
NETHERLANDS
38
Best Practice
7 . Rambler
Rambler is a social venture created in 2009 . The aim is to support street teens in developing their 
creative voice as a way to get their life back on track . Rambler has a studio and shop in the heart of 
Amsterdam where the teens develop and sell their own fashion designs guided by a creative coach and 
social worker . Rambler has opened a second studio and shop in Berlin in June 2016 and aims to roll out 
the concept to New York and Sao Paulo until 2021 . 
Rambler is a social venture created in 2009 by Tim Dekker and Carmen van der Vecht that captures 
the look and style of global streetwear . Carmen has her roots in design and Tim is a business development 
expert .  ‘ A rambler ’ is a person who takes multiple city walks , but will finally find its way . The aim of the 
venture is to support street teens in developing their creative voice as a way to get their life back on track . 
Rambler has a studio and shop in the heart of Amsterdam where teens develop and sell their own fashion 
designs guided by a creative coach and social worker . The pioneering focus of the venture is on talent 
instead of problem solving , enabling teens to feel empowered and find purpose . This appreciative 
perspective has now been adopted by the municipality and other social work organisations in the city of 
Amsterdam . Together they create a supportive eco-system for troubled youth , developing follow-up 
programs that enable teens to ( re ) access the labour market . Rambler has opened a second studio and 
shop in Berlin in June 2016 and aims to roll out the concept to New York and Sao Paulo until 2021 . 

8 . House of Denim , The Netherlands
Created in 2009 in the Netherlands , the House of Denim ( HoD ) is a platform for sustainability and 
craftsmanship in the denim industry . The mission of the HoD is to turn the industry towards a brighter blue 
- making it dryer , cleaner and smarter through projects relating to education , R & D , enterprise and 
networking . The platform has therefore developed several projects , like the “ Jean School ” - the world ' s first 
and only independent vocational course dedicated to mastering the jeans-related crafts . Created in 2009 
by fashion expert Mariette Hoitink ( HTNK ) and strategiser James Veenhoff ( Fronteer )  , the House of Denim 
( HoD ) is a platform for sustainability and craftsmanship in the denim industry . The mission of the HoD is to 
turn the industry towards a brighter blue - making it dryer , cleaner and smarter through projects relating to 
education , R & D , enterprise and networking . The platform has developed several projects : 
39
1 . Jean School : the world ' s first and only independent vocational course dedicated to 
mastering the jeans-related crafts . Together with educational institution ROCvA , HoD has created a 
three-year full-time course training the next generation of avant-garde denim makers . 
2 . Denim City is Amsterdam ' s denim innovation campus of the future set in a redeveloped old 
tram depot . Denim City is the home of House of Denim and workplace for Jean school students . Denim 
City also houses Blue Lab , the Indigo Archive and the Denim Union . 
3 . Blue Lab is a development centre for experiments and research including jeans washing 
equipment . The Indigo Archive curates denim , from books to fabrics to favourite jeans of celebrities 
from all over the world . Denim Union is an ‘ Embassy ’ for networking with industry players such as Gstar , 
Tommy Hilfiger , Levis , Scotch & Soda , Denham the Jeanmaker , Diesel and many others . 
4 . Global Denim Awards : The first-of-its-kind runway show / competition that spotlights the 
latest and greatest innovations by the world ’ s top denim mills as imagined by six emerging designers . 
5 . Denim Days : Each year in April , Amsterdam turns blue during the Denim Days organised on 
the grounds of the Westergasfabriek . The event consists of ‘ Kingpins ’  , a trade show for denim professionals 
presenting their collections in Amsterdam for the first time , and the Blueprint denim platform for 
consumers , featuring seminars , exhibitions , workshops , a vintage market , live music and more . 

40
The U . K . has been the birthplace of some of the most 
prominent sustainable fashion designers . Yet it ’ s public sector 
involvement remains limited . It is rather international organisations 
such as Fashion Revolution and the Ethical Fashion Forum which are 
active on a large scale but based in the U . K . that take on the role of 
continuously advancing social and sustainable practices . 
Additionally , U . K . corporate law allows for social entrepreneurs to 
register as such and making their initial financial burden of setting 
up a company easier to carry based on an already initially low cost of 
incorporating , when compared to other EU countries . With strong 
THE UNITED 
KINGDOM
41
international players focusing on sourcing , production and transparency the U . K . constitutes a strong 
eco-system for social and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs . 

Best Practice
9 . Ecoluxe , U . K
Ecoluxe London is a not-for-profit organisation that collaborates with charities , organisations , social 
enterprises , other non-profit entities and the media to promote luxury with an ethos . Therefore , a platform 
was created that supports ecological and sustainable luxury fashion . Ecoluxe cooperates only with 
eco-conscious brands and designers and provides them with full-spectrum business support . They offer 
training and consultancy as well as support with production . 
Ecoluxe London is a platform that promotes and supports ecological and sustainable luxury fashion . 
The epicentre of their philosophy is the three Ps : People , Planet and Profit . Stamo Ampatielou , the 
Co-founder , is the Business and Finance Director . He is a graduate of London College of Fashion with 25 
years ’ experience in the fashion industry in all aspects of design , production and manufacturing . 
Additionally , he owns the label “ By Stamo ”  . Elena Garcia is the Co-founder and the Communications 
Director . She is based in London since 1992 and graduated in Surface Textiles for Fashion at the London 
College of Fashion in 2006 . She is also the designer behind the “ upcycling ” labels “ Sew Last Season ” and 
 “ Elena Garcia Eco-Couture ”  . 
Ecoluxe London is a not-for-profit organisation that collaborates with charities , organisations , social 
enterprises , other non-profit entities , corporations and the media to promote luxury with an ethos . 
Moreover , it opens a showroom twice a year during London Fashion Week to showcase the work of up to 
35 upcoming ethical fashion and accessories brands from all over the world . 
Taking into consideration the negative social , environmental and economic dimensions of the fashion 
industry , they aim to raise awareness and to become the destination for showcasing and promotion of 
sustainable luxury . Ecoluxe cooperates only with eco-conscious brands and designers and provides them 
with full-spectrum business support . They offer training and consultancy as well as support with production 
as they connect the brands with manufacturers , suppliers and stockists . Furthermore , they aim to make 
these brands viable through marketing strategies and tactics taking into consideration the uniqueness of 
each brand . 
42
Some of their close partners include : British Wool Marketing Board , Cultural Business Investment , 
Centre for Sustainable Fashion , Coco Eco Magazine , European Regional Development Fund ( ERDF )  , 
Fashionworks , JP Selects , Olswang LLP , Pink Umbrella Marketing , UK Trade & Investment ( UKTI ) and 
Working Chance . 
10 . Here Today Here Tomorrow , U . K . 
Here Today Here Tomorrow ( HTHT ) is a collaborative fashion design label with a studio in London 
where sustainable and ethical fashion and accessories are designed , showcased and sold . The three 
designers are specialised in various sustainable design methods . Thus , they work with a wide range of 
products , like knitwear of recycled yarn , natural dyed textiles and accessories , up-cycled second-hand 
materials , high quality organic fabrics and vegetable tanned leather products . Here Today Here Tomorrow 
( HTHT ) is a collaborative fashion design label with a studio in London where sustainable and ethical 
fashion and accessories are designed , showcased and sold . 
HTHT is a collaboration between three designers : Anna-Maria Hesse , Katelyn Toth-Fejel and Julia 
Crew . Anna-Maria founded the shop / studio with Ines , Emma and Julia , after completing her MA in Fashion 
and the Environment in 2010 . She has varied experience working in both design and teaching in the area 
of sustainable fashion for companies including People Tree , Komodo and FAD . For her current knitwear 
collection which falls under the label Here Today Here Tomorrow , she mixes recycled yarns with UK bred 
wool . Katelyn received a BFA in textiles from the California College of the Arts and an MFA from 
Goldsmiths , University of London . She is the designer of Be Like A Bear using foraged materials and 
seasonal plants from around London as natural dyes to colour textiles and accessories . She is also the 
co-director of Permacouture Institute , an educational non-profit promoting regenerative design in fashion 
and textiles . Additionally , Katelyn works for the Centre for Sustainable Fashion . Julia received a BA in 
Accessories Product Design and Development from London College of Fashion and in 2010 graduated 
from the same university with an MA in Fashion and the Environment . She specialises in bag and 
accessories design . Currently she creates limited edition collections by up-cycling locally sourced 
second-hand materials , combined with high quality organic fabrics and vegetable tanned leather , creating 
beautiful , durable and valuable products . 
Through the shop / studio space HTHT aims to raise awareness regarding sustainable and ethical 
fashion . HTHT ’ s fair trade label , in its fifth season , provides an alternative to fast-fashion . The collection 
embodies the company ’ s continued commitment to sustainable design practices . First of all , the company 
43
collaborates with artisans from the Association for Craft Producers ( ACP ) in Kathmandu which is a 
not-for-profit fair-trade organisation certified by the World Fair Trade Organisation ( WFTO )  . Second , HTHT 
provides opportunities for low income , primarily female artisans in 15 different districts of Nepal . Each 
product in their collections is handmade and provides the artisan who made it with economic and social 
support . Additionally , the knitwear HTHT develops is made from 100% sheep wool ; a natural , warm , 
durable , biodegradable and highly sustainable fibre . Partner ACP also takes careful and deliberate steps to 
preserve the environment . They have installed a wastewater treatment plant and rainwater harvesting 
system , use recycled paper , discourage the use of plastic bags and use low chemical AZO-free dyes . 
Although some of us are aware of the destructive impact of the fashion industry , we tend to shield 
ourselves from this as it ’ s happening far from us . In HTHT ’ s shop customers can witness the creative 
process and realise how much time and effort is needed to create a product . It ’ s an inviting way to engage 
customers with the meaning of slow fashion which includes high quality craftsmanship , fair trade , 
durability , locality , recycling , natural dyes , organic materials , individuality and transparency of production . 

44
Poland similarly to Greece is still a young ecosystem for 
sustainable fashion , but it ’ s history of producing materials locally 
gives it a very specific advantage , which offers ample opportunity for 
growth as many fashion entrepreneurs struggle to trace their supply 
chain and find sustainable materials . Local design has not yet 
reached substantial maturity to lastingly impact upcoming designers 
locally , but sourcing and production already offer stepping stones 
for the generations of social and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs 
to come . 
POLAND
45
11 . Notjustshop
The company established in 2012 with the motto to change the world for a better one . They help 
disadvantaged children by involving them in creation of fashion together . By running fashion projects , they 
fulfil the needs of disabled children . According to their mission , in Notjustshop “ together with you we 
change those who needed help into those who want to help .  ” Helping others to make their dreams come 
true , this is the most important . Notjustshop collaborates with numerous hospitals and other organisations . 
They established collaboration with local and national organisations supporting the idea , as well as with 
artists , actors , sport celebrities . For them the community is the accelerator . Notjustshop cares about the 
environment . Everything that is manufactured by them is to 100% made in Poland . Fabrics , knitwear etc . 
they buy in Lodz ( city with long textile history in Poland ) from the company that holds the Oeko-Tex 
Standard 100 while the sewing is done locally in Cracow , so they do not need to worry about the work 
conditions of the seamstresses as they monitor that locally . 
Take a peak at how they work here . 

46
12 . Plan Planeta 
 ‘ Plan Planeta ’ is a mission driven company . Mission of inspiring people to make a difference . It 
partners with non-profit organisations , offering unique design and limited edition ethical fashion products 
on-line . For every product sold ,  ‘ Plan Planeta ’ gives a part of the income to the designated charity . There 
have been several projects organised by them so far : support for the homeless in Warsaw , the refugees 
from Turkey , kids and women in Ukraine , Syria and Nepal .  ‘ Plan Planeta ’ offers products made by producers 
who want to make a positive impact on the planet and on other people . Whether they are fair trade , 
organic , ecological or they just provide fairly paid work or other benefits to poor people - if they lead to 
positive change – they are always welcome to collaborate . That ' s how they understand ethical products . 
And then they go one step further , sharing their profits from sales with charities . 
In Plan Planeta social and environmental values are a natural part of doing business . They cooperate 
with companies and organisations which develop products or services that inspire positive change , which 
take steps towards lessening environmental impact or attempt new approach to important social 
challenge . Together they aim to improve life of as many people as it is possible . 

47
13 . Showroom . pl
Showroom . pl is a platform created by young entrepreneurs supporting Polish , interesting , 
independent fashion designers . They collaborate and promote local brands which are produced with 
respect for workers ' rights and the environment . They rely on cooperation with the designers , who buy the 
textile and sew the collections in the local market . Showroom helps young fashion designers to enter the 
fashion market in such a way that their products can be launched and become recognised to enable them 
to grow their business successfully ( with the support of showroom platform )  . Showroom together with 
Glamour magazine organises a series of professional workshops – ‘ Fashion Workshop ’  , dedicated to the 
process of creating a fashion brand . They collaborate with more than 300 fashion art designers promoting 
sustainable , ethical and ecological fashion . The two founders ( idea creators of the showroom ) are also 
active in Poland Start-up Foundation , which aim is to build awareness of the great potential of the start-ups 
among decision-makers , politicians and local government officials . They share their knowledge at different 
types of events promoting fashion entrepreneurship and start-up ’ s ideas . In 2014 , they received a reward in 
the 7 Ventures Pitch Day competition . 

48
The forces that shape social and sustainable fashion are 
constantly changing . In the section above we have provided you with a 
snapshot of active organisations and stakeholders , but depending on 
where you are located , what you are selling and where , there will be 
many more and other relevant organisations . 
Research your ecosystem and map it out to answer the following 
questions as relevant to your business case . 
1 . Who are the relevant players in your eco-system ? 
- Private organisations
- Public sector involvement
- Influencers
- Organisations at the forefront of social inclusion
- Sustainable design
2 . How do your competitors utilise the ecosystem to their advantage ? 
3 . And how can you best position yourself among the relevant 
players ? 
Hint : Take a peak at the annex for some inspiration or a kickstart ! 
TASK 1
xlix
Strategies that enable change-making or a social movement include co-creation and collaborative 
practices . Co-creation is an active , creative and social process , based on collaboration between producers 
and users that is initiated by the firm to generate value for customers .  ( 1 )  . It is “ about co-creating a new 
community from the ground up , with the company embedded in its foundation . Such vibrant ventures are 
built on dialogue and joint action , not data and delivery times ”  ( 2 )  . 
So , co-creation is a process , a road that leads to personal mastery and societal harmony . The traveller 
needs to pack a number of skills to be able to cross this road and reach their destination , their ‘ Ithaca ’  . We 
will show you the way to fill your backpack with the right skills , adopt the proper mind-set and get rid of all 
these wrong practices and stances that will only be a burden , slowing your pace and diverting your course 
from your desired end goal . 
Levels of co-creation
Several levels of co-creation can be defined . First a high level where a sense of shared destiny is 
developed that involves leverage of competences and defining joint goals and new opportunities leading 
to co-creation of value . A medium level is reached when joint development and co-management of the 
enhanced network takes place leading to shared practices and co-innovation . A low level evolves around 
collaborating with suppliers , key customers and partners leading to improved business processes and 
lasting relationships across legal boundaries . Market based , transaction driven traditional business 
commonly does not lead to any co-creation . 
6
CO-CREATION & COLLABORATIVE 
PRACTICES
50
Process for co-creation
You need to bear in mind that time is an important element in co-creation and collaborative ventures . It 
takes time to build relationships and to co-create strategies . You need values , meaning , processes and 
measurement of impact through Key Performance Indicators , the so-called KPIs . And then the process can 
be structured in the following steps : 
1 . Open up : Start deep dialogue in the community , raise understanding of community , project team 
development , create partnerships with local entrepreneurs and agents in order to achieve Business 
Concept Co-creation
2 . Build the ecosystem : Collective entrepreneurship development , formalise business venture , 
establish shared commitment in order to achieve Business Prototype Co-creation
3 . Create the enterprise : Test prototype , strengthen local entrepreneurs and management through 
new capabilities development ( training )  , build market base which will lead to Enterprise Creation
Important elements in the process of co-creation of a venture formation are : local co-invention and bottom 
up development ; the product and business model should be co-evolved and evolving ; local ownership 
and involvement ; to raise awareness ; information sharing ; self-financed growth and self-generated 
financial resources ; self-help groups ; rely on existing resources of the local communities and existing 
social infrastructure ; invest in local capacity building ; rely on patient innovation ( element of time very 
important )  , external ( from the community ) parties participation ; ally with non-traditional to the industry 
partners like NGOs , foundations and community groups ; engage in public policy dialogue ; and finally 
create relevant associations and institutions . 
Our qualitative fieldwork of a total of ten cases , led to defining three core strategies of collaboration : 
curating , co-mingling and spacing . 
51
The first main strategy is curating , which refers to respondents ’ main 
aim to conceive something as an outlet for their creativity and not 
necessarily because they want to have a social mission . Most often 
the founder of the enterprise acts as a curator and who creates a 
 ‘ portfolio of projects ’ based on aesthetic consensus . In the world of 
art and museums , the meaning of the word ‘ curator ’ used to point to 
the ‘ genius concept ’ of the exhibition planner as individual author , 
which has become a highly controversial topic . Nowadays , curating 
implies a cooperative , interdisciplinary working method that results 
in the creation of innovative structures for the presentation of 
cultural artefacts . Such an approach enables fields such as art , digital 
CURATING
52
media , design and architecture to intermesh in new ways . This shift in work processes pushes individual 
areas of action to come together in new meta-levels , such as networks and knowledge transfer . Such an 
interpretation highlights that in collaborative fashion enterprise it is not just about curating objects or 
products , but also of people , materials , relationships and space . In collaborative fashion enterprises , we 
found that curating plays out on four different levels :  ( I ) entry at the gate ,  ( II ) deepen the bond ,  ( III ) tipping 
point of sales and ( IV ) co-ownership . 
Entry at the gate
Aesthetics are key in the selection between who joins the project and who is not allowed access to the 
collaborative enterprise . This becomes especially visible in the cases that have built a platform to promote 
local / sustainable designers / brands . As one entrepreneur explains :  
 ‘ I searched for sustainable fashion brands that were interested in what we wanted to offer , and had a good 
aesthetic ; explained what we wanted to do and what we could offer them , and what they could offer us , and 
the reality is that 98% of those we contacted said yes . Because they like the image , our aesthetic , and we 
create trust by demonstrating that we know what the market is about .  ’  ( MTS )  . 
Those brands that want to join such a platform express the same selection mechanism :  
 ‘ And to me it ' s the most important national platform : because it was the first , because it has a lot of 
sustainable fashion brands . And also , because I really like the aesthetics ’  .  ( Miu Sutin ) 
As aesthetics are perceived as very subjective , it can create tensions between those who offer a platform 
for their designers and those who offer their designs . One entrepreneur even did not want to be quoted 
on her expression around this issue :  
 ‘ And then a tricky issue is the design , I have also had to turn away brands because they are .  .  . well let ' s say 
not in line with our aesthetic , and what our clients look for . What is clear to me is the aesthetic part of the 
platform is very important , it is fashionable and we can sell it ’  . 
53
Aesthetics are seen as the key to the sustainability of a company as they are prioritized over everything 
else :  
 ‘ In reality , brands that don ' t have a minimum of brand identity , and an image they care for… well , this is 
usually a symptom indicating other issues , like the lack of production , the lack of a collection .  .  . etc .  ( … ) It 
doesn ' t have to be a perfect webpage , but an Instagram account , a couple of photos , this demonstrates 
that they are serious about their project ’  .  ( MTS ) 
Aesthetics become the secret code for access to the collaborative enterprise ; without it , the door won ’ t 
open . 
54
Deepen the bond
When people are ‘ in ’ the network and want to do projects together , they again mainly connect on the basis 
of aesthetics . For example , in cases of a platform or physical store that brings together multiple brands , the 
founder acts as a curator in this process as one entrepreneur explains :  
 ‘ We offer to create looks using our products , to show how to combine the different pieces offered ’  .  ( MTS ) 
Here , the products of a certain brand are matched with products of other brands to create outfits , which 
will enhance appeal to customers . This quote illustrates the power of a collaborative platform in that it 
takes individual brands , styles and designs to a higher level by combining them with others . In the process 
of finding a graphic designer to do your art work or create your logo , selecting the right photographer and 
scouting the models that could be the ‘ face ’ of your brand , aesthetics is key . These crucial elements of a 
fashion business , are often found within the network leading to new types of collaboration . In dealing with 
start-ups , one needs to be creative with resources as they usually work with a shoe string budget . Instead 
of experiencing that as delimiting , the value of collaboration and sharing resources is appreciated in these 
enterprises . 
For example , I don ' t have money to pay for professional shooting or hire models ; but I found a 
photographer willing to do it for hardly anything ; the same with models , and just today I was offered a 
space for free to create a shooting .  ’  ( MTS ) 
Supporting brands to improve their aesthetic appeal is one function of ‘ platform ’ enterprises : 
A lot of times they make photos at home in a way that doesn ' t allow them to sell online . We started 
developing the online platform , and the photos many of them don ' t have the photographs that allow them 
to sell online , so we have a photographer , who shares the space . We are also learning bit by bit and trying 
to create solutions that we all need .  ’  ( Co-shop )  . 
These examples show that just entering a collaboration is not enough to succeed ; as an entrepreneur , you 
need to be able to look beyond your own aesthetics and see the opportunities for aesthetic resonance . 
Tipping point of sales
55
When aesthetics doesn ’ t appeal , companies won ’ t sell and will be either kicked out of the network or 
mentored towards developing a better aesthetic . Aesthetics are crucial in getting sales as customers buy 
intuitively based on what they visually perceive :  
 ‘ We grew , because we had success . We did not grow because we made investments , and 1000 T-shirts , and 
selling all over the place . No , we started growing because it works . Yes , because the client asked for more .  ’  
( Bao Bag )  
 ' We have retailers in Belgium , Japan and France who come here looking for the brands we have online to 
sell in their stores . So , to create this visibility and offer an ample supply , results in that the brands are selling 
to new retailers . Last week a Japanese girl came to buy stock from here . And if a girl comes from Japan , 
because she saw products on your webpage that she wants to buy and bring back , that ' s success ’  .  ( MTS ) 
And clients ask for more when they have been ‘ touched ’ by the aesthetic – because the design enters their 
heart and sense of style . Most collaborative enterprises make a point out of supporting each other in 
developing each person ’ s activity . Many designers don ’ t know much about business aspects such as 
finances and marketing and in being part of a network , they get support developing those elements of 
their venture . Interestingly - compared to common perspectives on entrepreneurship - finances are not the 
main currency in the network . Relationships are - and only relationships ( with peers , customers ) can help to 
craft the aesthetics that are unique to a brand . And when the aesthetics hit the right ‘ sweet ’ spot , financial 
rewards await the entrepreneur .  
 ‘ It is funny how a professional environment - with the relations that are not friendships but interchanges - 
grow when it is not about financial return directly . But when you are not yet creating volumes of return , 
doing things is not as easy , but it ' s growing with all of the brands we work with ’  .  ( MTS ) 
That ‘ sweet ’ spot is often very fragile and small changes to a certain unique aesthetic , can have major 
consequences for an enterprise : 
For the designers it ' s important , that we share the insights we have on the client . Often , they don ' t know of 
the effects some of the changes they want to make , might have on their sales , so we do try to give them 
feedback ’  ( Co-shop )  . 
56
A crucial part of curating entails adopting the right way of speaking :  
 ' But if you want to sell it , you need to understand who will pay for what and this part , the more market 
oriented part is hard to bring across to the creatives sometimes . They see themselves as artists and they are , 
but if you want to live from it , it takes more than creative talent . I am still learning the language of the 
creatives ’  .  ( Co-shop ) 
Co-ownership
Only when actors get acknowledged / valued for their aesthetic , they are able to become part of the 
collaboration up to the level of co-ownership .  
 ‘ The workshop is more than collaboration . We are co-owners ’  ( Bao Bag )  . 
For example , Bao Bag started with a creative mission rather than a social one and only happened to come 
across the chance to produce in collaboration with a foundation that employs disabled people . They have 
now become co-owner of the workshop and offer their services to other projects , thereby diversifying their 
offering , according to new-learned expertise . Many entrepreneurs imagine co-ownership , but have not yet 
arrived at that stage .  
 ‘ At the moment , the venture is a spin-off of one of the social cooperative businesses that I belong to , so its 
equity is through there , it doesn ’ t have its own legal entity at the moment . When it will have its own legal 
entity , I will have equity and so will the partners ’  ( SOFFA )  . 
57
Test your aesthetics ! 
1 . To whom do the aesthetics of your brand ( or collaborators ) appeal ? 
2 . What elements of your aesthetics do customers value ? 
3 . What elements of the aesthetics of your collaborators do you value ? 
Customer aesthetics
Define how you can improve your customer orientation , using aesthetic and 
identify potential collaborators that can help you achieve your ideal aesthetic . 
These can be sales partners , brands , material suppliers , even types of 
workshops ; but keep the customers ' aesthetic in mind . 
Evaluate
What forms of collaboration are suitable for you ? Is it a partnership , or do you 
want to fully integrate and co-own a project – why ? 
TASK 2
lviii
The second main strategy is co-mingling : our respondents clearly 
indicate their commitment to ‘ the relationship ’  , whether with the 
marginalised groups they cooperate with or other actors in their 
network . We could define three main groups that are at the centre of 
co-mingling activities for collaborative enterprise : 1 . Socially 
excluded communities , 2 . Customers and 3 . Peers with the division 
between peers as being part of a platform ( 3a ) and peers without 
being part of a platform ( 3b )  . 
COMINGLING
59
Heroes included
Collaborative enterprises go beyond wanting to simply integrate socially included ‘ stakeholders ’ in their 
venture , but rather strive for an interweaving of strengths and skills based on equality .  
 ‘ When we design a project these people ( who need help ) are not in the back , they are in the centre . Our 
people are the heroes of the project . We never presented poor children with a sad look in their eyes . Our 
kids are the heroes and we want them to see that they can spread their wings and do something amazing , 
like the able-bodied ones . For example , the project “ Give me a high five ” … The kids appeared on TV not 
because they were blind but because they did something cool . A cool T-shirt , a cool project ’  .  ( Notjustshop ) 
Aesthetics are at the core of that process of co-mingling as the aesthetic of a community needs to match 
( and be honoured by ) the aesthetic of the entrepreneur . In collaboration , they can then create a common 
aesthetic , as in the case of Here Today Here Tomorrow :  
 ‘ The association we work with and have built a great relationship with mainly work with family run groups 
and women . They go above and beyond Fair Trade certification . The organisation is really trying to create a 
robust organisation which does provide for its workers , things like childcare and education . One of the 
things they do is training , so , you know , there ' s huge unemployment in the country and so if they can find 
young people , young women , young men , depending on what their areas are , to train in different crafts so , 
you know , training new people with the weaving or the knitting , that is part of what they ' re doing , but you 
know , obviously having to be hand-in-hand with their clients and customers , like us , and lots of other 
different brands and companies from around the world that they ' re getting those orders to sustain training 
new people in those skills and to do that ’  .  ( HTHT ) 
Working with marginalized communities is challenging for many reasons :  
 ‘ And I started looking for workshops dedicated to social inclusion . The first workshop I found was ( … ) run by 
an NGO , they have their own brand and work as a workshop for other brands . It worked well and they 
continue to be an important workshop for me . But it all depends on the quantities . They work with women , 
who come from conditions , well , from the street and they give them training to give them a different future . 
So , they need time to learn to do the pieces well , and it becomes more complicated with bigger quantities ’  .  
( Miu Sutin ) 
60
Interestingly , collaborative entrepreneurs adjust their expectations when they work with deprived groups . 
People who used to work in the conventional textile industry understand the different ‘ rules of the game ’ 
based on the values they build their business on :  
 ‘ When I work with a social workshop I don ' t try to negotiate the prices , because I understand that the work is 
for them , so that they learn . When I was a buyer , the negotiation was the basis , but here no . You must 
understand and respect the working conditions ’  .  ( Miu Sutin ) 
Customers are king
Co-mingling with customers is crucial in all phases of collaborative enterprise as customers should be seen 
as the main ‘ collaborators ’ – without them the venture would simply not exist . Whether in the initial stages 
where a product is first ‘ tested ’ or in later stages when new customers lead to novel insights for adjusting a 
product , solid relationships with customers need to be built throughout the process of ‘ entrepreneuring ’  . 
And here again – no surprise – aesthetics plays a key role : only by the virtue of aesthetic resonance do 
ordinary citizens become key customers . Regardless of the availability of physical space such as a store , 
companies ’ first contact to potential customers is their sense of aesthetics . As one entrepreneur noted :  
 ‘ To us , minimalism is an essential issue , the most important elements in the Showroom app are product 
photos , other elements are in the background ’  ( Showroom )  . 
Good product photos that ‘ breathe ’ the brand ’ s identity – hence the strategic role of the ‘ right ’ 
photographer – are crucial to attract customers . And when someone has become a customer , it is key to 
carefully listen to their needs in order to keep them on board .  
 ‘ We are constantly keeping track of the opinions of our customers because they are most important to us . 
We respond to their comments and try to keep our finger on the pulse . Products don ’ t come to us directly 
but we try to attend a lot of fashion events where various brands present their clothes and where we can 
check their quality ’  ( Showroom )  . 
61
Collaborative activities are seen as at the core of value creation for customers :  
 ‘ For example , a milliner , perfect milliner , but now there ’ s not much demand for hats , so we worked with her 
and she has started doing jewellery , handbags , even bags , products that are easier to sell . By co-creating we 
are sharing value for our customers . Yes , definitely , and then they share their knowledge with us , so… ’  .  
( Ecoluxe ) 
Aesthetics represent not only the connective tissue of any type of collaboration , but also lift the sum of two 
single individual endeavours up to a higher level , in this case value creation for the customer . The customer 
then returns the favour in providing value for the company in an iterative process of mutual exchange .  
 ‘ They [ The customers ] tell us , why don ' t you try this , many clients have been asking , or this colour is more 
popular , and that illustration is great .  .  . So , a little . We have also once made something particular that they 
asked us for , because many were asking .  ’  ( Bao Bag ) 
Friends forever
Collaborative enterprises express a deep reverence for the ties they knot with others , especially when 
those bonds are fed by shared values .  
 ‘ I ’ ve learnt a lot from my friends who run enterprises of different sizes , manage projects and collaborate with 
people . I enjoy being the proverbial ‘ dumbest among the wise ’ and I try to surround myself with people I 
can learn something from .  ’  ( Showroom )  
 ‘ I learnt , also , that the small businesses are much more open to collaborate , and especially when they want 
to see a better world and do their own thing , they have a strong intrinsic motivation , and the rest , well they 
are easily identifiable ’  .  ( MTS ) 
It helps them to move beyond the level of the individual and see their own business as a creation crafted 
by many : 
62 
 ‘ Collaboration is my interaction . I am now alone in creating this brand ; and I still always talk in we form , 
because I feel like the work is a collective one . The collaborator who has helped me the most is the 
association for sustainable fashion . I see it as a constant learning process ’  .  ( Miu Sutin ) 
When part of a platform , collaborative practices can be accelerated as a common ‘ face ’ supports 
entrepreneurs in finding a common ‘ voice ’  .  
 ‘ And so apart from being able to sell on the platform I can also communicate what my brand is , which is very 
difficult when you are a standalone brand . So , to be able to be on this platform , which is also the first 
platform in Spain , gives me the chance to disseminate in a way that would otherwise be very difficult . They 
also communicate the general message of what sustainable fashion is , here in Spain ’  .  ( Miu Sutin ) 
In that sense , platforms take individual ventures to a higher level , but only when they are receptive to 
constantly relating to one another , in many different ways :  
 ‘ And the events that happen , we all participate actively . Their communication consists of shootings and 
events and presentations and we all support each other by sharing each other ’ s ’ news . This is something 
natural that happens every day . This is not a strategy , it ' s an integral part of who we are ’  .  ( Miu Sutin ) 
The relationship between individual ventures and ‘ the platform ’ as a collaborative enterprise is always 
mutual : a platform can ’ t exist without its ‘ members ’  : the members can reap the fruits of being part of the 
platform :  
 ‘ We don ' t offer courses , but we are not firm either . When we see that a brand needs help , we support as 
much as we can . If someone doesn ' t know how to calculate a margin , is creating too many bottoms and too 
little tops , doesn ' t know how to do billing , of course we help .  .  . sitting with them for two hours doesn ' t create 
us any income , but in the end , we think if they improve we all win ’  .  ( MTS ) 
63
Test yourself . 
1 . Identify events and workshops that you and your brand can 
identify with ; what makes them interesting ? 
2 . What platforms are active in your segment ? 
3 . Do the platforms complement your skill set ? Can you benefit from 
their expertise ? 
Get out there ! 
Talk to entrepreneurial peers , customers , platforms and shops and 
figure out how you could benefit from collaboration : what is it you 
want to learn ? What do you need to grow ? Co-mingle ! 
TASK 3
lxiv
The third main strategy for collaborative enterprise is the ‘ curation of 
space ’  , which is essential in conveying and enabling actors to 
engage with the aesthetic of the company . We can make the 
distinction between ( i ) physical space and ( ii ) online space . A 
physical space can serve as a co-creation place for team members 
and draw in customers who can witness or even interact with the 
process of design and embark on purchase .  ‘ Holding the space ’ 
online denotes the difference between the ability to attract or appal 
potential partners and clients . 
SPACING
65 
 ‘ So we wanted to get a space together where we could continue our projects , or collaborate , or build new 
things , we were looking initially for a studio together that we could share and struggled to find anywhere , 
this shop space was empty at the time , and we passed by one day and out of interest just asked what the 
rent was and it wasn ' t actually that dissimilar from the studios that we were looking at , and we thought well , 
this is an opportunity for us to have a space where we can work , where we can practise as design and 
makers , but also sell directly to customers and open out that process of how things are made and get 
people involved and understanding the time and materials and the processes that go into making products . 
So , it was very much about being within this very sort of micro space and the concept of being transparent 
in that way , people can walk past and see , you know , fabrics and machinery and items , accessories or bags 
or clothes or knitwear being made and then a day later appearing on the shelf or , you know , they can come 
in and watch that happening . So that was very much the sort of initial concept of the shop , of the studio 
space , having this dual use and it revolved from there ’  .  ( HTHT ) 
A physical space is an accessible and direct entry point to interact with customers :  
 ‘ From the Pop-up shop we actually learned what ’ s selling , we actually learned that we had a shop where the 
customers appreciated unique things and actually wanted to learn about the designers behind the product ’  .  
( Ecoluxe ) 
We have already seen how online presence is crucial in attracting customers :  ‘ holding that space ’ in an 
appropriate manner includes carefully scrutinising the purpose and use of all social media channels and 
other avenues that are used to interact with people , whether customers , socially excluded groups or other 
partners .  
 ‘ It doesn ' t have to be a perfect webpage , but an Instagram account , a couple of photos , this demonstrates 
that they are serious about their project .  ’  ( MTS ) 
In some cases , collaborative enterprise is even built around the smart use of technology :  
 ‘ The idea for Showroom emerged by accident when we were running a social media agency with Michał
Juda , some friends who had just established their own fashion brand came to us . They asked us for help in 
getting their online sales going . As we specialised in the use of social media , we developed an app for 
66
them , making it possible to sell products directly on Facebook . Then we decided to go to the Fashion Week 
and ask other designers whether they would like to use Showroom . It turned out that virtually everyone was 
interested , so when we returned to the office , which was located in Michał ’ s flat at that time , we started 
creating accounts of other designers ’  .  ( Showroom ) 
67
Test yourself ! 
1 . What physical spaces can you use to work , get inspired and learn ? 
What are the most relevant work-shop or co-working spaces for 
you ? Do you have access ? 
2 . What are the online spaces you could benefit from ? What do online 
communities offer , that you might need ? Do you have access ? 
To do
Create a list of online and off-line communities and spaces that offer 
services , space , a network to entrepreneurs like yourself . Identify what 
they can offer , that is relevant to you and what you are still missing . 
Look for alternatives , think outside the sector and you ’ re the box ! 
TASK 4
lxviii
During our cases , we discovered that sharing spaces fosters social 
innovation and adds value to the co-creation process . Being 
open-minded to new social concepts , helps to find a unique form for 
ventures to develop and learn from each other to achieve social 
impact . 
SOCIAL IMPACT
69 
 ‘ My hope would be to establish a new culture of cooperative ventures and have people collaborate and 
share innovation and production abilities and resources to earn money for each one but also for them .  ’  
( SOFFA )  
 ‘ HTHT has been a studio shop , it ' s becoming the brand , there ' s nothing to say that it ' s always going to be 
about a Fair Trade brand in Nepal , I think this idea of Here Today , Here Tomorrow and the fact that we ' re all 
doing so many other things , we do research , we do education , it can be so many other things as well and it 
might , again , evolve into something beyond Fair Trade production and it might become a research hub or , 
you know , a consultancy for businesses or , you know , educational workshops on sustainable design .  ’  ( HTHT )  
 ‘ We want to create jobs or at least help create a business for these young entrepreneurs . As well as create 
jobs for the marginalised groups . Such as trafficked women , in our factory .  .  . hopefully create this trend of 
bringing back fashion production back to Europe ( … )  .  ‘  ( SOFFA )  
 ‘ Ira offers training life coaching with the ZRM tool ( zelfredzaamheid )  .  ( … ) The creative program is low profile 
and low impact : youth are invited to hang out in the store / atelier to create their own fashion designs and 
after approx . 9 months they can ‘ stream out ’ onto the next challenge , either a traineeship , job or education . 
The retail program is higher intensity and impact : twice half a year of training in which youth really learn 
how to approach customers in the store , how to sell , how to keep the store clean etc .  ’  ( Rambler ) 
70
To-do
Draw for yourself the diagram above : what problem are you targeting , 
what ’ s your solution , what impact is the solution creating ? 
TASK 5
lxxi
This section has introduced you to the three core strategies for 
collaborative fashion enterprise . Keep in mind that we live in a 
networked society and that your greatest strength depends on your 
relational skills of building community around you . As an exercise , 
you can reflect on what you have learnt from this section and how 
you can adjust your business accordingly . You can use the checkbox 
to verify if you apply the three strategies . 
CONCLUSION
72
Reflect
How do you already apply these strategies in your business ? What can 
you improve ? How can you improve it ? 
1 . Curating
2 . Co-mingling
3 . Spacing
TASK 6
lxxiii 
( Humphreys et al , 2009 )  
( Simanis and Hart , 2009 : 79 ) 
REFERENCES
74 
 " Our best hope for the future of humanity lies in the power and effectiveness of socially motivated , highly 
empowered , individuals to fight for changes in the way we live , think and behave ” Jeff Skoll founder of 
eBay and the Skoll Foundation , 2008 . 
We focused on the skills that social and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs ’ possess and showcase their 
implementation in the context of successful collaboration with other stakeholders and entrepreneurs . Our 
cases all aim to create value for people , planet and profits , known as the ‘ triple bottom line ’  . We have 
already shown you how the fashion industry is detrimental to the environment and how it exploits the 
production work-force . We now want to show various entrepreneurs are actively pursuing a different path 
to entrepreneurial success , leveraging their communities ’ needs for growth . The following section 
introduces you to some of the skills that we have identified as being crucial to ' entrepreneuring ' in the 
fashion industry as well as best practice cases from five European countries . 
Paulo ( 2002 ) identified 21 core skills that are required to perform the basic roles needed in building 
collaborative enterprises . He also identified 6 roles that the founding team , volunteers and staff should 
perform ( 1 )  . There are : 
• Developing working conditions with communities and organisations
• Encouraging people to work with and learn from each other
• Work with people in communities to plan for change and take collective action
• Work with people in communities to develop and use frameworks for evaluation
• Develop community organisations
• Reflect and develop their own practice and roles ( 2 ) 
Among the 21 skills we identified : communication , relationship building and networking . 
7
ENTREPRENEURIAL SKILLS
75
Gilchrist ( 2004 : 5 ) research indicates that skills are not enough and that personality traits and qualities of 
the individual profile of the entrepreneurs and their staff plays an essential role , she states :  “ personality 
traits see to have a significant impact on networking ability . These include a commitment to perceive and 
value the whole person , showing interest , empathy and attention ”  ( 3 ) 
Besides co-creation and collaborative practices , it is necessary to develop certain skills that are required to 
perform the basic roles needed in building collaborative enterprises . In entrepreneurship , we therefore 
rely on skills that are called entrepreneurial skills . Besides the common / well-known skills , we want focus on 
those that are most relevant for the social and sustainable entrepreneur :  ( 1 ) Collaborative leadership skills ,  
( 2 ) social embeddedness skills ,  ( 3 ) networking and alliance building skills ,  ( 4 ) social innovations skills ,  ( 5 ) 
and fashion business skills . 
76
Leadership is a process whereby an individual influences a group of 
individuals to maximise their efforts towards the achievement of a 
common goal . As Eisenhower stated ,  “ leadership is the act of getting 
someone else to do something you want done because he wants to 
do it ”  . Achieving environmental and social sustainability is quickly 
becoming one of the great leadership challenges of our time . But 
the current leadership styles are often insufficient to generate the 
will to build sustainable organisations . Context becomes crucial in 
that leadership should take larger social and environmental factors 
into account . Leadership should be adaptive , enabling , facilitating 
and of service to the wider community . Evidence from Alvord et al 
COLLABORATIVE 
LEADERSHIP
77 
( 2004 : 272 ) research identified the existence of leadership patterns of individual or groups abilities to 
 ‘ work with and build bridges among very diverse stakeholders ’  ( 4 ) 
A transformational leadership style , is one where a leader succeeds in engaging others for a cause a 
purpose larger than their pay check . The following four topics illustrate some of the most crucial in 
collaborative leadership . 
Managing Volunteers and Staff
While starting up a venture , it is often very helpful to have the support of volunteers . But volunteers are not 
obliged , their commitment relies on their motivation alone ; they are not paid and cannot be pressured , so 
they need to be persuaded and they need to draw value out of what they are doing . Through careful 
planning and strategy , the cooperation with volunteers can be a gain for both sides . For further 
information , read Kouvaras ( 2015 ) on how to plan a volunteer programme ( 5 )  . 
Managing Accountability and Diverse Constituents Skills
Relationship Managing Skills are paramount to social and sustainable ventures . Considering this , 
accountability is therefore “ the process through which an organisation makes a commitment to respond to 
and balance the needs of stakeholders in its decision-making processes and activities and delivers against 
this commitment ”  . To address all stakeholders , you have to be accountable through your finances , 
governance , performance and mission . For social entrepreneurship , the challenge exists to integrate 
so-called “ fringe ” stakeholders - the poor , weak and non-legitimate stakeholders . To gain more insights 
into this topic , check out the literature by Hart and Sharma ( 2004 )  ( 6 )  . 
Managing diverse skills & interests requires understanding individual-level and organisational-level goals ! 
78
Managing Advocacy for Change Skills
To be a collaborative change agent you need to lead , engage and create a theory of change . To put an 
issue on the political agenda , you need to be heard , but you also need to be able to present a plan of how 
a change can be implemented . The challenge is in generating consensus and building support for a 
concrete cause . 
Finally , to be attached , as a co-creator you need to engage your team and the collaborating partners in the 
whole process of designing your venture until the product reaches the customer . It is particularly important 
to talk about values , trust and objectives ( on social and commercial objectives ) with your future co-creators . 
Know where you want to go and get others excited ! 
79
The WE is at the centre of collaborative leadership . 
During our research , we discovered the form of “ collaborative leadership ” as a wide-spread way for the 
decision-making process . This makes it possible to bundle strengths and develop added-value to the 
venture .  
 ‘ I wouldn ’ t call them committees , but yes there is more of a collaborative air to the venture itself so we do 
involve to the different aspects of the whole venture even if our roles and responsibilities are defined , we try 
to participate in all of them although it is difficult to make yourself available for all the activities being 
discussed .  ( SOFFA )  
 ‘ The three of us pretty much make all the decisions together , the major decisions , we do each bring our own 
strengths and skills but we don ' t have traditional distinctions between our roles , we use each other ’ s 
strengths to do different sorts of jobs , but we design all the collections together and we have a process 
which we ' ve been doing now , for a number of years , where we do that collaboratively and I mean that ' s 
definitely my favourite part of the whole business is getting to do that .  ’  ( HTHT )  
 ‘ Collaboration is my interaction . I am now alone in creating this brand ; and I still always talk in we form , 
because I feel like the work is a collective one . The collaborator who has helped me the most is the 
association for sustainable fashion . I see it like a constant learning process .  ’  ( Miu Sutin ) 
Many start-up ventures are connected to a funding body , association or other entrepreneurs and 
collaborators , particularly when they start out . This fact makes it even more important to build up 
collaborative leadership skills that ensure a satisfying co-creation and collaboration process for all 
stakeholders .  
 ‘ As a social business , we deal with equal partners at all levels of the business . When my expertise is required 
I would present the best possible solution to the team and resolve the matter through dialogue and action 
for the best possible outcome for the business .  '  ( SOFFA ) 
80
Test yourself ! 
1 . Who do you consult with when making decisions ? 
2 . What stakeholders do you consider when making your decisions ? 
3 . What stakeholders involve you in their decision-making 
processes ? 
To-do ! 
Set yourself a collaborative leadership goal : identify stakeholders that 
are affected by your decision-making and involve them in your 
process . 
TASK 7
lxxxi
Social embeddedness is related to the network governance mode . 
How can a collaborative organisation be governed ? How are 
decisions taken ? How is information and control shared ? What is the 
power model ? Social embeddedness is “ the ability to create a 
competitive advantage based on a deep understanding of and 
integration with the local environment .  ” This capability involves the 
ability to create a web of trusting connections with a diversity of 
organisations and institutions , to be able to rely on common norms 
like commitment and loyalty . 
SOCIAL 
EMBEDDEDNESS
82
Therefore , the vital elements that you should make sure to create in your relationships with your team and 
collaborators are : trust , reciprocity , equal members , role integrity ( protect members pay and domain )  . The 
fastest way to develop e . g . trust in your relationships is by offering trust . Another important parameter of 
how relationships in your organisation are governed has to do with sanctions . How is non-conforming 
deviant / opportunistic behaviour penalised ? Your options include : peer pressure , loss of status , or a 
financial fine . Remember , the more self-regulating the network , the deeper embedded it is . 
Business Ethics Skills
An entrepreneur today needs to have clear business ethics towards a corporate global citizen . You need to 
be able to distinguish between right and wrong and to be able to make the right decisions in dilemmas by 
managing conflicting goals . Understand that ALL choices you make have an impact ! 
Social Embeddedness applied
Thinking about the impact that a social and sustainable venture should produce , a demand for social 
embeddedness skills arise . Sharing values and building on trust are the benefits that should be 
implemented through social embeddedness . 
No venture is an island and the more you move toward being embedded within your eco-system the 
better you can leverage your network , the better you will understand others ’ needs and better you will be 
able to collaborate effectively . Social embeddedness provides the opportunity to understand how others 
are impacted by your actions and how others ’ actions impact you . It gives you the opportunities that come 
from a contextual understanding of interrelatedness .  
 ‘ The Association for Craft Producers who we work with and have built a great relationship with mainly work 
with family run groups and women . They go above and beyond Fair Trade certification . The organisation is 
really trying to create a robust organisation which does provide for its workers , things like childcare and 
education .  ’  ( HTHT )  
 ‘ I know a lot of the other brands and I trust their values and process and what their image means for my 
brand . But I also have trust in that they can help me with their experience in fashion and working with the 
brans when I need it . A lot of the process is based on values and trust .  ’  ( Miu Sutin ) 
83
Test yourself ! 
1 . Who are the key players in your eco-system ? What is your 
relationship to them ? Do you trust them ? 
2 . What other stakeholders have you not thought of before ? 
3 . How are other ventures incorporating fringe stakeholders in your 
surrounding ? 
To-do
Define the impact you want to have on society : Go out and find out 
how others are achieving similar goals . What are your options to 
connect with your eco-system ? What players share your values ? 
TASK 8
lxxxiv
A vital characteristic of entrepreneurs is their ability to build 
networks , those networks provide access to resources , help them 
support their venture , but also increase their capacity for social 
impact and social value creation . Their networks bring them 
partners , customers , suppliers , funds . Entrepreneurs have a higher 
chance of succeeding when they are well-connected .  
 “ If you want to walk fast walk alone . If you want to walk far , walk 
together .  ”  ( African proverb ) 
NETWORKING & 
ALLIANCE 
BUILDING
85
Organisations are realising that they can meet their objectives through cooperation with other 
organisations instead of competing with them .  “ Network and alliance building benefits include : increased 
legitimacy to the venture , increased uniqueness , increased funding success , and increased complexity 
( thus making it harder for competitors to imitate )  . It makes actors more reliable , trustworthy , prestigious , to 
increases the quality of their reputation , their perceived legitimacy , and access to social networks . 
Networks help a venture rethink its business model in a sustainable matter . Others may hold the key to 
your success and you may hold the key to others ’ success !  
 ‘ We have a board and the investors are part of the board . The investors are very involved . We have 
meetings every month with the investors , internally , without the designers . I trust them a lot , in their 
experience , their mentoring and support . 
I think I have two key responsibilities . One that it works , works economically and continues working and the 
other is that it doesn ' t lose its values .  ’  ( Co-Shop ) 
Networking and alliance building skills applied
To curate a network can be one of the most rewarding ways to collaborate effectively . It usually gives 
entrepreneurs to collectively present themselves , and work toward a common goal , sharing costs and 
efforts , allowing for a higher degree of professionalisation and lower costs per venture . 
Curating relies heavily on the ability to create and maintain a network . It is about carefully selecting your 
partners and engaging new players to create and explore new opportunities . Therefore , networking and 
alliance building skills are crucial for the sustainability of the venture and might also be door-openers for 
further growth .  
 ‘ The thing was that the community in reality already exited , it just wasn ' t established in an organised form , 
there were many designers that got together to go to markets to sell , or organised fairs , so they already 
knew each other . And from the designers we got a lot of recommendations and network growth . And from 
there we had a full shop and much more interest than space . There was a real necessity and the movement 
that followed demonstrated that . And it has continued this way during the three years . We rarely had to go 
out and look . Almost always , the people approach us with products , ideas for collaboration , a lot more than 
we have the capacity to manage . The only thing we have done is organise it . Give is a body , a form , meet 
and connect . But this community already existed .  ’  ( Co-Shop ) 
86
For example , in the beginning we had seven employees because we were supported by OAED for a few 
months , but funding why ? It ' s totally different when the circumstances help you , with the taxes or with 
European Programs . Although we are not entrepreneurs , if ELEPAP didn ' t exist we would try to find other 
actors in order to be sustainable .  ( SOFFA ) 
87
Test yourself ! 
1 . Who are the key players in your eco-system ? 
2 . Are you connected to them ? 
3 . How could someone else ’ s expertise benefit your business ? 
4 . What can you offer in return ? 
Go out , meet people ! 
Find the most relevant , associations , meet-ups , events and start telling 
people about what you do , don ’ t forget to follow up and find out what 
they are looking for . 
TASK 9
lxxxviii
Social entrepreneurship is often defined as innovation that leads to 
positive social change regardless of the mechanisms through which 
it is achieved ( 7 )  . According to this approach the focus is on 
innovative ventures initiated by entrepreneurs to tackle social or 
societal issues ; so , meeting the social goals is more important than 
the resource mix of the enterprise which involves a particular 
combination of human and financial resources . 
Social Innovation emerges as a novel solution to a social problem 
that is more effective , efficient , sustainable for which the value 
SOCIAL 
INNOVATION
89
created accrues primarily to society as a whole rather than private individuals ( 8 )  . Socially innovative 
business models include : trading for social purpose , delivering public services , providing support and 
services to vulnerable and excluded groups and providing financial services . Dare to think outside the box ! 
Dream big and start small every step in the right direction counts .  
 ‘ With more time , you have more of a relationship . It ' s funny because normally when a business relation 
doesn ' t immediately display the economic benefits you hoped for things start to dissolve , but we are doing 
more and more things together . Eva for example from Ecology , we started having her stuff online , she has 
helped out a few times and I have offered her space to do her own shootings .  ’  ( MTS ) 
90
To do
Revisit Task 5 . How are you using collaborative leadership , social 
embeddedness , network and alliance building to create a positive 
social impact . Analyse the steps that you take from defining your 
problem to contributing to social change . 
Reflect
Is your approach the most effective to create a social impact ? What 
could be an alternative approach ? What skills could you use and 
leverage to be more effective . What do you need to learn ? Who do 
you need to collaborate with ? 
TASK 10
xci
Business skills encompass a variety of umbrella tasks associated with 
running a successful fashion enterprise . Artistic talent and a great 
product are not enough ( unfortunately )  . In the fashion industry , the 
importance of these skills is sometimes underestimated ; but we see 
that successful social and sustainable fashion entrepreneurs put 
particular emphasis on acquiring business skills or on collaborating 
with partners who contribute with business acumen . Social 
entrepreneurship in fashion faces a complex supply chain and 
creative industry specificities all in one : therefore , being on top of 
your business skills can ensure that you create a product a customer 
BUSINESS SKILLS
92
will want to buy , offer services that your suppliers and buyers value and grow your business sustainably . 
Financial Skills and Fundraising
Entrepreneurs bear a significant economic risk , financial sustainability vital . The same is true for social and 
sustainable fashion entrepreneurs . The resources of their enterprises can have a hybrid character coming 
from trading activities , from public subsidies or from voluntary resources . When profits are not the only 
objective these skills are sometimes neglected , but financial sustainability is equally important and 
achieving a positive social impact is only possible if the enterprise can be sustained financially as well . 
If entrepreneurs do not have access to capital , they often rely on fundraising activities : these can come 
from investors , crowdfunding platforms or industry partners . You need to evaluate what your best options 
are , what are your fundraising goals and plans ? Who do you want to raise money from , and what do you 
want to achieve ? A clear strategy will help you weigh your options . 
Business Planning and Research
Starting up and growing your venture can be quite overwhelming . The business plan will help you to 
identify the strengths and weakness of your own venture ; it will also help you assess the external 
environment for competitors and collaborators and your internal operations and to-dos for efficiency and 
task-management . You will be able to evaluate risks and anticipate difficulties so you can plan ahead . 
To be able to create a good and realistic business plan you need to perform research . Keep yourself 
updated about developments in your industry , talk to your customer ( and potential customers ) and 
observe their behaviour , and go into dialogue with other entrepreneurs , potential partners , suppliers and 
buyers to gain insight and test your assumptions . 
93
Sourcing Materials and Supply Chain Management
A social and sustainable fashion entrepreneur needs to know where to source what type of sustainable 
materials , and that ’ s not easy . In the last few years there have been some significant innovations in the 
realm of textile production . There are various sources of databases and online marketplaces that one can 
source their materials from if they do not have the capacity to source it from the producers themselves . 
There is also innovation in the processes of producing textiles and garments to eliminate the distraction 
caused to the environment , like use of less water , non-toxic colours and others . Ethical Fashion Forum and 
mysource . io are a good point of reference for someone who wants to learn more . 
Furthermore , supply chain management skills are essential to fashion entrepreneurs in whichever position 
along the supply chain they are found . To collaborate successfully , understanding your suppliers and 
buyers pain-points and operations can be crucial to identify new opportunities and better practices . 
94
Analyse : what takes place in each stage ? Where does it take place in the world ? What are the working 
conditions ? Who is involved ( organisations and people )  ? Transparency in supply chains is pivotal if we 
want to combat child labour , modern slavery and dehumanising working conditions . The fashion industry 
has traditionally been characterised by low transparency , which has led to these atrocities . Check out 
fashionrevolution . org for more information . Understand who does what and how ! 
Impact Measurement
Collaborative enterprises are evaluated through their social impact and social value creation . Impact is not 
only seen as the output of social venture activity but is also built in its operation process thus throughout 
their entire value chain ( Nicholls , 2008 )  . Measurements include the Triple Bottom line accounting ; which 
measures the company ' s success capturing an expanded spectrum of variables including the impact to the 
people , the planet and the profit . 
We saw that co-creators and collaborative ventures in the fashion industry do not only bring about positive 
outcomes but aim at being a job create , to have a positive environmental and social impact or to help 
others follow a dream and to bring them economic performance benefits . What impact ? And how can you 
measure it ? 
Our data suggests that among the entrepreneurial skills , collaborative leadership , business skills and social 
embeddedness are the most present across the collaborative ventures we interviewed .  
 ‘  (  .  .  )  ’ we ' d love to be able to establish collections where our materials are more sustainable as well , at the 
moment we ' re focusing on the relationship we have with our makers . Within Nepal there are particular 
challenges with getting organic cotton and wool and those sorts of things , which is another really important 
aspect of what we want to do and where we see the brand going and what we represent , and we ' ve not 
been able to do that at the moment because we are so small and we have limited capabilities for those kind 
of growing in that way as well , so that ' s definitely a goal of ours . But for us , it ' s about taking it step-by-step to 
get there .  ’  ( Ecoluxe London )  
 ‘  (  .  .  .  ) And of course the financials because the sustainability of social cooperative enterprise and the 
employees are dependent on that .  '  ( ARTemeis ) 
95 
 ‘ The business model is based on the need for viability , everyone has great ideas but the important thing is 
that it is viable . 
I looked at the market and wanted to make sure that what I was doing was actively addressing a need .  ’  
( MTS )  
 ‘  (  .  .  ) we are firstly a social enterprise . But really what happened was that we didn ' t have a clear idea when we 
started , we wanted to do something we liked . And little by little , when we started growing , we had to figure 
out where we were going . Would we be the type of company that does everything super cheap or would we 
try and create additional value . and that ' s when we started looking for a more social way to do things and 
started working with the foundation . But the reality is we are also trying to maintain a competitive price . And 
that ' s not easy .  ’  ( Bao Bag ) 
96
Test yourself ! 
1 . Who is your customer ? 
2 . What are you offering ? What ’ s your value proposition ? 
3 . How are you delivering your product or service to your customer ? 
To-do
1 . Talk to your customers or target customers : what do they want , what 
do they expect , what are they willing to pay ? 
2 . How can you adapt your business model to drive sales ? 
3 . Research your competitors and potential collaborators : how do you 
differentiate yourself from your competition ? Who can help you 
make the customer happier ? Reach out ! 
TASK 11
xcvii
1 . Paulo ( 2002 ) The national occupational 
standards for community development work . 
Grantham : Paulo
2 . Bryant , R ( 2010 ) Identifying need in Gunn , R and 
Durkin , C ( eds ) Social Entrepreneurship A skills 
Approach . Bristol : The Policy Press
3 . Gilchrist , A ( 2004 ) The well-connected 
community . Bristol : The policy press
4 . Alvord
5 . Kouvaras ( 2015 ) 
6 . Hart and Sharma ( 2004 ) 
7 .  ( Dees , 1998 ) 
8 .  ( Murray , Caulier-Grice and Mulgan , 2009 ) 
9 . Ethical Fashion Forum sourcing directory : 

ectory / directory / 4
10 . 
11 . 
REFERENCES
98
Aside from the three strategies for collaborative fashion enterprise , we deem it important to acquire 21st 
century skills . Do you know which are the skills that you need to develop in order to succeed in today ’ s 
world ? Silicon Valley and the EU manifesto reveal that it is your ability of dreaming , imagining , questioning 
and critical thinking , challenging , experimenting , problem solving and learning . 
Facing many challenges entrepreneurs are known to turn to innovative and creative solutions : The 21st 
century demands for new skills to match the practices of new ways of doing business . Apart from the 
 “ obvious ” ones such as digital literacy , skills that enhance creativity , innovative thinking adaptability , 
flexibility are included in this school of thought . For social and sustainable entrepreneurship , we consider 
the following ones as the 21st century skills that contribute to a prosperous future of the enterprise : 
Dreaming , imagining , questioning and critical thinking , challenging , experimenting , problem solving and 
learning . 
What does it take to be a successful entrepreneur ? The sets of skills employed by successful fashion 
entrepreneurs is vast , and diverse . And one thing is certain , we cannot expect entrepreneurs to be great at 
everything . Our take on collaborative ventures supports this notion . Complimenting sets of skills , 
knowledge , expertise and ways of thinking from your network of partners and the eco-system you operate 
in is crucial , to understanding what it is YOU can offer . 
Yet , we find that almost all our entrepreneurs clearly encompass a few critical skills : critical thinking and 
questioning , learning and problem solving ; and these are deeply rooted within the entrepreneurs ’ ways of 
thinking , communicating and reflecting their own process . 
In relation to the above standing entrepreneurial skill of “ social embeddedness ”  , which relies on trust and 
dialogue , it ’ s counterpart is equally important in identifying challenges , pitfalls ; but also , opportunities for 
improvements and innovation . 
8
21ST CENTURY SKILLS
99
Similarly ,  “ questioning ”  , draws attention to the habits , behaviours and patters that we tend to accept and 
not challenge . It draws attention to what we don ’ t know , and haven ’ t really thought about . Having the 
ability to look at things from a different perspective and question the status-quo points out problems and 
opportunities , creating a critical filter for society and your own business . 
100
Questioning the why and how of the status quo , habitual behaviour 
and practices allows the entrepreneur to see a need for alternatives 
and to start exploring opportunities . Think about it . One t-shirt for 
EUR 3 . 99 , is that even possible without exploiting someone along 
the value chain ? 
Doubt and objections in the right dosage are important and support 
the ability of critical thinking . It ’ s an analytical ability that goes 
beyond questioning to dig deeper and recognise problems , 
potential pitfalls and failures . Critical thinking is the filter you need to 
QUESTIONING & 
CRITICAL 
THINKING
101
apply to sway your passion and stubbornness . The run of an objective analysis and the evaluation of an 
issue in order to form a judgement , helps to make clear your actual position . Self-evaluate !  
 ‘ You need to be careful , because the conscious consumption boom also leads to the fact that many say they 
are sustainable - but you need to see some of the conditions in the factories in Alicante or Malaga . The 
people work more hours than in Bangladesh , and most of them don ' t have contracts .  ’  
( MTS )  
 ‘ If you try to buy 100% organic fair trade cotton .  .  . Well .  .  . We ' re just not there yet . No , I think the society is just 
not prepared to value that yet . If you argue that a t-shirt was made locally , didn ' t exploit anyone and is made 
of completely natural material ; but it costs you 30 Euros , well no one will buy it .  ’  ( Bao Bag ) 
Moreover , questioning and critical thinking can be seen as supportive skills for the monitoring body of the 
venture . A steady review on the venture ’ s impact based on own impression ( or on the feedback of other 
stakeholders or consumers ) can then lead to the next step that follows the monitoring : The learning and 
improvement process .  
 ‘ From the Pop-up shop we actually learned what ’ s selling , we actually learned that we had a shop where the 
customers appreciated unique things and actually wanted to learn about the designers behind the product .  ’  
( Ecoluxe London ) 
The popular saying ,  “ life-long-learning ” can be transferred in our context to the lifespan of your venture . 
Learning with intention can ensure that your venture continuously develops .  
 ‘ I ’ ve learnt a lot from my friends who run enterprises of different sizes , manage projects and collaborate 
with people . I enjoy being the proverbial ‘ dumbest among the wise ’ and I try to surround myself with people 
I can learn something from .  ’  ( Showroom )  
 ‘ I am curious in so many ways with a global outlook , I ' ve travelled for work and myself and like seeing new 
things , investigating .  .  . observing , and I think this connects to my professional choices ; if I hadn ' t seen all the 
things I ' ve seen , hadn ' t observed , I wouldn ' t have developed the capacities to do what I do .  ’  ( MTS ) 
102 
 ‘ I saw for the first time what all that work amounted to… . I see it like a constant learning process . To me , to 
keep learning is something super important , also online… But I could spend my whole life taking courses ’  
( Miu Sutin ) 
103
Test yourself ! 
1 . What practices around your business do you simply accept ? 
2 . What are the biggest issues facing your business ? 
3 . Answer and ask WHY ? Answer again and ask WHY ? Answer again 
and ask WHY ? And… you get the idea ! 
Questioning is not only a skill , it ’ s also a mind-set ! Go out into the 
world and be curious : ask WHY ? 
TASK 13
civ
The ability to dream helps to create a vision , to overcome obstacles , 
create a sense of purpose and push forward . Dream BIG !  
 ‘ This is my time , my life , my dream and my primary objective . 
Everything else is a means to continue doing this , nothing else .  ’  ( MTS )  
 ‘ I did not create the business to help others follow their dream , but I 
think 
we are .  ’  ( Co-shop )  
 ‘ And to follow my dream , which is to change the way we consume , 
and I would love to grow and give work to people .  ’  ( Miu Sutin ) 
DREAMING
105
To-do
Dream ! Dream BIG ! What change do you want to see in the world ? 
What do you want to achieve ? Paint a colourful picture ! 
TASK 14
cvi
Imaging is the skill that bridges the gap between dreaming and 
action . Start imagining how your dream could become reality and it 
becomes a concept , a plan , something concrete , a business model 
and eventually , reality . Ask yourself : HOW ?  
 ‘ I was able to confirm that in this world a lot of people have great 
ideas and concepts . But few are able to put them into practice in a 
good way . There are so many people that have dreams , but they lack 
a business vision entirely , also the education , so the great ideas get 
lost on the way .  ’  ( MTS )  
 ‘  ( … ) and we wanted to portray the fact that we wanted to give up the 
 ‘  ’ sofa ’  ’ and just do something to make a change in the industry of 
fashion .  ’  ( SOFFA )  
 ‘ I had this idea of combining this tiny venture with helping others . 
Such a mixture was created . That ’ s how it began !  ’  ( Notjustshop ) 
IMAGINING
107
108
Back to reality ! 
1 . What are the paths you could chose to realise your dream ? 
2 . Define yours . 
3 . What do you need to put into place to start and develop your 
path ? 
4 . Read , listen , observe and start to create an action plan . 
TASK 15
cix
No one ever said it was easy . As an entrepreneur , you will face 
unexpected and undesirable developments ; if you can face the 
challenge , you are bound to find a solution . Taking the risk , by doing 
something that seemed difficult or impossible can then turn out to 
be the key to success . Embrace the challenge and challenge the 
status quo ! 
One challenge that is always mentioned in the context of the fashion 
business , is the collaboration of designers and entrepreneurs . Yet , 
those who do it successfully , learn from each other and benefit 
CHALLENGING
110
professionally and personally . Challenging the norms of your own patterns of thinking can inspire action 
and creativity !  
 ‘ I ’ m a designer , I ’ m not an entrepreneur , this I ’ m not willing to accept , I ’ m a designer trying to go into 
business , onto the business side .  ’  ( Miu Sutin )  
 ‘ The designers are creative , they think in the short term , they are chaotic , also creative minds value their 
creation more than anyone . But we need to find a way for that creation to be sold . If you think of other 
creatives the music industry , the arts , you can create what you like and have it at home . But if you want to 
sell it , you need to understand who will pay for what . and this part , the more market oriented part is hard to 
bring across to the creatives sometimes . They see themselves as artists and they are , but if you want to live 
from it , it takes more than creative talent . I am still learning the language of the creatives . An engineer 
doesn ' t get offended from feedback . It really is like changing the country . You need to learn how to say it in 
a way that doesn ' t offend .  ’  ( Co-Shop )  
 ‘ When someone does such things as I do they have to realise this is not going to be easy (  .  .  )  ’  ( Notjustshop )  
 ‘ Out of this one business I need to support two paths so you need to be ready to do some extra work , but if 
you have the passion and you really feel it , then you ’ ll overcome any obstacles .  ’  ( Notjustshop ) 
111
To-do
Reflect : are you ready for the risk , the lifestyle , the uncertainty ? 
TASK 16
cxii
Trying out various ideas to see how good or effective they are , 
experimenting is about getting your hands dirty and learning by 
doing to find the best solution .  
 ‘ At the moment , we ’ re testing various models of cooperation with 
Polish fashion magazines to see what works out and what doesn ’ t .  ’  
( Showroom )  
 ‘ We had the pop-up shop for two months , and at all times we had 
between 10 and 15 designers , different price points , and different 
products . The design of the Pop-up Shop was made out of palettes , 
used palettes…and our lights made out of seaweed .  ’  ( Ecoluxe ) 
EXPERIMENTING
113
Trial and error are your friend . You don ' t know where you are 
vulnerable until you have failed . 
To do
Define your assumptions and go out and try ! Experimenting isn ’ t 
about resources , it ’ s about dedication ! 
TASK 17
cxiv
What if it didn ’ t work ? Problem solving is the skill that will let you find 
alternatives and maintain a solution-oriented approach when things 
don ’ t go your way . In a collaborative enterprise , methods of problem 
solving and finding a ( common ) solution are required to reinstate 
cohesion among the team members . Don ’ t give up easy ! 
Entrepreneurs across the board must be equipped to face 
challenges and find ( sometimes unlikely ) solutions . Collaborative 
ventures call for particular presence of this skill . Finding common 
ground among different stakeholder interests is challenging , a 
PROBLEM 
SOLVING
115
problem-solving skillset and mind-set are crucial to push continuously for common ground and cohesion 
among the team members .  
 ‘ Well , when there ’ s a problem rises I tend to…try to talk with other partners of the group about these 
problems and see if we can resolve them in a more collaborative way . This is also for the venture itself .  '  
( SOFFA )  
 ‘ With presence of mind first try to find the solution and then identify the reason that problem created in the 
first place .  ’  ( SOFFA )  
 ‘ For example , a milliner , perfect milliner , but now there ’ s not much demand for hats , so we worked with her 
now and she has started doing jewellery , handbags , even bags , products that are easier to sell .  ’  ( Ecoluxe ) 
116
Test yourself ! 
1 . What is the biggest challenge you face ? 
2 . What is the ideal outcome and what needs to happen , fall into 
place for that to work ? 
Brainstorm ! 
Don ’ t forget : invite team members , fellow entrepreneurs , customers… 
the more feedback and brain-power the better . 
1 . Come up with 100 ideas on how to fix your challenges
2 . Filter the ideas : Chose a few and start trying to figure out how some 
of these ideas might work out . 
TASK 18
cxvii
Last , but definitely not least , the ability and the willingness to learn 
are what make for great entrepreneurs and collaborators . Constant 
learning is a key factor to a successful and sustainable development 
of the venture . The learning process among entrepreneurs is based 
not only on their experiences and interactions but also on their own 
development and emotional states . Keep learning ! Be proactive : 
read , study , try and be passive : observe , evaluate , take a step back . 
Being an entrepreneur is a learning journey . Believe in your own 
opportunity to grow ! 
LEARNING
118
But if you want to sell it , you need to understand who will pay for what and this part , the more market 
oriented part is hard to bring across to the creatives sometimes . They see themselves as artists and they are , 
but if you want to live from it , it takes more than creative talent . I am still learning the language of the 
creatives ’  .  ( Co-shop )  
 ‘ Collaboration is my interaction . I am now alone in the in creating this brand ; and I still always talk in we 
form , because I feel like the work is a collective one . The collaborator who has helped me the most is the 
association for sustainable fashion . I see it like a constant learning process .  ’  ( Miu Sutin ) 
119
To do
1 . List five unanswered questions on how to make your social and 
sustainable fashion business more successful . Be concrete . 
2 . What knowledge and / or skills do you need to take your business 
to the next level ? List for each . 
3 . Rank the knowledge and skills needed according to your 
priorities . 
4 . Research how you may be able to learn . Be creative . Remember 
your network and collaborators as potential mentors in certain areas . 
Think meet-up groups , on-line courses , books , blogs , you-tube 
tutorials… and set yourself learning targets for the next 6 months . And 
do it ! 
TASK 19
cxx
We can imagine that you might feel overwhelmed with the amount 
of info you have read . It is important to recognise that many of the 
skills we have introduced to you , you might already be very familiar 
with . Maybe you found that you already use some of them regularly ? 
We advise you to use the handbook as a workbook that you can go 
back to for practice and inspiration . You can use the checkbox to 
verify if you have and use these skills . 
If you want to learn more about 21st century skills , check out the P21 
framework :  
CONCLUSION
121
A glimpse at the future
When we depart from an image of a bright future , halve of the work is already done . Dreaming is such a 
powerful tool that it can really craft new realities : never underestimate the power of your dreams ! We know 
very well that it is not easy to believe in yourself and your dreams when adversities cross your path . 
Entrepreneurship is really a process of becoming : it is a journey in which you get to know yourself and your 
business better . Failure does not exist as difficulties test your resilience : flexibility and bouncing back after 
pitfalls are crucial in becoming even more yourself within your business . 
There is no turning back . The fashion industry is built from a 20th century mind-set and all of us together 
are reshaping it as we speak . It is a playground for people to experiment , with new designs , innovative new 
business models , novel technologies and other definitions of what a supply chain should look like . And 
while small and big actors in this field are playing their part , collaboration between them is what makes the 
difference . Small innovative start-ups can come up with the break-through new technologies and business 
models needed to radically disrupt the industry . Such as for example fashion designers who grow skin like 
fabric from fungi with the support of biotechnologists . Big retailers can make an impact by scaling such 
technologies and freeing up finances for investment . 
122
Summarize your key learnings
1 . How can co-creation and collaboration benefit your business . What 
are the steps you want to take to make it happen . 
2 . What entrepreneurial skills do you need to work on ? What are your 
strengths and how can you leverage them ? 
3 . How do reflecting upon 21st century skills influence your 
decision-making ? What are the next steps you see yourself taking 
and how can these skills benefit you and your business ? 