A Cognitive and Social Psychological Perspective on the demand for fashion
Abstract
The fashion industry is an important global industry . In 2012 , in Britain it 
generated more than £48 billion annually and employs more than 600 , 000 
people . Whether or not we consider ourselves fashionable or interested in 
fashion , we all clothe ourselves in items we have bought or have chosen 
to wear . Individuals in developed countries tend to buy more fashion items 
than they need and many have bought items that remain unworn . The 
fashion industry depends on demand for new ideas and products which 
allow individuals to perceive themselves as socially or economically 
superior or simply different . From a psychological perspective , this is in 
conflict with the well understood desire to conform . The psychological 
underpinnings of the demand for fashion are complex and have been 
neglected in research . This paper considers the cognitive and social 
psychological roles of decision making in the demand for fashion . 
Fashion has been described variously as the prevailing style at any given time 
( Nystrom , 1928 )  ; the pursuit of novelty for its own sake ( Robinson , 1958 )  ; a 
manifestation of social contagion ( King , 1964 ) and collective behaviour ( Horn , 1968 ; 
Lang & Lang , 1961 )  . It is a complex , diffuse , often perplexing , highly visible 
characteristic of societies which can be conceptualised both as an object and as a 
behavioural process of social influence and diffusion ( Sproles , 1974 )  . As such , 
fashion is a useful vehicle to enable economists to understand non-necessitous 
expenditure ( Robinson , 1961 )  . The demand for fashion is a multi-dimensional 
phenomenon of interest to researchers from many disciplines including cultural 
studies , fashion , psychology , sociology and anthropology as well as economics . 
However , due to the complexity and variability in understanding consumer decision 
making and buying behaviour , the demand for fashion is not well understood . 
Consumer behaviour , particularly the act of purchasing , has been of interest to 
researchers for decades especially from an economic perspective ( Loudon & Della 
Bitta , 1993 )  . Utility Theory ( Bentham ,  [ 1824 ]  , 1987 )  , proposes that consumers are 
rational decision makers concerned only with self-interest who make rational choices 
based on the expected outcomes of their decisions . However , in order to behave 
rationally in the economic sense consumers would need to be aware of all the 
available consumption options , be capable of correctly rating each and available to 
select the optimum course of action ( Schiffman & Kanuk , 2007 )  . This is no longer 
considered realistic as consumers are unlikely to have all possible information , 
adequate motivation and time to make a perfectly rational decision ( Bray , 2008 )  . 
Moreover , social relationships and values strongly influence consumer decisions 
( Simon , 1997 ) which can result in individuals seeking satisfactory , rather than 
optimal , choices ( e . g .  , Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 )  . Consumers ’ attitudes about a 
product or service are formed through experience with the product or service , 
information from salespeople , friends , relatives and advertisements . Because 
attitudes are learned , they can change over time . 
2
In 2012 , the global clothing industry was valued at US$1 . 7 trillion and employed 75 
million people . At that time in the UK alone , the clothing industry employed 600 , 000 
people and the total UK household consumption on clothing and footwear was £48 
billion , approximately £732 per capita . Today , the UK high street fashion industry is 
worth an estimated £44 . 5 billion1 
. Despite a general decrease in consumer spending 
on the high street , Mintel ( April , 2014 ) reports that most shoppers in most 
department stores are shopping for fashion : 50% shop for clothing , 40% for footwear 
and over 30% purchase beauty products . Moreover , online shopping for fashion 
( clothing and footwear ) continues to increase . Mintel report that online sales of 
fashion increased by 461% between 2001and 2006 and by 152% between 2010 and 
2011 when more than a third ( 35% ) of shoppers bought their clothes online spending 
£4 . 3 billion . These figures continue to increase . In 2013 , 36 million adults ( 73% ) in 
Great Britain accessed the Internet every day and 72% of all adults bought goods or 
services online . Reasons for the boom in online fashion sales are cited as the 
increase in the number of households who have broadband ( 83% in 2013 )  , more 
sophisticated websites , and increased numbers of fashion brands such as Zara , 
H & M , Gap and Topshop having transactional online presence . In addition to 
increased internet access from home , access to the Internet using a mobile phone 
more than doubled between 2010 and 2013 , from 24% to 53%2 
. 
GfK ’ s 2006 study for Wall Street Journal Europe3
surveyed 20 , 654 people aged over 
15 years in 20 countries across Europe and USA to investigate consumers ’ 
reasoning about and attitudes towards clothing consumption and shopping habits . 
The study reported that 80% of the sample bought clothes because of necessity , low 
cost ( 75% )  , pleasure from buying clothing or an accessory ( 50% )  , own country of 
manufacture ( 52% )  , and spontaneity . Just over one third ( 38% ) of those surveyed 
said they followed trends and a third were interested specific labels . The survey also 
investigated online shopping habits and found that only 25% of consumers in the UK 
and 13% of consumers in USA had made online purchases of clothing or 
accessories at least once in the previous twelve months . More recently , a study by 
GSI , owned by eBay , reported that of 2000 adult shoppers almost 45% preferred 
shopping for fashion online than offline . The study also found that 71% of women are 
likely to research online and buy offline , compared to 52% of men . Interestingly , 
although 64% consult a fashion retailer ' s website before making a purchase , 
consumers tend not to consult the retailers ’ social media profiles . In the GSI study , 
90% of consumers reported that they had not interacted with any fashion retailer ' s 
Facebook , Twitter or mobile site . 
Without doubt , fashion is an important global industry which relies on demand for 
new ideas and products that will allow individuals to perceive themselves as socially 
or economically superior or simply different . Whether or not we consider ourselves 
fashionable or even interested in fashion , we all clothe ourselves in items we have 
bought or have chosen to wear . Researchers in marketing , frequently suggest 
Maslow ’ s ( 1943 ) model describing a hierarchy of needs is useful for understanding 
consumers ’ purchase decisions . This is reflected in the interpretation of GSI ’ s survey 
findings which claims that 4 out of 5 purchases are bought as a result of need .  

1

2

3 3

3
Not only is the term ‘ need ’ problematic , the claim is unsupported by the literature . 
For example , many individuals buy more fashion items than they need as result of 
impulse and emotional buying . Consequently , many items remain unworn . A survey 
of more than 1 , 200 adults in 2011 by QVC , the online retailer , found that both men 
and women had unworn items of clothing they had bought as a result of impulse 
buying : women had an average of 22 unworn outfits valued at £285 and men had 19 
unworn items worth an average of £248 ( Poulton , 2011 )  . 
The fashion industry depends on demand for new ideas and products which allow 
individuals to perceive themselves as socially or economically superior or simply 
different . For more than a century , conspicuous consumption ( Veblen ,  [ 1899 ]  , 1994 ) 
has been used to describe the acquisition of luxury goods and services to publicly 
display economic power . Veblen ' s Theory of the Leisure Class critiques the 
neoclassical theory of consumption and presents an evolutionary framework in which 
preferences are determined socially in relation to the positions of individuals in the 
social hierarchy . Having discretionary income allows individuals to consume goods 
and services for prestige rather than for the intrinsic , practical utility of the goods and 
the services . Almost 100 years ago , Nystrom ( 1931 ) argued that the industrial 
revolution had induced a ‘ philosophy of futility ’ that would increase the consumption 
of goods and services as an activity for its own sake . He discussed the concept of 
conspicuous consumption as behavioural addiction , narcissistic behaviour or both 
which was a means to satisfy consumers ’ desire for instant gratification 
of hedonic expectations . Previously considered a preserve of the rich , by the late 
twentieth century conspicuous consumption had become a socio-economic 
behaviour of poorer social classes and economic groups , and common to the 
societies of countries with emerging economies ( Stanley & Danko , 1996 ; Charles , 
Hurst & Roussanov , 2009 )  . Stanley and Danko ( 1996 ) described how Americans 
with a net worth of more than $1 million were likely to avoid conspicuous 
consumption and practice frugality . In support , Charles et al .  ( 2007 ) argued that the 
richer a society or peer group , the less important visible spending becomes . For 
individuals in lower economic status groups and developing economies , conspicuous 
consumption serves more to fight the negative perception of being poor rather than 
to establish an affluent status . Fashion satisfies simultaneously the demand for 
novelty and difference , and the demand for conformity and belonging ( e . g .  , Asch , 
1956 ; Sherif , 1935 )  . 
Novelty and difference in fashion is exemplified by modern celebrity culture and is 
often mimicked by fast fashion available to all at a low cost . What was previously 
novel becomes commonplace allowing individuals to be part of an ‘ ingroup ’ to which 
an individual identifies psychologically ( Tajfel , 1974 )  . Such systems are fundamental 
to the incessant demand for fashion . Research suggests that over the past 30 years , 
women have increased the volume of garments in their wardrobes by 400% . In 2011 , 
research findings showed that women buy and dispose of 62lb of clothing in a year 
and that on average women have 22 unworn garments in their wardrobe . Siegle 
( 2011 ) predicts that over a lifetime , women will spend £133 , 640 on ‘ looking good ’  . 
Siegle attributes this increase to the rise in ‘ fast fashion ’ where low-priced garments 
allow consumers to emulate celebrity looks and celebrity culture by wearing a 
different outfit every day . Fast fashion encourages consumers to spend less on 
individual items and buy more . This makes consumption attractive to individuals from 
a financial perspective . 
4
The growth in online and mobile shopping encourages consumption at any time . The 
report highlights how the increasing demand for fashion is being met through a 
global production of 80 billion garments a year . Current thinking in sustainable 
consumption research suggests overconsumption ( e . g .  , Diamond , 2008 ) is the 
fundamental barrier to a sustainable fashion industry , potentially as a result of the 
depletion of finite fossil fuels used for production and transportation ( e . g .  , Allwood , 
Laursen , Rodríguez & Bocken , 2006 )  . Persuading consumers to engage more with 
their clothing , value craftsmanship , buy fewer and spend more on individual items 
remains a serious challenge . 
The demand for fashion is influenced by multiple factors including the internal and 
external influences on the individual , social relations , the media , advertising and 
marketing campaigns , festivities , socio-economic factors and the weather . The 
multitude of behavioural activities in fashion is known as ‘ fashion involvement ’  ,  
( O ’ Cass , 2004 )  . Fashion involvement is impacted by psychological , social and 
economic factors . For example , Browne and Kaldengerg ( 1997 ) found that 
consumers spend more time buying fashion clothing due to strong feelings of 
pleasure related to possessions , while Park et al .  ( 2006 ) found that materialism and 
positive emotion significantly affect fashion involvement and impulse buying 
behaviour . Yet , recent studies such as those by GSI report 80% of purchases were 
necessary . Indeed , many other suggestions have been put forth to account for 
consumer behaviour , but despite decades of research by social analysts , cultural 
historians and business entrepreneurs , an understanding of the demand for fashion 
remains elusive . 
According to Dewey (  [ 1910 ]  , 2009 ) the consumer buying decision process comprises 
a five-stage purchase decision process ’ framework : problem recognition , information 
search , and evaluation of alternatives , purchase , and post-purchase evaluation . 
However , because of multiple physical , social , temporal and psychological 
influences , the stages need not be followed in any particular order and some stages 
might not be completed at all . Physical influences include location , store 
atmosphere , aromas , sounds , lighting , weather , and so on . Social influences relate 
to the characteristics and interactions of others who are present during a purchase 
decision , product use and evaluation . Time impacts the buying decision process in 
several ways . Consumers consider the time required to acquire knowledge about , to 
search for , buy and use a product ; the frequency of use and length of the overall 
product life . Other decision influencers are the time of day , day of the week or month
at which the purchase decision is taken . In addition , the amount of time devoted to 
any stage of a purchase decision is mediated by the pressure on a consumer . 
Physical , social and temporal influences impact the consumer psychologically and 
these aspects are compounded by the individual ’ s personality , mood and state . 
Together these serve to affect the ability and desire to search for and receive 
information , seek and evaluate alternatives ( Pride & Ferrell , 2012 )  . 
Fashion is important for individual and social life and therefore has an obvious 
relationship with psychology . Yet as an area of research , fashion has been neglected 
in both cognitive and social psychology . Psychology involves the scientific study of 
mental functions and behaviours with the aim of understanding individuals and 
groups to the betterment of individuals , societies and communities . Cognitive 
psychology , a sub-discipline of psychology is concerned with the study mental 
5
processes such as sensation and perception , memory and learning , attention , 
communication , problem solving , creativity and thinking . All of which impact the 
demand for fashion . Psychologists distinguish between sensation and perception : 
sensation relates to sensory input from the environment through sight , taste , hearing , 
smell , and touch ; perception refers to the processes by which we make sense of 
these stimuli , and therefore the world . However , because cognitive capacity is 
limited , and impacted by physical , social , temporal and psychological influences , not 
all inputs are processed . Typically , inputs that have been processed are salient ( loud 
or sudden ) or easy to integrate with personal beliefs and attitudes . Thus they are 
inherently biased . Another sub-discipline of psychology is social psychology , 
the scientific study of how people ' s thoughts , feelings and behaviours and goals are 
constructed and how such psychological factors are influence and are influenced by 
interactions others ( Allport , 1985 )  . Recently , social cognition ( e . g .  , Fiske & Taylor , 
1991 ) has developed as an area of psychology in which cognitive processes are 
understood in a social domain . It is therefore an appropriate approach from which to
better understand the demand for fashion . 
Related to social psychology and social cognition is the study of personality . 
Personality is a set of internal traits and tendencies which result in consistent 
patterns of behaviour , and self-concept ( e . g .  , Rogers , 1959 ) can also influence 
buying behaviour . Although studies of the link between buying behaviour and 
personality have been inconclusive , many marketers maintain a relationship exists . 
Buyers tend to purchase products that reflect and enhance self-concept , the view 
they hold of themselves . Lifestyles , innovators , thinkers , achievers , experiencers , 
believers , strivers , makers and survivors ( Mitchell , 1983 )  , are influenced by 
personality , self-concept and demographics . The interaction of these factors strongly 
impacts the consumer buying decision process . 
In order to understand the demand for fashion , data needs to be collected , analysed 
and interpreted . However , the methods of achieving reliable outcomes are 
problematic . For example , self-report measures used in the majority of studies 
concerned with understanding attitudes , beliefs and behaviours in a broad range of 
domains have known limitations . Therefore , although descriptive and inferential 
statistics provide an insight into perceived attitudes , beliefs and behaviours , they do 
not inform us about the actual , limited cognitive processes that result in the 
reasoning behind these attitudes , beliefs and behaviours . 
Questionnaires are a type of self-report method which can contain both open and 
closed questions . Although self-report methods allow personal data to be collected 
from large samples , there are potential validity problems . Items can be ambiguous , 
leading or incomprehensible , but in contrast with interviews , there is no way to 
discern if items have been interpreted as intended by the respondent . Respondents 
may seek to provide ‘ desirable ’ responses ( Edwards , 1957 )  , mistake or remember 
incorrectly the actual details of the responses they are providing due to the fallibility 
of memory , or because of . Furthermore , responses are constructed through recall 
which in itself is fallible ( Bartlett , 1932 )  . Information must be retrieved from episodic 
memory ( e . g .  , Tulving & Thomson , 1973 )  . Episodic retrieval involves interaction 
between a ‘ retrieval cue ’  ( self-generated or provided by the environment ) and a 
memory trace . The success of retrieval depends in part of on the success of 
encoding at the time of the event . Self-report questionnaire items serve as retrieval 
6
cues . Three quarters of the consumers in the GSI report above claimed they bought 
items because they were bargains . Thus , these purchases were likely to be 
spontaneous with little attention to aspects other than the seemingly low price . In 
such cases , when consumers are asked to recall why they made the purchase , their 
response relates to the most salient aspect of the transaction : the price . However , 
when asked for reasons based on subjective judgements such as emotional 
involvement , participants might respond that they needed the purchase because 
they may well have believed they did . More transient , but powerful emotional , 
psychological or social influences at the moment of purchase may not be retrieved 
as they might not have been successfully encoded at the time . Regardless of the 
fallacy of memory , people often do not know what influences their behaviour ( e . g .  , 
Nisbett & Wilson , 1977 )  . Even if it were possible to know this , recall is influenced by 
many factors including memory limitations and cognitive biases ( Kahneman , 2011 )  . 
The advantage of collecting personal , idiosyncratic data needs to be weighed 
against these disadvantages . 
Attribution theory ( Heider , 1958 ) is a bias which refers to a social psychological 
phenomenon in which people claim that their own behaviour is caused by situational 
factors and that other people ’ s behaviour is caused by dispositional factors ( Fiske & 
Taylor , 1991 )  . It is concerned with all aspects of causal inferences : how people 
arrive at causal inferences , what sort of inferences they make and what the 
consequences of these inferences are ( Folkes , 1988 )  . Attribution theory assumes 
that people draw upon their past experiences when facing a new situation . It is 
therefore important for marketers as their role is to convince consumers of the need 
for a particular item to solve a problem or improve their lifestyle . Marketers may 
assume that as consumers use a product , they assess its quality and draw 
conclusions about its many characteristics . Then , when consumers see a similar 
product on the market , this past experience influences future purchase decisions . 
However , due to the inherent cognitive and social biases described above , asking 
purchasers to articulate the reasons for purchasing even at the time of buying may 
be problematic . Asking them to recall actual reasons is even more difficult as biases 
are impacted by problems with memory . 
Despite the important role that consumption plays in economic theory , Ackerman 
( 1997 ) argues that economics has been one of the least important contributors to 
this field of research and is one of the disciplines least affected by new approaches 
to consumption ( Darnell , 1992 )  . The reason for this is the “ rigidity of the conventional 
economic theory of consumer behaviour ”  ( Ackerman , 1997 , p . 65 ) which assumes 
that only prices , incomes and personal taste affect consumption . In this framework , 
consumers have well-defined , limitless desires for goods and services that are 
unaffected by social interactions , culture , economic institutions , or the consumption 
choices or well-being of others . However , from a psychological perspective , this 
framework is flawed in that consumers do not exist or make decisions in isolation . 
In sum , the challenge of understanding the demand for fashion is a serious issue for 
researchers in many disciplines . Although many definitions of fashion exist ( e . g .  , 
Nystrom , 1928 ; Robinson , 1958 ; King , 1964 ; Horn , 1968 ; Lang & Lang , 1961 ) no 
shared understanding exists . Because fashion can be interpreted as an object and a 
process ( Sproles , 1974 )  , it is a useful vehicle for economists to understand society ’ s 
non-necessitous expenditure ( Robinson , 1961 )  . Consumer behaviour is of interest to 
7
researchers from an economic perspective ( Loudon & Della Bitta 1993 )  , but the 
commonly cited Utility Theory ( Bentham ,  [ 1824 ]  , 1987 ) is no longer seen as realistic 
( Schiffman & Kanuk , 2007 ; Bray , 2008 )  . More recently , researchers have
acknowledged that social relationships and values influence consumer decisions 
( Fiske & Taylor , 1991 ; Allport , 1985 ) and can result in satisficing ( Simon , 1997 ) 
rather than optimising ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 )  . Marketing professionals cite 
Maslow ’ s hierarchy or needs ( 1943 ) as an appropriate model for understanding or 
predicting consumer behaviour , but evidence suggests consumers buy for many 
reasons other than necessity , including impulse , cheap cost , positive emotions 
( Browne & Kaldengerg , 1997 ; Park et al .  ( 2006 ) often as a result of retail therapy 
( Schmich , 1986 )  . However , on the negative side , impulse buying can result in 
conspicuous consumption ( Siegle , 2011 ; Stanley & Danko , 1996 ; Charles , et al .  , 
2009 ; Veblen ,  [ 1899 ] 1994 )  , affluenza ( de Graaf et al .  , 2001 )  , overconsumption 
( Diamond , 2008 )  , and a philosophy of futility ’  ( Nystrom , 1931 )  . Whilst supporting the 
fashion industry by maintaining a demand for fashion , such overconsumption can 
damage the environment ( Allwood et al .  , 2006 )  . 
The paradoxical nature of fashion allows individuals to be different and conform 
( Tajfel , 1974 ; Asch , 1956 ; Sherif , 1935 )  . Early models such as Dewey suggested 
(  [ 1910 ]  , 2009 ) proposed a simple five-stage purchase decision process , but lifestyles 
( Mitchell , 1983 )  , individual differences and personality ( Rogers , 1959 )  , can affect the 
value of such a model ( Pride & Ferrell , 2012 )  . As consequence of complex 
interactions , generating a valid and reliable understanding of the demand for fashion 
necessitates rigorous , valid and reliable data collection methods . However , 
questionnaires and other self-report measures are limited as respondents can be 
subject to social desirability ( Edwards , 1957 )  , fallible memory processes ( Tulving & 
Thomson , 1973 ; Bartlett , 1932 )  , ignorance of what influences behaviour ( Nisbett & 
Wilson , 1977 ) and therefore misattribution ( Folkes , 1988 ; Heider , 1958 ) as well as a 
range of cognitive biases resulting from the desire to respond quickly and intuitively 
( Kahneman , 2012 )  . 
Understanding the demand for fashion is complex and interpretation is likely to be 
influenced by the researcher ’ s interest . For example , a marketer might be motivated 
to understand demand to increase sales , advertisers might seek understanding to 
increase perceptions of individual need , psychologists might be motivated to help 
consumers develop more healthy consumption behaviours . From a fashion 
perspective , affluenza , overconsumption , conspicuous consumption and retail 
therapy are considered serious threats to a sustainable fashion industry . However , 
while marketers promote the concept that 80% of what we buy is as a result of 
necessity , and consumers uncritically consider that their buying behaviour is 
necessary , asking consumers to develop more ethical buying behaviour remains 
futile . Consequently , it falls to psychologists to challenge consumers ’ perceptions to 
support them in reflecting more accurately on the reasons for their purchasing 
behaviour , and if possible to propose that marketers include caveats in their 
conclusions suggesting the results show perceived rather than actual reasons for 
consumers ’ purchasing behaviour . 
