How South Korean movies are dominating world cinema
From independent films to hit series streaming on platforms like Netflix , South Korean films are capturing audiences around the world . What ' s behind their success ?  


Film still from ' The Apartment with Two Women ' 
Kim Se-in ' s ' The Apartment with Two Women ' premiered at the Berlinale in February

When South Korea ' s " Parasite " made history by becoming the first non-English language film to win the Academy Award for Best Picture , all eyes were set on director Bong Joon-ho . 

Bong had famously said the Oscars were " very local .  " 

South Korean actress Yang Mal-bok , whose new film " The Apartment with Two Women " premiered at the Berlinale in February , says Bong ' s sentiments resonated with her .  
 
 " I ' m a bit tired of the cultural flow that was a bit monopolized in one direction ,  " Yang told DW .  
 
 " I started to think that our tastes in movies were long concentrated on one side and it ' s obvious to me that your view expands when you come in contact with a culture or art of a different region , like South Korea ,  " she said . 

But in recent years , audiences worldwide have developed a bigger thirst for Korean cinema . 

Rise of South Korea ' s cultural economy
The Korean wave — or Hallyu — is a term widely used to describe the international success of South Korean music , film , TV , fashion and food . 

In October last year , the Oxford English Dictionary added the Korean word Hallyu to its latest edition . 

When asked about Hallyu , Jung Bo-ram , Yang ' s co-actress in the " The Apartment with Two Women ,  " said " It ' s the universalist themes of Korean society " which help drive the success of South Korean films abroad . 

In her latest movie , Jung plays a woman in her late twenties who lives with her mother . The film centers around their turbulent mother-daughter relationship .  
 
 " All mothers and daughters living in South Korea can relate to this story . I thought that this movie is not specific to South Korea but it contains various emotions that you can feel about the relationship of any mother-daughter ,  " Jung told DW .  
 
 " When people watch this movie , they can relate with their own lives .  " 

Yang Mal-bok in The apartment with two women 
 ' Your view expands when you come in contact with a culture or art of a different region , like South Korea ,  ' says Yang Mal-bok ( pictured ) 

South Korean films take world by storm
The success of South Korean films abroad took off in the 1990s — after the last vestiges of its repressive military regimes ended . Censorship laws were eased and investment started trickling into the film business by large Korean companies . 

Investments through conglomerates — or chaebols — like Samsung , Daewoo and Hyundai have all played a major role in the country ' s film industry . 

Following the Asian financial crisis of 1997 , new conglomerates like CJ Entertainment , the Orion Group ( Showbox )  , and Lotte Entertainment emerged to become the biggest players in the South Korean movie industry . 

In the first decade of Hallyu , international fans , particularly in the US , typically downloaded pirated films while South Koreans studying abroad did the subtitling .  
 
 " This was happening long before OTT ( over-the-top ) platforms and easy subtitling ,  " Yang explained . 

But as her new independent film is touring international film festivals , the actor says South Korean films have finally become " elevated " and that Hallyu is here to stay . 

Yang also played a cameo in the South Korean series " Squid Game ,  " one of streaming giant Netflix ' s all-time biggest hits . The nine-part thriller reached 1 . 65 billion viewers just in its first month of release . 

Yang said she " had no idea " that the series would " become so popular all over the world .  "  
 
 " It ' s obvious that Hollywood has had a huge cultural influence on the world . English-speaking movies are screened in theaters and multiplexes . It ' s hard to compete with that but , for two decades now , international independent film festivals have increased opportunities for us to be seen and heard ,  " Yang said . 

A man and a woman sit at a table , each with a large round candy .  
 ' SQUID GAME ' SERIES BREAKS ALL RECORDS
Broken candy , no consequences
In the " Honeycomb Challenge ,  " participants have to remove the stamped symbol from a traditional " dalgona " Korean candy by licking or breaking the pre-carved shape out of it with a needle — without destroying it . The Brown Butter Cafe in Singapore organized the challenge for its guests . If they had followed the rules of the survival thriller series , this woman would have been dead . 


123456
Entertainment industry as ' soft power ' 
Netflix has announced that it would spend $500 million ( €451 million ) in 2022 as part of efforts to expand South Korean content . 

The pandemic , however , has taken a toll on the film industry .  
 
 " After COVID-19 , there is less investment in the entire cinema industry in South Korea , so there might be less opportunity to have auditions for me , but it ' s also hard to say if it ' s a totally bad situation ,  " said Jung .  

Local productions , however , still account for a major share in the South Korean market . 

The South Korean government considers the entertainment industry a key driver for the future national economy and is heavily investing in films and series from the national budget . One of its main goals is to become the world ' s leading exporter and importer of entertainment and media .  
 
 " The Apartment with Two Women " is director Kim Se-In ' s debut film and was funded by the Korean Academy of Film Arts . 

Watch video02 : 28
K-pop :  ' Korean wave ' sweeps across India 
 " I can focus only on making the film . From writing the script to the post-production stage , the Korean Academy of Film Arts has given me every support to blossom ,  " Kim said .  " I don ' t have to worry about market and distribution , the academy helps with it .  " 

Kim won five awards at the Busan International Film Festival in October . 

When asked what she thinks is behind the success of South Korean cinema , Yang said the country ' s entertainment landscape is adaptable and changes very fast .  
 
 " Media produces new content very fast . It ' s tricky to pick up only one reason why cultural content from South Korea becomes popular . Perhaps it is a wave and South Korea is at the center of it .  " 

Edited by : Sou-Jie van Brunnersum