How China ' s movie muscle is changing its relationship with Hollywood
Social Sharing
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Reddit
LinkedIn
As China ' s movie marketplace grows , there ' s less need or desire for Hollywood titles
Eli Glasner · CBC News · Posted : Feb 12 , 2022 4 : 00 AM ET | Last Updated : February 13

Death on the Nile , left , opens in theatres in North America this week and in China next week . Hollywood films are facing increased competition from Chinese productions such as the record-breaking The Battle at Lake Changjin , right .  ( 20th Century Studios / CMC Pictures ) 

247 
comments
Next week , something special arrives on movie screens across China . Death on the Nile is the first Hollywood film to open in China in months , and it ' s currently the only U . S . release on the calendar . 

Film industry reporter Erich Schwartzel says it ' s getting harder than ever for Hollywood films to crack China ' s market . The author of Red Carpet : Hollywood , China , and the Global Battle for Cultural Supremacy says many of Marvel ' s biggest titles didn ' t get in last year .  
 
 " The Eternals , Spider-Man : No Way Home , Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings , Black Widow — all titles that didn ' t get into China and left a big fat zero on the balance sheets of the studios ,  " Schwartzel said . 

WATCH | The trailer for Death on the Nile : 


A new cinema superpower
In 2020 , China surpassed North America to become the world ' s largest film market in terms of movie ticket sales . 

China isn ' t just bigger ; it ' s booming . As far back as 2008 , when moviegoing started to flatline in North America , it was growing in China , Schwartzel says . With younger audiences that go to the movies more frequently , the Chinese multiplex looks like Hollywood ' s promised land . 

For a time , Chinese authorities allowed in a limited quota of foreign films . Hollywood studios struck up China co-production deals for films such as Iron-Man 3 to ensure access — access that came with a long list of taboo topics , from disparaging remarks about authorities to any mention of Tibet or Tiananmen Square . 


How Hollywood Changes for China
2 years ago
Duration0 : 44
CBC ' s Eli Glasner shows how Hollywood is changing content for Chinese approval . 0 : 44
But in 2018 , the landscape changed . China media expert Rebecca Davis saw it first hand from her post in Shanghai .  
 
 " China put film under the direction of the Central Propaganda Bureau ,  " she said .  " It basically elevated film as an art form to a more central position but also put it under greater scrutiny .  " 

Last year , as the country celebrated the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese Communist Party , only a few foreign films — among them , Luca and Free Guy — trickled in during the critical summer period . 

Largely free from competition , China ' s homegrown films dominated the box office .  
 
 " Films in China have gotten a lot more commercial ,  " says Schwarztel .  
 
 " There ' s routinely Chinese comedies , Chinese dramas , Chinese science-fiction epics topping the box office . Now what we ' re seeing is China shipping those movies and TV shows to try and introduce itself to the world .  " 

WATCH | The trailer to China ' s highest-grossing film , The Battle at Lake Changjin : 


To marvel at the might of China ' s cinematic muscle , look no further than the top reigning films from 2021 . At No . 1 : The Battle at Lake Changjin , a patriotic war movie where Chinese soldiers battle Americans that shattered box-office records , earning over $900 million US . 

While determined film fans can still download foreign films illegally , Schwartzel wonders about the long-term effects of the restrictions .  
 
 " I think there is a lot of anxiety over at Disney right now because if you count Spider-Man and Venom , we ' re on five Marvel-affiliated movies that have not gotten into China ,  " he said . 

But many Canadian filmmakers are also seeing their future projects stall . 

Canadian filmmakers frozen out

Canadian producer Sidney Chiu helped make the Vancouver-shot film Finding Mr . Right a hit in China . But he says the strained relationship between China and Canada at this point makes it harder to succeed .  ( CBC News ) 
In 2013 , feature film producer Sidney Chiu worked on Finding Mr . Right . Shot in Vancouver , the romance trumped the Superman film Man of Steel at China ' s domestic box office with a fraction of the budget .  
 
 " The blood , sweat and tears we put in from the Canadians and the Chinese teams , to hear that was quite the shock for us ,  " he said . 

But following the arrest of Huawei CFO Meng Wanzhou and the two Michaels affair , Chiu says the chill in Canada-China relations is having an impact .  
 
 " Fast-forward to today and there are certainly situations between our governments that are not the best of relationships ,  " he said . 

These days , collaborating with Chinese companies on the type of feature-length dramas audiences enjoy is getting more difficult because of the perseverance needed to get through regulatory bodies and get the film released in both countries , Chiu said . 

WATCH | The trailer to Yung Chang ' s documentary Up the Yangtze : 


With films such as Up the Yangtze , Canada ' s Yung Chang built a reputation as a director focused on humanizing China ' s rapidly changing society . 

He says his 2012 boxing film China Heavyweight was the last official China-Canada co-production . Last year , another sports documentary he ' d planned ground to a halt due in part to what he describes as a " more nationalistic propaganda take on storytelling .  " 

As someone who is inspired by visiting and telling stories of China , Chang is frustrated .  
 
 " The rumblings and the grumblings from myself and all my colleagues in China is that we ' ve got to kind of lay low for 10 years before we could probably approach our films .  " 

WATCH | Foreign filmmakers feel pressures of China ' s tight film industry rules : 


Harder than ever for Hollywood to crack China ’ s movie market
29 days ago
Duration2 : 03
China is now the largest movie market in the world , but regulations and censorship changes are making it harder for Hollywood to get its films on the big screen there . 2 : 03
With trade missions on pause and cultural exchanges seemingly a thing of the past , experts such as Davis worry about the increasingly divergent directions of the East and the West .  
 
 " I find it kind of scary ,  " she said .  " I don ' t want to live in a world where we don ' t have any sort of cultural overlap and cultural connection . 

However , Yang remains determined to keep sharing his vision of the country .  
 
 " I firmly believe that China is not a monolith and individuals in China are not automatons ,  " he said .  " They ' re individuals and think individually as well .  " 