Sustainable
Fashion
in a Circular
Economy
KIRSI NIINIMÄKI (Ed.)
Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy

Aalto University
School of Arts, Design and Architecture
Sustainable
Fashion
in a Circular
Economy
KIRSI NIINIMÄKI (Ed.)
Foreword: Kirsi Niinimäki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
ACADEMIC GROUND
Circularity and Fashion
1. Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy: Kirsi Niinimäki . . . . . . . 12
Sustainable Fashion Consumption
2. The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset in a Circular
 Economy: Cosette M.J. Armstrong, Chunmin Lang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3. Collaborative Consumption and the Fashion Industry:
 Claudia E.Henninger, Celina Jones, Rosy Boardman,
 Helen McCormick . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Design Strategies
4. Designing for a Circular Economy: Make, Use and Recover
 Products: Ruud Balkenende, Conny Bakker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5. Design for Circularity: The Case of circular.fashion: Essi Karell . . . . . . 96
6. Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool for Supporting
 Sustainable Design Strategies: Ulla Ræbild, Karen Marie Hasling . . . 128
Business Thinking
7. Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry through
 Circular Business Model Experimentation: Nancy M.P. Bocken,
 Karen Miller, Ilka Weissbrod, Maria Holgado, Steve Evans . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Textile Waste
8. A Consumer-centered Approach for Managing
 Post-consumer Textile Flows: Kerli Kant Hvass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
9. Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem and a Case of Cotton:
 Pirjo Heikkilä, Paula Fontell, Marjo Määttänen, Ali Harlin . . . . . . . . . . . 192
BUSINESS EXAMPLES 
Collaboration and Creativity in B2B Sector: TouchPoint . . . . . . . . . . . 220
Responsibility in Business through Textile Recycling:
Purewaste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224
Giving a New Life for Waste: Recycled Jeans as Terry Towels:
Finlayson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Arela Knitwear Care Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
‘Clothes as a Service’ Will Disrupt the Fashion System:
Anniina Nurmi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236
Heaven for Pre-owned Brands: Emmy.fi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240
Leasing Fashion Can Be Fun! Vaatepuu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 244
Writers in this publication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
Contents

7
Foreword
Circular economy (CE) is a hot topic. This publication will provide 
the most up-to-date information from the many levels of circularity within the fashion context. In Sector I Academic Ground, several 
international experts from the fields of design, consumption, business, 
technology explain how circularity can be approached in a multilevel 
way. The themes covered are sustainable fashion consumption, design 
strategies, new business thinking and textile waste. It is worth noticing 
that when talking about circular economy, waste is not the only focus.
Other points to consider include the slowing down of consumption, 
constructing new design understanding and new business strategies.
These are required for building the wider transformation of the fashion 
system, and, moreover slowing down the material throughput within 
the system, further to dealing with the end problem of textile waste.
The introductory chapter, Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy, 
written by the editor, opens the definition and describes some of the 
key elements and layers within the circular economy. This chapter 
closes with a design-guidelines for fashion in the CE context. The 
next chapter, The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset in a Circular Economy
by Cosette M. J. Armstrong and Chunmin Lang, addresses an important layer in CE: consumer behavior and its meaning for CE. Writers 
approach the issue of sustainable consumption through the style 
8
confidence of clothing, which has an impact on consumer purchasing 
and disposal behavior. The chapter Collaborative Consumption and the 
Fashion Industry by Claudia E. Henninger, Celina Jones, Rosy Boardman and Helen McCormick, focuses on interesting and emerging phenomena. It defines collaborative consumption and outlines the different 
activities at play within it, such as renting, sharing, swapping, and borrowing, and looks at how these activities are now entering the business 
world.
The next three chapters focus on the design side of CE. First, Ruud 
Balkenende and Conny Bakker provide the foundational principles 
with the text Designing for a Circular Economy: Make, Use and Recover 
Products. After which Essi Karell addresses the fashion designer’s circular 
thinking through a case study, Design for Circularity: The Case of circular.
fashion. Ulla Ræbild and Karen Marie Hasling then provide a design 
tool to work with sustainability and circularity in an educational or 
business setting, Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool for Supporting 
Sustainable Design Strategies.
Nancy M. P. Bocken, Karen Miller, Ilka Weissbrod, Maria Holgado 
and Steve Evans focus on business transformation in their text, Slowing 
Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry through Circular Business Model 
Experimentation. Based on a real life example, they describe how businesses can transform linear thinking towards circularity through a 
process of experimentation and how to further develop slow consumption as part of the business model. As Nancy M. P. Bocken et al.
highlight business experimentations are needed to change the system 
from linear (take-make-dispose) towards circular one (narrowing= 
efficiency, closing=recycling, slowing=reuse, slow consumption, 
remanufacturing).
The last two chapters focus on textile waste. First, Kerli Kant Hvass 
describes the consumer viewpoint on textile disposal, and thereafter 
how to create solutions for the collection of textile waste in the chapter 
A Consumer-centered Approach for Managing Post-consumer Textile Flows. In 
the final chapter, Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem and a Case of Cotton
Pirjo Heikkilä, Paula Fontell, Marjo Määttänen and Ali Harlin focus on 
| Foreword 
9
textile waste and its recovery through different recycling technologies.
The sector II Business Examples presents some Finnish thinkers 
and businesses at the forefront of thinking about circularity. These cases 
incorporate the themes of services, recycling, creativity and collaboration and show the way to rethinking the fashion business in a CE 
context. Such bold thinkers and brave examples are needed to form 
a new understanding as to how to transform the current linear model 
towards circularity.
I want to thank all the writers for their time and efforts in sharing 
the latest knowledge from within the field. Special thanks go to academic reviewers for their valuable comments to improve the content 
and flow of the texts in the part I Academic ground. Thanks also extend 
to all the businesses presented in this book.
And for the reader, I hope you will enjoy reading this book and 
find it informative. Its aim is to open up circularity and its many levels 
of application within the fashion context. The field of circularity is 
emerging and new knowledge is currently entering the field. This book 
and its content can be understood as an entry point to this challenging 
new field. Learning and the construction of knowledge is ongoing.
Rotterdam 15.5.2018
Kirsi Niinimäki
Foreword |

Academic
Ground
12
Kirsi Niinimäki
01
Circularity and Fashion
Sustainable Fashion
in a Circular Economy
13
Keywords: Circular economy, circularity, sustainable fashion, closed-loop, 
systems thinking
This chapter provides an overview of the circular economy 
in general and specifically linking circular economy to 
fashion. While the phenomenon, fashion in a circular 
economy, is new and emerging, this chapter is an initiative 
to open some of its many layers, while not providing exact 
scientific knowledge as such. More so, it tries to show 
the complexity of this term while also providing some 
opportunities to change our linear way of thinking towards 
circularity.
14 | Circularity and Fashion 
Introduction to current
reality, linear economy
The textile and fashion industry is one of the largest industrial sectors, 
which uses a lot of resources and causes a lot of environmental problems. To give an example, globally 20% of industrial water pollution 
is caused because of the dyeing and treatment of textiles (Kant 2012, 
sited by EMF 2017, 21). In the linear system this industrial sector uses 
mostly non-renewable resources “– 98 million tons in total per year – 
including oil to produce synthetic fibers, fertilisers to grow cotton, and 
chemicals to produce, dye, and finish fibers and textiles” (EMF 2017, 
20). While textile and fashion manufacturing has moved to lower-cost 
countries on the other side of the globe, so also have many environmental problems. The true value of resources used in industrial production are easily forgotten or subsidized (e.g. clean water, energy, pure 
soil) and the costs of environmental impacts are not included in the 
end price of the product. In this way low cost garments can have a 
remarkable environmental impact in the location where they are produced. Textile manufacturing in particular causes a lot of environmental problems, while harmful and toxic chemicals are used and waste is 
not treated properly. This causes human tragedies for workers and the 
neighbouring communities and their environment.
In the linear system (design-manufacturing-sale-dispose) we are 
wasting valuable materials in huge amounts. Not only materials, 
however, but also many other resources, for example water and energy 
needed for manufacturing are wasted if the product life-time is very 
short. It has been estimated that 80% of all products turn into “waste” 
and are thrown away within the six first months (Baker-Brown 2017, 
11). Garments’ life cycles have also drastically shortened. For example, 
in the UK, WRAP (2012) has studied that the average time of owning 
a garment is 2,2 years. On the other hand the amount of impulsepurchased garments has increased, and these kinds of garments might 
never have been worn (Niinimäki 2011). A study from Finland showed 
that around 30% of garment purchasing was based on impulse shopping 
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 15
(ibid.). Some consumers actively seek emotional “highs” by constant 
purchasing, and this emotionally “addictive” search easily leads to 
impulse shopping, which seems to have become accepted behaviour in 
today’s fashion consumption (Niinimäki 2018b). The average number of 
times a garment is worn has decreased by 36% compared to the situation 15 years ago (EMF 2017). Moreover, the vast amount of garment 
production results in markets being oversaturated, and not all garments 
produced actually enter the market anymore. There are different figures 
for unsold garments, but one estimation shows that even 20% of produced garments will be unsold (Ann Runnel 11.10.2017). For example, 
in the Netherlands it is estimated that 21 million garments were unsold 
in 2015, meaning 6,5% of garment offerings (Pijpker 5.5.2018).
WRAP (2012) has produced good reports on clothing consumption in the UK. They have reported that 1.14 million tons of clothes 
are supplied onto the UK market each year and 1.78 million tons of 
raw materials are needed to produce these items. From this, around one 
third becomes waste in the production phase (pre-consumer waste), 10 
000 tons ends up as waste during the use time (damaged in the maintenance, e.g. during laundering) and 1.13 million tons ends its life either 
in re-use (540,000 tons, of which 70% goes overseas), recycled (160, 000 
tons), incinerated (80,000 tons) or goes to landfill (350,000 tons, worth 
£140 million).
In the linear model, the material throughput in the system is fast 
(fast design and manufacturing, fast consumption, easy disposal) and 
this fast tempo is also setting the model for the fashion business and its 
means of pursuing profit. McAfee et al. (2004) highlight that garments 
are not made to last for long in the current linear system and most 
of our garments are designed to be laundered only 10 times. Such is 
the new “norm” in the fast fashion business. But we also have other 
problems than waste in the fashion sector. There are consumers who 
buy new fashion items every week (Morgan & Birtwistle 2009) and 
fashion has become easy entertainment or a kind of fashion “hunt” for 
some consumers (see Armstrong et al. 2015, Niinimäki 2018b). Because 
of this intensive consumption and impulse purchasing our wardrobes 
16 | Circularity and Fashion 
are full, and therefore many garments in our wardrobes are not in active 
use. Around 30% of clothing in wardrobes have not been worn for at 
least a year, according to a study by WRAP (2012), and Fletcher (2008) 
further estimates that up to 70% of our wardrobe content is in inactive use. This ends up as a huge unused resource and wardrobes full of 
disused garments.
While the linear model results in an oversaturated and oversized 
fashion system with big environmental impact (Armstrong et al. 2016), 
it is imperative that we develop better use of resources and change the 
system. We have to create a better balance and use all resources more 
wisely. Closing the loop and building a new understanding of how 
fashion can be redesigned in the context of a circular economy and can 
be more sustainable is the goal of this chapter.
Circular economy
A Circular Economy (CE) is regenerative by nature, based on principles of closed loops. A Circular Economy CE, is not a new concept.
It originates from Walter Stahel’s report “The potential for substituting 
manpower for energy” from 1976, presented to the European Commission (Baker-Brown 2017, 10). It presented the idea of and ‘economy in 
loops’, with the positive impact to increase jobs: “economic competitiveness, reduced dependence on natural resources and the prevention 
of waste” (ibid.). This idea was further developed by McDonough and 
Braungart in their concept ‘Cradle to Cradle’ which is a well-known 
principle for closing the loop in two different cycles; biological or technological (2002). According to this principle, a product is designed to 
have multiple life cycles or to be biodegradable. Accordingly, after the 
use phase, the product will continue in technical or biological cycle.
A biological cycle means composting, which, however, is not a 
realistic option for textiles while only a few fibers can be composted 
and while textiles include harmful chemicals which should not be 
released into the soil. Moreover, composting produces methane, which 
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 17
contributes to greater greenhouse gas emissions and global warming 
(Niinimäki 2013), and even the nutrient value from textiles to soil is low.
Furthermore, textiles, even bio-based, compost too slowly to be suitable 
in the municipal composting system and therefore should be composted 
in home-composting units. In the fashion sector, therefore, closing the 
loop is more likely to happen in a technical cycle (using textile waste to 
produce new fibers and yarns). Nonetheless, some of the latest experiments reveal the potential for using the biological cycle as one solution 
in the textile sector. For example, some Cradle to Cradle Certified garments have been developed to be compostable (see EMF 2017). On the 
other hand, a more interesting option is to combine these two cycles 
and use biological processes to some extent in order to process textile 
waste to be suitable for the next round of manufacturing within the 
technical cycle (producing new yarns). For example, while separating 
fibers in blended materials, biological composting can help, for example, 
to destroy bio-based materials from blends, and in this way polyester can 
be separated and used again in the recycling process (Yao 22.3.2018).
A circular economy approach in fashion aims to develop a more 
sustainable and closed-loop system where the goal is to extend the usetime of garments and maintain the value of the products and materials as long as possible. This means that all materials will be recycled in 
several rounds. Products are designed to be included in a system where 
all aspects support circularity. The original design needs to take account 
of several lifecycles. Materials need to flow within the system and waste 
needs to be collected and appreciated as a valuable material for recycling and material recovering. All products need to be collected back 
after their useful time is over. Policy measures could push the development towards this path by implementing Extended Producer Responsibility EPR principles (e.g. Niinimäki 2013; OECD 2001). Accordingly, 
moving towards a circular economy means taking a system perspective 
on fashion, where all actors are included: designers, producers, manufacturers, suppliers, business people and even consumers. A good model for 
the fashion sector is presented in Figure 1. This model was constructed 
by RSA (Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures 
18 | Circularity and Fashion 
and Commerce, “Great Recovery” programme 2013). The model constructs a four level system. The first includes consumer behaviour, and 
its goal is to extend the product use phase. The second includes companies and new kinds of business models (e.g. Product-Service Systems 
PSS) to extend or intensify the use of products. The third challenges 
manufacturers by bringing in new ways to extend the use-time of the 
product through remanufacturing. The fourth level concentrates on 
material recovery, using waste to manufacture new fibers and yarns.
This is the most interesting level, and a lot of new development work is 
going on in this sector looking at how to use textile waste as a source 
for new fiber production. Notably, this model also includes key stakeholders who are needed to enact the transformation towards circularity. New kinds of collaborations are needed to get everyone onboard.
Designers, researchers, industry, companies, users and policy makers are 
all needed to create a new network and a new system.
The next section presents the key concepts for circular economy.
The text includes some business examples in parentheses, from businesses which have succeeded in offering some interesting developments 
relating to a certain aspect of CE.
Focus on use
As Walter Stahel puts it, the optimization of use or utilization of manufactured objects, is at the core of the circular economy, and not the 
term ‘cycle’ as one might have expected. This distinguishes the circular economy from the linear economy, which optimizes the production of the same objects up to the point of sale” (2017, wiii). Extending 
and intensifying the use, reusing the same object in a new context, and 
innovative reuse are some of the ways that shift use to the centre of circular thinking. This is a new challenge for industry, business and designers, but also for consumers, who need to critically consider their own 
consumption practices. We have to create a new consciousness towards 
the use of clothing and introduce new practices for using our clothing 
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy |
Figure 1. The Four Models of DCE, Design in a Circular Economy (RSA 2016).
Factory
Brand
Consumer
Product
Design for
longevity
Design for
service
Recycled
material
Design for
re-use in manufacture
Design for
material recovery
Resource
facility
Design
Academics & education Investor
B
s
rands/com
panies Consumers/users
Policy makers
Resource management
Material experts
Manufacturers
Design for a circular economy
Influencers
19
20 | Circularity and Fashion 
longer, maintaining it well, but also investing in a smaller wardrobe with 
less content. The concept of a curated wardrobe is based on the need 
for wiser purchase decisions whereby each garment is seen as an investment, and thus wardrobe content is constructed slowly (e.g. Filippa K).
The smaller content but smarter collection of clothing choices in a 
wardrobe provides an alternative approach to fast fashion consumption.
New business thinking 
Extending the use of clothes is one key issue in sustainable development. For example, if we can double the use-time of clothing we can 
halve the resources needed for production and halve the waste rates 
of consumption (Stahel 2017). This would be an important improvement upon current unsustainable fashion consumption and the early 
disposal of clothing. Some examples already exist of how garments can 
be rented or leased (e.g. Mud jeans, Lena fashion library, Vaatepuu) or 
brands that offer free mending services to extend the use-time of garments and, simultaneously, to emotionally satisfy customers but also 
to strengthen brand value (e.g. Nudie jeans). Patagonia even offers 
returns with an ‘Iron Clad Guarantee’, offering a replacement or 
mending service if a product does not last as long as expected (EMF 
2017). Product-Service-System PSS models can provide a new focus 
for fashion companies. Here, the focus is more on use and product 
utilization than on selling the product. Such services create the possibility of providing new value propositions for consumers. For example, 
through a more individual, customized or made-to-measure design 
service a better fit – for both mind and body – can be provided (e.g.
Anna Ruohonen).
Circular economy means adopting a new, more strategic and 
future-oriented mindset in all aspects of a company’s activity. While in 
the linear model it is easier to focus on a narrow core, in a circular 
economy the core has to be in the lifecycle, use, and regeneration of 
products and closing the material loop: 
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 21
Sourcing from return chains, growing presence in used product markets, creating value from any waste materials along the value chain and maintaining 
deep involvement with products in use are just some of the strategic shifts 
companies make to evolve to a circular model. Companies have to think 
beyond the traditional core and build an ecosystem of partners that operate 
and monetize the entire product lifecycle (Lacy & Rutqvist 2015, 149).
Enabling technology
and grass root activities
Information technology, IT, provides us with new ways to track the 
origin and flow of material (Webster 2017). Transparency – the origin 
of the product – could be increased through the help of new technology. RFID codes (or yarn including the same information) could 
include information about the fiber content of the garment and could 
also inform about suitable recycling technology for the garment and its 
materials (EMF 2017).
Online services can provide possibilities to open out the production path behind the garment towards consumers (e.g. MADE-BY).
Cloud services can also help the producer to make the right sustainable choices along the way. For example, makersite.net provides tools for 
teams to work with sustainability issues along the production chain and 
to calculate the best choices through LCA (life cycle analysis).
Reverse Resources (2017) has constructed a future view for the 
mass manufacturing garment industry and propose an open data system 
for all material leftovers. If this is done together with an alternative 
pricing system, factories could facilitate virtual traceability of material 
resources and create “virtual interconnections throughout the supply 
chain. … This is crucial for building an effective circular economy as 
well as supporting many digital solutions of industry 4.0 globally (e.g.
blockchain-based transparency)” (ibid., 22).
IT also provides new ways to reach the consumer and do business 
by engaging consumers. Crowdfunding could be one way towards 
22 | Circularity and Fashion 
sustainable fashion. Through crowdfunding, users can invest in a project 
they want to see implemented and the process aided by social media 
platforms (Kretschmer 2013, 186). Designers can sell a small collection, 
for example, specially made from sustainable and high quality, durable 
materials and produced locally. Through a crowdfunding campaign, a 
designer can sell the collection before it is produced, thereby avoiding surplus production (Anna Ruohonen has used this strategy). This 
ensures and stabilises the way of doing business. Crowdfunding also 
provides a channel for cooperation between designers/companies and 
users and thus can open “a shorter and more regional value chain” 
(Kretschmer 2013, 186) within the global and complex fashion system, 
which is otherwise not easy to control.
Figure 2. Swapping events organized by students in Aalto University, Helsinki 
(posters by Manuel Arias Barrantes).
23
As Webster points out (2017, 103), “a circular economy is not primarily about technical materials and recycling/recovering them while 
moving to renewables. It is a different way to see the economy which 
includes the material but is not limited by it.” All kinds of activities are 
welcome in a circular economy and grass root activities can be influential or at least offer alternative business examples. A sharing economy 
can include activities like cooperation, sharing, flexibility, lending, 
giving, and gifting. For example, new IT enables services/platforms to 
be built, which can be uses by anyone to provide repair or swapping 
services. A sharing economy can lead to collaborative consumption 
enabling consumer-to-consumer activities (see Figure 2 of a swapping 
event as a student activity in Aalto University). Peer-to-peer-based 
activities can provide new ways to access goods or services or can offer 
a platform for a business in second-hand garments, for example. This 
‘two-sided market’ between consumers is happening through platforms 
created and run by third parties (Webster 2017; Hamari et al. 2015).
Examples of this are the websites Zadaa and Emmy, where anyone can 
sell their garments.
Technologies can even create social interaction around these activities. Through the help of IT, a community can be built in which new 
forms of collaboration can happen, even face-to-face. Good examples of this are mending or knitting clubs. These communities can 
educate consumers to extend the use time of garments but can also 
enhance social wellbeing, providing emotional satisfaction which can 
even replace some of the emotional effects of fast fashion consumption 
(Hirscher et al. 2018). ICT examples lead to new ways of developing 
a sharing economy and also demonstrate ways towards a new kind of 
business thinking. As Webster (2017, 106) highlights: “The IT revolution 
is enabling circularity and the rethinking of materials, energy and credit 
flows. It is also one key to rebuilding social capital, social networks.” It 
also provides opportunities to act and operate on different scales (local, 
block-based) or combine different actors (e.g. companies and consumers) in a new kind of collaboration showing new alternatives for large 
business operations.
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy |
24 | Circularity and Fashion 
Dealing with and
recovering waste
Lacy and Rutqvist (2015, 119) divide waste into four different categories. The first is wasted resources, where all materials and also energy 
are entirely lost if the product cannot be continually regenerated. The 
second is wasted lifecycles, where products have artificially short 
lifecycles, and might even be disposed while they are still functional; 
a phenomenon called early disposal. The third category is wasted 
capacity, where the full potential of the product is not used, seldom 
use for example. The fourth category is the wasted embedded 
values, where all resources and materials from the disposed product are 
not recovered and put back into use.
There exists a lot of both pre- and post-consumer textile waste, as 
explained earlier in this chapter. Reverse Resources (2017) found out 
that up to 25–30% of textile material is lost from the supply chain 
during fabric and garment production. This pre-consumer waste is 
mainly from cutting and mill waste and does not include the larger leftover materials (deadstock) from when the production season is changing. Reverse Resources have created a totally new way of using larger 
leftover pieces of fabric from the rage of 18 inches to 5 yards as well as 
introducing deadstock fabrics back into mass scale production. This new 
strategy of using leftovers is a creative example of remanufacturing (the 
process of using leftover fabrics in mass-production). They approach 
the problem through three different design strategies. Firstly, invisible 
remanufacturing, where leftover fabrics are placed in internal sections (hidden details). Secondly, visible remanufacturing, where leftover fabrics are placed on external sections of a garment (visible details).
Thirdly, design led manufacturing, where a designer takes into 
account a specific waste stream and uses that while designing a new 
garment. Here, the waste fabric has a strong influence on the aesthetic 
of the new garment (Runnel et al. 2017). This approach does not need 
big investment in technology but challenges the current way of designing and manufacturing on a mass-industrial scale. As Reverse Resources 
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 25
highlight (ibid. 2017, 16), “remanufacturing is particularly interesting 
because it could be the key to creating the economic incentive for 
transparency. … But making data on leftovers and creating transparency 
is the critical key to unlock effective circularity of material flows.”
Post-consumer waste can be recycled using mechanical, thermal or 
chemical recycling methods (see chapter 9). In mechanical recycling, 
material is selected, cut, shred, carded and spun into new yarns (e.g.
Reblend, Purewaste). With this process, the quality of the yarn is not 
as high as with virgin materials and very often some virgin materials 
are added to keep the quality sufficiently high. Through the chemical 
or thermal recycling process, the material is returned to polymer level 
by dissolving it, and thereafter the fiber is regenerated (or reproduced).
Unfortunately, a lot of recycling is down-cycling, meaning that the value 
of the material is lost (at least at some level) if the recycled material or 
Figure 3. Visible remanufacturing by Reverse Resources (Runnel et al. 2017, 15).
PRODUCTION OF 10 000
OF THESE HOODIES WOULD:
• Save 2843 yards (17%) of virgin fabrics
• Avoid 0.88 tonnes of fabrics from
being spilled
• Saved 7827 kg CO2
VISIBLE REMANUFACTURING
– using leftover fabrics on external sections of a garment
Hoodie specification drawing
& marker plan
Visible remanufactured fabric pieces
Invisible remanufactured fabric pieces
 Virgin fabric
Amount of saved virgin fabric
26 | Circularity and Fashion 
product is of a lower value than the original (every frequently-recycled 
textile material is down cycled for filling purposes only). Recently, a lot 
of development work has been done to construct different technologies 
to be used with different waste fibers in the mechanical or chemical 
recycling process. New technical and system innovations are needed to 
use the waste as a valuable resource within manufacturing. New material standards and testing methods are also needed as more and more 
waste is remanufactured into new fibers, yarns, textiles and clothing.
Safety issues are critical when textile waste material includes different 
kinds of chemicals, some quite harmful. In addition, new inventions are 
needed to totally close the loop and to recycle not only materials but 
also the chemicals in the textile materials.
A good example of multi- or even interdisciplinary collaboration 
is the T2C Trash-to-Cash project, by which new material and product 
opportunities are developed via creative design from textile waste or 
process by-products. With collaboration between 18 diverse partners 
from 10 different countries – from design research, material science, 
market research, and industry – this Horizon 2020 funded project aims 
to reduce the utilization of virgin materials, improve material efficiency, decrease landfill volumes and energy consumption, and foster 
design for recycling with the vision of closing material loops. The waste 
used in T2C is cotton, polyester, cotton-polyester blends and recycled 
paper board, and the aim is to develop technical innovations to make 
use of these waste streams while producing high quality materials and 
innovative design products. The project is based on wide collaboration between different knowledge areas, and the focus is to challenge 
the current linear system towards circularity. The project is based on 
three iterative cycles throughout the 3,5 years and on open knowledge 
Figure 4. Closing the material loop. Green lines present the 
research areas in T2C project. This project has received funding 
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme under grant agreement No 646226.
Use
Cellulose
textile
[cotton/
poly-blends/
man-made]
Polyester textile
[100%/
cotton-blends]
Regenerated
fibres
processes
Cellulose
fibres
Polyester
fibres
Sustainable
materials manufacture
Textiles
Plastics &
reinforced
plastics
High quality
products
[user insights]
Novel
Performance
Automotive
Interdisciplinary approach - Design-driven methodology
Simulating
future
recycling
concepts
using existing
materials
Automatic
material
sorting
Validation, scalability, business & enviromental assessment, bus ni ess mode sl and es vr eci s Sorting
End of Life
Products construction
Finishing processes Yarns, fabrics & materials processing
Fibres regeneration
Feedstock
Testing
Use
28
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 29
sharing between disciplines. At the end, product design concepts and 
prototypes are constructed in a co-design setting and are evaluated 
through the following aspects: circularity, LCA, and innovation potential (see the results from https://www.trash2cashproject.eu/).
One technology used in T2C is Ioncell-F, which is a chemical 
recycling method for cellulose fibers (Sixta et al. 2015; Aalto University 27.10.2015). The process uses environmentally friendly ionic liquid, 
which is an alternative to the solvents currently used in man-made cellulosic processes (viscose production). Ioncell-F technology converts 
wood into textiles or textile waste or paper waste into new fibers. It is an 
alternative to virgin cotton production or viscose production. In addition, the process has the potential to revolutionize recycling of textile 
waste, turning waste cotton into upcycled high-quality, high-end fiber.
Aalto ARTS contributes to the project through the development 
of design methods for interdisciplinary collaboration, defining new 
material attributes and making the first prototypes with recycled yarns, 
defining principles for design-for-recycling and constructing a methodology for a design-driven material innovation process. (For interim 
results, see, Smirnova et al. 2016; Niinimäki, Tanttu, & Kohtala 2017; 
Niinimäki, Tanttu, & Smirnova 2017; Tanttu, Kohtala, & Niinimäki 
2016). The project is multidisciplinary by nature, aiming even for interdisciplinary collaboration and defined as a design-driven process. This 
chosen strategy means that creative and collaborative methods are used 
throughout the process. While traditionally, innovation processes are 
driven by technology initiatives, here the creative aspect of the design 
is given the role of forerunner within an interdisciplinary collaboration 
to enhance new perspectives in knowledge sharing. Design methods 
created the grounding and the “glue” for three different streams within 
the project: Design Research Stream, Science and Technology Stream, 
and Manufacturing Stream, in order to work towards the same objective 
Figure 5. Eugenia Smirnova’s tests on colour recycling 
from textile waste (photo by Eeva Suorlahti).
30 | Circularity and Fashion 
and achieve the best results. During the project, creative design methods 
for interdisciplinary material-based and collaborative research have 
been developed. A design-driven approach can challenge the traditional 
technology-driven innovation process by bringing in new, unexpected 
elements, combining different knowledge flows or challenging the traditional way of realising invention in the material sector (Niinimäki 
2018a). A good example of this is fashion designer Eugenia Smirnova’s 
MA thesis (Smirnova 2017), in which she collaborated with material 
researchers, worked in their lab to get to know the process and began to 
question, what might happen if colour was recycled and not only fiber.
Based on this idea and colour tests she constructed a new concept of a 
colour library; how designers will work in the future, a future where all 
fibers are recycled, and colours are kept throughout different lifecycles, 
while closing the material loop (Smirnova 2017).
New technologies for using textile waste are being developed, creating new challenges to the original garment design while considering the 
end part of its lifecycle, e.g. the fiber content in the garment. The sorting 
of different textile waste materials is an important phase while recovering waste. Unfortunately, a lot of fashion items are made from blends, 
very often from 3–4 different fiber types, and this combination might 
prevent their recyclability. Also, the information about fiber content is 
not always correct, which also prevents garments from entering certain 
recycling processes. Recently, an automatic sorting system using robotics has been tested with textile fibers (e.g. in Trash2Cash project). New 
kinds of sorting plants for textile waste have also been established, with 
one new plant planned to be built in Southern Finland in the near 
future.
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 31
More creativity and
collaboration are needed
Redesigning materials, systems, and products for circular use is a fundamental 
requirement of a circular economy and therefore represents a giant opportunity for companies, even in product categories that aren’t normally considered 
innovative (Nguyen, Stuchtey & Zils 2014, 15).
“Design is a key to circular economy” says Ken Webster (2017, 66). He 
further quotes Nigel Cross, the leading researcher in design thinking, 
“scientific problem solving is done by analysis, while designers problem 
solve through synthesis” (ibid. 66) and he links this approach to a 
wider system perspective. While we need the system approach for CE, 
designers can help to navigate through “complex interactions, iterations 
(feedback) and uncertainty” highlights Webster (ibid.). Designers can 
in fact use their creative skills to enhance collaboration between different knowledge areas (Niinimäki 2018a), to build new networks and 
connections between different stakeholders and to push the boundaries between different disciplines (Niinimäki, Tanttu & Kohtala 2017).
Moreover, the choices made during the initial design phase determinate 
if the product is possible to recycle and therefore is it suitable for several 
lifecycles. Moreover, the PSS; Product-Service-System requires a new 
approach to product design, while here the focus is on utilization and 
use, focusing on fulfilling users’ needs in more creative ways, not the 
product design or manufacturing alone.
But not only design creativity is needed to transform existing challenges to opportunities. We need more creative thinking in business, 
industry and technologies. We need to construct experimentation concerning how different business models could work with services, different profit-making logic, and with new practices at different levels 
(micro and macro, local and global). Businesses have to think how to 
best create stronger brand value in the context of sustainability, which 
could be used even in the second-hand market, how high-quality brand 
clothes could have another “business cycle” as second-hand clothes 
32 | Circularity and Fashion 
(e.g Filippa K, Emmy). Business has to think about how to create new 
profit-making possibilities from services (e.g. Vigga or Mud jeans and 
leasing cloths), from extended product lifetimes, or from reuse or recycled strategies in fashion. In this regard, a more experimental economy 
is needed, i.e., an economy which is based on circular experimentations 
and forerunner companies.
Also, new kinds of networks are needed. Networks which combine 
different stakeholders, different knowledge areas and which boldly 
begin to challenge the linear model and think things differently. There 
already exist good examples of what this kind of networking can best 
achieve. Furthermore, policy makers are needed for this work to solve 
the question of what would be the best way to invite (even force) companies, industry and consumers into this transformation process. As 
Sanders (2015) puts it, collaboration is the key for a successful outcome 
in complex problem settings. “Collective creativity refers to acts of creativity that are experienced jointly by two or more (and sometimes even 
crowds of) people” (ibid. 296). Complex sustainable issues like circular 
systems need to be approached through a collaborative, experimental 
and creative mindset to be able to find solutions together. “The only 
way we will be able to address the important challenges we face today 
is to do so collectively. Collective creativity can lead to relevant and 
sustainable innovation” (Sanders 2015, 298). In the best creativity can 
be used to challenge the whole industry, the way we design, manufacture, do business and consume fashion. We have to align creativity and 
innovative economy in the context of circularity. Here I want to quote 
Infinited fiber company and their statement of values which they think 
can help facilitate the BIG change.
Values:
Innovativeness: The more brains the more change
Openness: Together we will find affordable solutions
Solution oriented: We want to put all in
(http://infinitedfiber.com/strategy-2/)
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 33
Strategic design and
innovation in a CE context
As Kretschmer (2014, 181) highlights in the context of sustainable development, design has to move from the “beautification and improvement of 
products” towards a wider perspective and system thinking, that is, strategic design. Systems approaches do not remain at the product design 
level only but widen the design aspects towards cultural aspects (cultural 
transformation process). Understanding sustainable innovation through 
this way extends the design process from products to “human needs, to 
ways of satisfying them, and, if appropriate, to transforming them into 
artefacts. Accordingly, sustainable innovation includes societal system 
innovation, usage innovation, organizational innovation etc.” (ibid. 182).
Kretschmer further argues that product innovation alone might not 
be the best solution to a certain problem in the context of sustainable 
development. He further proposes that new knowledge is needed at the 
front-end stage of innovation to find the right focus for the innovation, 
which might not in fact be a new product.
In the linear economy, design has been used to keep the consumption rates high. This has to change in the CE context, and material 
throughput in the system needs to slow down. Even if the waste can be 
handled differently in the future, a CE approach cannot give permission to maintain unsustainable fashion consumption rates at the current 
level. Fashion consumption needs to transform. “The commonly 
accepted role of design as a cheap resource of ideas, as a profession of 
beautification, and as a powerful marketing ‘tool’ must therefore be 
questioned seriously and urgently” (Kretschmer 2014, 183). If the industry continues on the traditional design path, it will lose the potential of 
creative thinking to change its business assets towards a more sustainable 
future. More creative and strategic design is needed to build a sustainable product culture which takes into account, and more importantly 
leads towards, sustainable fashion consumption practices even in a CE 
context.
34 | Circularity and Fashion 
Design principles in CE
Good stuff is durable, made from locally sourced, sustainable materials, 
is repairable, fit for purpose and dismantle-able (thus easily up-cycled or 
recycled). It has a valued purpose (not just a fantasy-advertising-based, 
flash-fashionable appeal). Let’s make stuff remarkable again. Meaningful. 
Special. (Fletcher 2017, 19)
This quote from Cat Fletcher (2017) highlights the key issues in design 
for circularity. We have to change our current and familiar design strategies while working in the context of a circular economy. We have to 
create new strategies for designing with quality and life cycles in mind.
We have to be able to design for several life cycles and these different cycles need to be included with the design solution of the original product. We have to focus on creating something more meaningful 
and special for the end user. Something that they are ready to fall in 
love with, keep long, cherish and take care of (e.g. Niinimäki & Koskinen 2011; Niinimäki & Armstrong 2013). We should avoid designing 
disposable products, or alternatively we either have to find ways to 
effectively produce them from eco-materials or recycle them into new 
textile materials with low environmental impact. The best new design 
is included into the new business model which focuses on use and providing value through deep satisfaction in utilization, not only on easy 
profit via a single sale.
Based on the earlier discussion, the following design guidelines for a 
circular economy have been constructed in Table 1.
The list starts from the designer’s daily practices and more traditional 
design tasks, such as dealing with style, quality, and the aesthetical aging 
of materials or styles. Then the list moves to include the users’ world, 
how to trigger the user to extend the lifecycle of the garment, how to 
intensify the use or how to include the service aspect within the design 
and business concept. In this way the emphases upon the circular system 
is included. We need to use recycled materials more and also think about 
the product’s recyclability. The work of designers moves towards the 
35
Table 1. Design guidelines in a CE.
DESIGN KEY STAKEHOLDER IMPACT
Design for quality and long-term use Business, Users Extending the lifecycles, aesthetical 
aging, product satisfaction
Emotional Design Users Slowing consumption through deep 
product satisfaction and personproduct attachment
Design for easy repair, reuse
and redesign
Business, Users New business models
(e.g. services)
Design within new business models 
(e.g. swapping, second-hand business, 
PSS, renting, leasing)
Business, Users Extending or intensifying the use
Design from recycled materials Industry, Business Creating demand for recycled 
materials
Avoid harmful, toxic chemicals
and substances
Industry Supporting CE system
Design for recycling (easy disassembly 
or made from mono-materials, 
recycling all materials and chemicals
in a closed loop manner)
Industry, Policy Creating CE system
Design for transformation All New paradigm
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy |
future and because of that towards more intentional design. “The intentional design space points toward the future. Design embodiments that 
emerge from an exploration of intentional design space include organizational transformation, behaviour change, and/or social transformation” 
(Sanders 2015, 298). This aspect creates new challenges for design skills, 
because we have to design for a larger scale or with a view to a longer 
future, to construct the transformation towards a circular system as a 
36
EXTENDING
THE USE WITH
CARBON
SAVING
WATER
SAVING
WASTE
SAVING
10% = 3 months 8% 10% 9%
33% = 9 months 27% 33% 22%
Table 2. The effect of extending the use time of garments (WRAP 2012, 23).
| Circularity and Fashion 
whole. Here more strategic thinking is needed and also large-scale collaboration needs to be achieved. In the CE context, including systems 
thinking and new collaborations, changes fashion design and the role of 
the designer becomes a knowledge-intensive profession, more so than if 
it merely emphasized aesthetic or functional outcomes.
Impact
One focus in the circular economy is to support activities in more local 
and regional contexts than in the linear economy. Waste is best handled 
locally rather than by being transported long distances to the other side 
of the globe. Reuse, updating, and modification can be achieved more 
flexibly within close distance, and in this way such activities support the 
local economy. The new sharing economy (e.g. swapping) needs local 
actors and local communities to create a viable new economy, even a 
block economy.
Investing in and creating local actions intensifies the use of labour.
Many of the activities within the circular economy are labour-intensive 
and can create new boosts in the micro- and also macro-levels of the 
economy (Stahel 2017). “By rethinking the way we produce, work and 
buy, we can generate new opportunities and create new jobs”, has been 
stated in the EU’s Circular Economy Package (EU 2.12.2015), giving 
positive futures a path to follow. WRAP predicts that change towards 
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 37
circularity could generate up to 3 million new jobs in the EU by 2030 
(WRAP 2015).
Circular thinking (extending and intensifying use, reuse, redesign, 
recovering waste) uses fewer resources, and preserves the water and 
environment, ending up in low-carbon use, less use of energy and fewer 
virgin materials, making circularity, therefore, more ecological than 
industrial processes in the linear model (Stahel 2017). WRAP (2012) has 
calculated the effect of extending the use time of garments. According 
to WRAP the average lifetime of a garment in the UK is 2,2 years.
From the figures in Table 2. we can see that even a slight change in 
consumer behaviour can have a big effect. For example, 9% savings in 
waste means 150 000 tons of waste in the UK alone.
Conclusions
Circular economy is an emerging phenomenon which will totally 
change the fashion system. Companies and designers at the forefront will be leading the transformation of the fashion industry. On 
the other hand, individual designers, small companies and even grass 
root initiatives can show the alternative ways towards more sustainable 
futures. There already exist examples of how to design, manufacture or 
do business in the context of CE. Policy and legislation are tightening, 
at least on the European level, and companies who are prepared for this 
can lead the way towards the CE business and CE society at large.
When constructing a new understanding of the circular economy, all 
levels need to take into account; consumption, design, business, industry and waste management. This needs a systemic perspective and tight 
collaboration between different stakeholders. On the other hand, new 
understanding and new networks open different business and design 
opportunities. It can be summed-up that the transformation towards 
circularity needs creativity, new way of thinking and acting, new networks, large collaboration and brave experimentation.
| Circularity and Fashion 
Companies mentioned in the text
http://filippakcircle.com/
https://global.makersite.net/
http://infinitedfiber.com/
https://mudjeans.eu/
https://store.emmy.fi/
https://vaatepuu.wordpress.com/
https://vigga.us/in-english
https://www.annaruohonen.com/fi_FI/
http://www.lena-library.com/
http://www.made-by.org/
https://www.nudiejeans.com/
http://www.patagonia.com/ironclad-guarantee.html#
searchterm=guarantee
http://www.purewaste.org/
http://www.reblend.fi
https://zadaa.co/
Some interesting information on the web
WRAP Love your clothes -campaign
https://www.loveyourclothes.org.uk/
Circular Fashion
https://circular.fashion/
Circular Fashion Network
https://circularfashion.com/
Cradle to Cradle products
https://www.c2ccertified.org/
Fashion positive materials collection
https://www.c2ccertified.org/fashionpositivematerials/
Close the loop, a guide towards circular fashion
https://www.close-the-loop.be/en 
EMF Ellen MacArthur Foundation, A new textiles economy: Redesigning 
fashion’s future, https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/
downloads/publications/A-New-Textiles-Economy_Full-Report.pdf
38
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 39
References
Aalto University (2015, October 27). Luxury fiber from recycled cardboard.
Retrieved from http://chem.aalto.fi/en/current/news/2015-10-27-005/.
Armstrong, C., Niinimäki, K., Kujala, S., Karell, E. & Lang, C. (2015).
Sustainable product-service systems for clothing: Exploring consumer 
perceptions of consumption alternatives in Finland. Journal of cleaner 
production. Vol. 97, pp. 30–39.
Armstrong, C., Niinimäki, K. & Lang, C. (2016). Towards design recipes to 
curb the clothing carbohydrate binge. Design journal. Vol. 19:1, pp. 159–181.
Baker-Brown, D. (2017). Resource matters. In: Baker-Brown, D. (Ed.)
The re-use atlas. London. Riba, pp. 7–15.
EMF Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2017). A new textiles economy: Redesigning 
fashion’s future. https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/
downloads/publications/A-New-Textiles-Economy_Full-Report.pdf
EU (2.12.2015). Closing the loop: Commission adopts ambitious new circular economy 
package to boost competitiveness, create jobs and generate sustainable growth.
Press release http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-15-6203_en.htm 
[Accessed 13.4.2018].
Fletcher, C. (2017). What a waste! In: Baker-Brown, D. (Ed.). The re-use atlas.
London. Riba, pp.16–20.
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable fashion & textiles: Design journeys. London.
Earthscan.
Hamari, J., Sjöklint, M. & Ukkonen, A. (2015). The sharing economy: Why 
people participate in collaborative consumption. Journal of the association for 
information science and technology Vol. 67:9, pp. 2047–2059.
Hirscher A., Niinimäki K. & Armstrong, A. (2018). Social manufacturing in the 
fashion sector: New value creation through alternative design strategies? 
Journal of cleaner production. Vol. 172, pp. 4544–4554.
Kant, R. (2012). Textile dyeing industry: An environmental hazard. Natural 
science. Vol. 4:1, p. 23.
Kretschmer M. (2013). A design perspective on sustainable innovation. In: 
Gassmaan, O. & Schweitzer, F. (Eds.). Management of the fuzzy front end of 
innovation. New York. Springer, pp. 179–191.
Lacy, P. & Rutqvist, J. (2015). Waste to wealth. The circular economy advantage.
Hampshire. Palgrave, Macmillan.
McAfee, A., Dessain, V. & Sjoeman, A. (2004). Zara: IT for fast fashion. Boston.
Harvard Business School Publishing.
McDonough, W. & Braungart, M. (2002). Cradle to cradle: Remaking the way we 
do things. New York. North Point Press.
40 | Circularity and Fashion 
Morgan, L.R. & Birstwistle, G. (2009). An investigation of young fashion 
consumers’ disposal habits. International journal of consumer studies. Vol. 33,
pp. 190–198.
Nguyen, M., Stuchtey, M. & Zils, M. (2014). Remaking the industrial economy.
McKinsey quarterly, February, retrieved from http://vuggetilvugge.dk/
wp-content/uploads/2015/12/Circular_economyEMF-Newsletterfebruar-2014.pdf [Accessed on: 01/05/2016].
Niinimäki, K. (2011). From disposable to sustainable. The complex interplay between 
design and consumption of textiles and clothing. Doctoral dissertation. Helsinki: 
Aalto University.
Niinimäki, K. (Ed.) (2013). Sustainable fashion: New approaches. Helsinki. Aalto 
ARTS Books. https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/handle/123456789/13769
Niinimäki, K. (2018a). YABBA DABBA DOO: Boosting multidisciplinary 
innovation through design-driven approach. 21st DMI: Academic design 
management conference, Next Wave, 1–2 August 2018. Ravensbourne 
University, London, UK.
Niinimäki, K. (2018b). Knowing better, but behaving emotionally: Strong 
emotional undertones in fast fashion consumption. In: Becker-Leifhold, C.
& Heuer, M. (Eds.) Eco friendly and fair: Fast fashion and consumer behaviour.
Sheffield. Greenleaf, pp. 49–57.
Niinimäki, K. & Armstrong, C. (2013). From pleasure in use to preservation 
of meaningful memories: A closer look at the sustainability of clothing via 
longevity and attachment. International journal of fashion design, technology and 
education. Vol. 6: 3, pp.190–199.
Niinimäki, K. & Koskinen, I. (2011). I love this dress, it makes me feel beautiful: 
Emotional knowledge in sustainable design. Design journal. Vol. 14: 2,
pp. 165–186.
Niinimäki, K., Tanttu. M. & Kohtala, C. (2017). Outside the “comfort zone”; 
Designing unknown in a multidisciplinary setting. Design journal. Vol. 20, 
no. Supplement 1, pp. S4434–S4443.
Niinimäki, K., Tanttu, M., & Smirnova, E. (2017). Designing for the circular 
economy. In: P. Kääriäinen & L. Tervinen (Eds.), Lost in the wood(s): The new 
biomateriality in Finland. Helsinki. Aalto ARTS Books, pp. 92–101.
OECD (2001). Extended producer responsibility: A guidance manual for governments.
OECD Publishing.
Pijpker, J. (5.5.2018). Hoe H&M van zijn kledingberg afkomt. NRC weekend.
RSA Action and Research Centre (2016). Designing for a circular economy: Lessons 
from the great recovery 2012–2016. London; UK.
Runnell, A. (11.10.2017). Reverse Resources. Lecture in seminar ‘Fashion in a 
circular economy’-seminar. Aalto ARTS, Helsinki, Finland.
1 | Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy | 41
Runnel, A., Raihan, K., Castel, N., Oja, D. & Bhuiya, H. (2017). Creating 
digitally enhanced circular economy. Reverse Resources. http://www.
reverseresources.net/about/white-paper
Sanders, EB. (2015). Is sustainable innovation an oxymoron? In: Stebbing, P.
& Tischner, U. (Eds.). Changing paradigms: Designing for a sustainable future.
Mumbai. Cumulus Think Tank / Aalto University, pp. 296–301.
Sixta, H., Michud, A., Hauru, L., Asaadi, S., Ma, Y., King, A.W.T., Kilpeläinen, 
I. & Hummel, M. (2015). Ioncell-F: A High-strength regenerated cellulose 
fiber. Nordic pulp & paper research journal. Vol 30:1.
Smirnova, E. (2017). Colours in a circular economy. (MA thesis). Helsinki. Aalto 
University. https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/handle/123456789/24669
Smirnova, E., Ilén, E, Sixta, H., Hummel, M., & Niinimäki, K. (2016). Colours 
in a circular economy. Proceedings of Circular Transitions—Mistra future fashion 
conference on textile design and the circular economy. London. Chelsea College 
of Arts.
Stahel, W. (2017). Preface. In: Baker-Brown, D. (Ed.). The re-use atlas. London.
Riba, pp. xiii–xviii.
Tanttu, M., Kohtala, C., & Niinimäki, K. (2016). Can design-driven material 
innovation approach also drive circularity? Proceedings of Circular Transitions 
– Mistra future fashion conference on textile design and the circular economy.
London. Chelsea College of Arts.
Trash2Cash –project: Taking waste & making new fibers: 18 partners,
10 countries https://www.trash2cashproject.eu/[Accessed 10.5.2018].
Webster, K. (2017). The circular economy. A Wealth of flows. 2nd edition. Cowes.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation.
WRAP (2012). Valuing our clothes: The true cost of how we design, use and 
dispose of clothing in UK. http://www.wrap.org.uk/sites/files/wrap/
VoC%20FINAL%20online%202012%2007%2011.pdf [Accessed 14.4.2018].
WRAP (2015). WRAP’s vision for the UK circular economy to 2020. http://
www.wrap.org.uk/content/wraps-vision-uk-circular-economy-2020
Yao, G. (22.3.2018). Closed-loop in garment industry-from design to recycle.
Lecture in Aalto CHEM, Espoo, Finland.
42
Cosette M. J. Armstrong, Chunmin Lang
Sustainable Fashion Consumption
The Clothing Style
Confidence Mindset 02 in a Circular Economy
43
Personal style has been implicated recently in the potential 
product longevity in clothing, underpinned by a mindset 
characterized by creativity, authenticity, and mindfulness, 
though little has been articulated as to what “style” 
necessarily means in real practice and how exactly this 
attribute influences sustainable consumption behaviors. The 
purpose of this paper is to define clothing style confidence 
and explore the impact of this attribute on clothing 
consumption habits, from purchase to disposal behaviors.
Individual interviews were conducted with 23 women 
and men who self-identified as confident in their personal 
style. This study resulted in a definition of clothing 
style confidence and an illustration of its influences on 
consumption behaviors that may foster product longevity, 
playing an important role in a circular economy.
Keywords: Style, clothing style, sustainable consumption,
purchase behavior, disposal behavior
44
Introduction
Clothing is a prominent tool used to create one’s expressed identity or 
personal style, defined by Kaiser (1997) as a distinct method of expression. This symbolic production of self is a reality in every individual’s 
life, though research has shown that some individuals who lack a sense 
of completeness with respect to self-definition are more likely to use 
cultural symbols like clothing in pursuit of completeness (ibid.). Similarly, a research study discussed in Fletcher and Grose (2012) found that 
consumers who lack the confidence to experiment with existing garments frequently making new purchases to “reinvent” their expressed 
selves and evidence the highest material throughput and environmental impact. More recently, a variety of scholars have begun to correlate 
concepts related to style with sustainable consumption, providing evidence that those who have clarity about their personal style more frequently engage in practices supportive of sustainable development, such 
as reduced consumption, repair and maintenance, repurposing or redesigning, or other creative habits (Bly et al. 2015; Fletcher & Grose 2012; 
Ruppert-Stroescu et al. 2015). These practices support the product longevity of clothing, which is the cornerstone of sustainable clothing consumption (Cooper 2010). Niinimäki (2017) argues that consumers are a 
key stakeholder in this longevity by way of their habits and actions. Specifically, current sustainable consumption scholars suggest a type of style 
that is characterized by personal creativity, heightened self-awareness,
and mindfulness (Bly et al. 2015; Fletcher 2016; Ruppert-Stroescu et al.
2015; Watson & Yan 2013). Therefore, this mindset has an important role 
to play in the implementation of the circular economy.
Bly (2013) recently argued that sustainability facilitates style, an 
antithesis to mainstream fashion and followership. In this light, freedom 
from fashion provides a more sustainable way to consume that is punctuated by self-awareness and creativity; free from fashion dictate, one 
may explore their creative expression without the continual acquisition 
of new things. They may also generate meaning with clothing more 
suited to one’s personal values. Perhaps, those who are confident in the 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
45
symbolic production process of dress do so in a more reflective and 
consistent way, resulting in less material throughput and environmental 
impact. The emerging dialogue surrounding style and its potential role in 
sustainable consumption deserves much more exploration in regards to 
what role fashion (e.g., constant change, trendiness) plays in the development of this style as well as the degree to which one’s style must truly be 
separated from the fashion system to meet sustainability aims.
The purpose of this project was to explore a comprehensive definition of clothing style confidence (CSC), a potential attribute supporting sustainable consumption, and explore how this attribute influences 
clothing consumption behaviors, including purchase, use and maintenance, and disposal behaviors. Individual interviews were conducted 
with men and women who self-identified as confident in their personal 
style, which provided a window to illuminate CSC’s role as an important and emerging sustainability concept. Following, a discussion of style, 
creativity, and freedom form the building blocks that supported this 
investigation. Then, a discussion of methods is followed by an outline of 
research findings and concluded with a brief discussion of implications.
Background
This emerging focus on personal style and sustainability has evolved 
quite naturally during an age of abundance in the marketplace; the 
access to appearance modifying tools like clothing has significantly 
expanded. Facilitated by an abundance of props, experimentation with 
style also occurs to resolve cultural ambiguities about aspects of life 
such as gender or social class (Kaiser et al. 1991). This prompts a transitional space in time where style is permitted to become much more 
heterogeneous (Kaiser et al. 1991; 1995). Could this more heterogeneous landscape support sustainability? We must first situate style in this 
landscape, then explore how aspects articulated by recent scholars, like 
creativity and freedom, may help define a type of style confidence that 
encourages sustainable consumption.
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
46
Style
As we begin to shape a conceptualization of clothing style confidence (CSC), it is important to first clarify what style means. Kaiser 
(1997) defines personal style as a distinctive method of expression that 
is developed through one’s creativity and experimentation with “tools 
and props” (ibid. 503). Style is different from fashion. Style evolves 
slowly and reflects an individual’s identity, inner self, and way of life.
Fashion, on the contrary, is temporary and ever-changing trend, and 
reflects more outer self (Gwozdz et al. 2017). Gadel (1985) characterizes 
style-oriented consumers as prioritizing dressing well and being interested in the cut or style of garments (e.g., “fashionable” or “interesting”), 
the appearance of garment quality, and garment performance. Kaiser 
(1997) contrasts style-oriented consumers with pragmatic consumers 
who are focused on easy care and low-cost maintenance of clothing.
Style-oriented consumers can also be fashion-oriented, which is an 
interest in staying up-to-date with trends; though most style-oriented
individuals prefer clothing that will not go out of style quickly. To be 
sure, style and fashion orientations are not positioned at two ends of 
a continuum; rather both are aspects of the personal style experience 
(ibid.). Notably, Gadel (1985) articulates that just because someone is 
style-oriented does not necessarily mean they are confident in choosing 
styles and color or necessarily have a flair for dressing well.
There are recent studies that further aid in delineating style’s potential role in sustainable consumption. Zarley, Watson and Yan (2013) conducted an exploratory study of the decision processes of fast versus 
slow fashion consumers. The slow fashion consumer is preoccupied 
with quality over quantity, seasonless style, simplicity in form, garment 
details, and achieving versatility with fewer clothing items to maintain 
longer wear. Study findings affirm that these consumers have a nontrendy self-image; therefore, personal style is a greater factor in clothing 
choice than fashion followership. Similarly, Cho et al. (2015) recently 
proposed a concept called style consumption as a “distinctive mode of 
tailoring of a given time which evolves slowly, thus, having the quality 
of being eternal,” arguing that style consumption begets longer wear 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
47
and increase garment retention over time by acquiring goods that 
align with one’s personal style (Cho et al. 2015, 2). These researchers 
found that style consumption positively influenced both environmental 
apparel purchasing and sustainable apparel divestment practices (ibid.).
Fletcher and Tham (2004) categorized clothing consumers by material throughput and environmental impact based on levels of fashion 
interest and motivations, proposing that there are two types of consumers who evidence a lower environmental impact: 1) those who have 
less interest in fashion and consume for quality and timelessness, and 
2) those who have more interest in fashion and consume for creative 
ends (discussed more in Fletcher & Grose 2012). Neither is necessarily 
a fashion follower. Instead, these consumers develop their own style and 
consume strategically, overall consuming and disposing of less than the 
slave to fashion. This can be contrasted with fashion leaders who prefer 
a hedonic shopping experience and have a tendency to need emotional 
and experiential satisfaction during shopping (Kang & Park-Poaps 2010; 
Kim & Hong 2011). Clothing is highly varied in its uses and the symbolic reasons for its use, and environmental strategies to increase sustainability must be tailored to these ends, which can include a respect 
for fashion (Fletcher & Grose 2012). On the other hand, Fletcher and 
Tham (2004) also point to a lack of confidence as problematic in the 
case of the slave to fashion, who frequently purchases superfluously to 
express disparate identities. We now turn to discuss more specifically the 
role of creativity and freedom as potential aspects of a type of style confidence that supports sustainability aims.
Creativity
Innovative and creative people are more prone to play with aesthetics (Baudrillard 1994), the goal of which is often to seek distinction 
from others (Baudrillard 1994; Tian et al. 2001). Meeting the need for 
creativity is a dominant motivation for clothing consumption (Fletcher 
2012). Individuals who use clothing as a symbol in expression of creativity are motivated by fashion change (ibid.), which can increase the 
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
48
purchases of products that are used for shorter time periods (Ritch & 
Schröder 2012). However, creativity was recently identified as being 
linked to problem solving in cases of reduced consumption by engaging in practices that support sustainability, such as repurposing, redesigning, or other creative habits (Ruppert-Stroescu et al. 2015).
Ruppert-Stroescu et al. (2015) discovered a variety of creative contributions that aid in problem solving when the acquisition of new 
clothing is dramatically reduced. The study found that when research 
participants refrained from new clothing acquisition for a specific 
time period, attitudes and behavior toward clothing began to change, 
prompting creative expressions. Research participants spent more time 
assessing their wardrobe and put more effort into creating outfits that 
were not prescribed by a retailer. They discovered a new perception of 
their wardrobe, seeing items in their wardrobe in ways they had not 
noticed before. Some began altering garments by modifying, mending, 
or redesigning. Others borrowed goods from others to stimulate creativity in the wardrobe. Most importantly, participants experimented 
with new styles of dress that they wanted to try, and in turn, this intensified their sense of personal style (ibid.).
Similarly, Lapolla et al. (2015) argued that though clothing repair is 
not as common in the household today and many lack the skills to 
repair, one way to reduce textile waste is to encourage clothing reuse 
and repair through creativity. Types of creative activities found to 
support garment longevity via reuse and repair were closet organizing/re-organizing and donating clothing, modifying apparel to make 
it more personal, and achieving better fit and increased uniqueness.
Research participants in this study expressed a desired for more guidance and expertise to improve garment longevity by acquiring the skills 
to modify garments, mix and match wardrobe items, and create new 
types of products from old clothing. Learning new skills and having 
guidance was perceived as important to increasing creativity with clothing reuse and repair. These studies highlight the importance of style and 
creativity in sustainable clothing consumption behaviors.
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
49
Freedom
In the aforementioned study by Ruppert-Stroescu et al. (2015), some 
research participants who abstained from new clothing acquisition for 
a period of time employed their creativity with their existing wardrobe 
to continue to look fashionable and compliant with current fashion 
trends while others rejected subscription to fashion trends altogether 
and redirected their attention to other items in their environment.
Indeed, the degree to which one’s style must truly be separated from 
fashion precept has implications for consumption behavior that beg 
empirical exploration. The current literature seems to suggest that this 
age of abundance and heterogeneity of style could prompt the entrance 
of a type of personal style that is not necessarily isolated from but is 
also not entirely beholden to the fashion system. A space may now exist 
where one can explore creative expression; generating meaning that is 
more tightly aligned to one’s goals, values and personal narratives (Bly 
et al. 2015; Fletcher 2016).
One might assume that clothing style confidence (CSC) implies a 
certain disregard for the fashion system. Yet, this perspective may ignore 
a possible mindful navigation of the fashion system where one could 
engage in fashion without the excessive material throughput, as suggested by Cho et al. (2015). The first scholars to discuss such freedom 
were Lowe and Anspach (1973), who describe a consumer mindset 
called freedom in dress; considered a separate dimension of appearance 
management that is characterized by three dimensions that include: 1) 
an individually or subjectively defined state of mind, 2) “dressing freely,” 
including purposeful planning, execution and pleasure in the results, 
and 3) a process conducted on the basis of restrictions and satisfactions 
related to clothing: economic (budget), social (peer group) or perceptual (aesthetics). In this light, a consumer believes they have control 
over what they wear, are capable of choosing among available clothing 
alternatives, and are satisfied with the choices they make.
Concerning sustainable consumption, interesting aspects of this state 
of mind include the embodied mindfulness and autonomy in carefully planning, executing and enjoying clothing choices that align with 
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
50
one’s sensibilities as well as the inherent satisfaction gained by navigating certain constraints, such as income (Lowe & Anspach 1973). For 
instance, individuals who are “free” may be able to overcome economic 
restrictions by using originality and creativity in appearance management. Further, social-psychological considerations may also play an 
important role in overcoming economic constraints, such as praise from 
others or an absence of criticism; the degree of favorable acceptance 
determines a feeling of being free. This state of mind must be defined 
by the individual and cannot be objectively defined by others in terms 
of color, style, etc. An important and related aspect of this mindset is an 
attribute called aesthetic perceptual ability, which the authors define as 
the ability to coordinate interesting appearance contexts (ibid.). In sum, 
the person who is the most capable of deciding between equally attractive alternatives and is most satisfied with the clothing chosen experiences the greatest freedom (Lowe & Anspach 1978).
The concept of freedom in dress has primarily been explored to 
understand purchase decisions rather than the entire consumption 
experience, including style. Nevertheless, the notion of freedom merits 
consideration in the context of sustainable consumption. Kaiser (1997) 
has discussed how emerging subcultures can influence a disregard of the 
fashion system. The development of personal style becomes a form of 
mutiny, most frequently conducted by innovative and creative individuals who play with aesthetics in search of distinction (Baudrillard 1981).
Subsequently, heterogeneity in style proliferates. On the other hand, 
Cho et al. (2015) more recently describes a type of style consumption 
that evidences an interest in fashion without a wholesale subscription 
to it. Thus, more recent literature seems to depict a mindset where 
one may honor their own personal style by making good choices. The 
inadequate empirical exploration of this type of consumption is chiefly 
what propels this study.
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
51
Methods
To begin developing a comprehensive definition of clothing style confidence (CSC), the authors reviewed literature relevant to personal style, 
such as appearance management, symbolic interactionism, and sustainable consumption. This literature was utilized to develop an interview protocol, developing interview questions related to appearance 
evaluation, orientation, and investment, style orientation and fashion 
consciousness as well as questions about purchasing, use and disposal 
practices. A pilot exercise was conducted with five women and one 
man who all self-identified as style confident. On the initial protocol, a series of questions prompted the participant to discuss how they 
defined their personal style, which did not yield useful feedback during 
the interviews. These were replaced with more specific questions about 
appearance management behaviors. Additional questions regarding 
purchasing and disposal behavior were also added to permit a better 
understanding of how this type of confidence influenced behaviors 
relevant to sustainability.
The authors then conducted 23 individual interviews with men and 
women who self-identified as style confident. To begin recruiting participants, a short list of ten personal contacts who appeared to embody 
style confidence were identified. These participants were contacted via 
email and invited to participate if they identified as “confident about the 
individual way they express themselves with clothing and accessories.” Most 
interviews were conducted in 30–45 minutes via a web application, 
which allowed the authors to conduct the interview in an online chat 
and receive the transcript of the interview. This aided in prompt review 
and analysis of the data. Four participants requested an in-person interview, and these were audio recorded. After these interviews, one of the 
authors reviewed the audio recording and made extensive notes. These 
notes along with the other transcripts were loaded into Nvivo software 
for qualitative analysis. All transcripts were reviewed by both authors 
and discussed to identify initial themes. Then, the primary investigator 
coded the 23 transcripts.
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
52
Discussion of findings
The following discussion is organized around the study’s two primary 
objectives: 1) to explore a comprehensive definition of clothing style 
confidence (CSC), and 2) explore how this attribute influences clothing consumption practices, including purchase, use and maintenance, 
and disposal behavior.
Defining clothing style confidence (CSC)
Five attributes characterize the life of the style confident: style longevity, aesthetic perceptual ability, creativity, appearance importance, 
and authenticity (see Table 1). Style longevity refers to the preference for purchasing clothing with a long-term view, which includes 
avoidance of quickly passing fashion trends. Participants articulate a 
style- rather than fashion-orientation when it comes to clothing purchasing and dress. Some participants articulate that they are aware 
of and are even inspired by fashion trends but do not blindly follow.
Rather, they select from the new trends carefully to align with their 
personal style. Aesthetic perceptual ability refers to the ability to 
put clothing together in an aesthetically pleasing way, including perceived knowledge about what flatters the body. Participants articulate 
that they are knowledgeable about and may have even developed rules 
for how clothing items coordinate, including clothing selection and 
coordination to flatter the body and personal style. Creativity refers 
to an individual’s interest in developing one’s own style by mixing and 
matching clothing to experiment with new and different looks. Participants articulate that they enjoy the creative process of putting outfits 
together, which may include experimenting with their personal style 
with a sense of adventure. Some participants also discussed mixing and 
matching clothing in new ways to breathe new life into older garments.
Appearance importance refers to the degree to which one considers his/her appearance to be important. Participants articulate that 
their appearance is important to them and they are satisfied with their 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
53
CHARACTERISTIC DEFINITION PARTICIPANT COMMENTS
STYLE
LONGEVITY
The preference to purchase clothing
that can be utilized for a long time; some 
preference for timelessness.
“I don’t buy too trendy items since it will 
be out of date very soon.”
“I’ve always been interested in fashion
and current trends but more as a way to 
supplement my own style rather than a 
way to copy others.”
AESTHETIC
PERCEPTUAL
ABILITY
Perceived knowledge about what
clothing looks good on the self, including 
what flatters the body and the ability to 
put clothing together in an aesthetically 
appealing way.
“I think that I know what looks good
on me.”
“If I am trying to accentuate a certain part 
of my body I will find what looks the best.”
CREATIVITY One’s interest in developing one’s own 
style by mixing and matching clothing to 
experiment with new and different looks.
“I enjoy playing with my style and 
recreating my look on a daily basis.” 
“I like layers, and sometime I try to wear 
my old clothing in different way. For 
example, if I don’t like my old shirt, I will 
wear it with a jacket. You know there are 
hundreds of ways to wear one piece of 
clothing.”
APPEARANCE
IMPORTANCE
The degree to which one considers
his/her appearance to be important.
“I feel that my appearance is a way that
I represent myself; self image is important 
to me.”
“Personal appearance is one of the most 
important things in my life. It makes me 
feel confident and comfortable in front of 
other people.”
AUTHENTICITY How well one’s clothing style reflects
the “real me”.
“I dress the way I do to please myself.”
“I’ve become more comfortable in my
skin and wearing something that is not in 
the ‘norm’ does not scare me off. I know
it works for me.”
Table 1. Attributes that Characterize the Style Confident.
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
54
level of attractiveness. Some participants discuss that this may include 
an extra effort in planning what they will wear. Authenticity refers to 
how well one’s clothing style reflects the “real me.” Participants articulate that dressing according to their personal style is a way of expressing 
who they are. Being genuine in this context is important to them. This 
knowledge of what aligns with their personality and what does not has 
developed over time.
Clothing style confidence and
consumption behaviors
Research participants discussed that their consumption behaviors were 
certainly shaped by their surroundings, living location, working environment, social group, etc., including fashion marketing and trends.
However, participants use a clear sense of self to negotiate these influences as they formulate a response. One participant remarked, “Starting 
a job in the corporate world has influenced my style … I realized that 
I have been dressing just like everyone else at my job …” Another participant mentioned, “I started working through some personal stuff that 
was hindering my self-confidence and through my fashion choices, I 
was able to achieve a sufficient and independent lifestyle.” These participants do not simply follow trends or imitate what other people are 
wearing; rather they create their own look that reflects their personal 
style and exemplifies who they are. The following discussion highlights 
the various ways this confident sense of one’s style may influence consumption behavior, including purchase, use and maintenance, and disposal (see Table 2).
One outcome of having confidence in personal style is more awareness of their needs before they go shopping for clothing, resulting in 
strategic purchasing. Participants explained that they often know 
what specific item they are looking for and focus solely on that when 
shopping. As some participants mentioned, “My shopping is more 
directed …” and, “… I always know what is right.” Many other comments indicated that participants often have their existing wardrobe in 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
55
mind while shopping for new clothing; therefore, they are able to create 
more looks by mixing and matching their new and existing clothing 
items. For instance, a participant stated, “When I purchase my clothing, 
I always think about if this piece matches some of my other pieces.” In 
addition, avoiding trendy styles is another aspect of this strategic focus.
Participants note that instead of following trends blindly, they choose 
what they know looks good on them and will last a long time. One 
participant explained, “… All of my clothing and accessories are almost 
all trendless: safe color, safe prints, and safe silhouette” while another 
participant noted her interest in current fashion though she considered 
longevity in other aspects, “I would think about how often I will wear 
the clothing before I decide to buy.” Participants also discussed impulse 
shopping, which was not necessarily uncommon but similarly precise.
A number of participants said they would buy impulsively, yet very few 
said they regretted these impulse purchases later -- they know themselves and make good decisions, even on impulse. For example, a participant stated, “I rarely experience regret when buying clothes;” and 
another said, “It is rare for me to feel regret because I really think about 
my purchases, especially if they are expensive ones.” Notably, being creative often enables this type of consumer to find different ways to wear 
their purchases.
In regard to the use and maintenance of existing wardrobes, many 
of the comments discussed by participants pertained to wardrobe 
preservation. Many stated that they devoted extra effort to take good 
care of their clothing to increase its lifespan and keep it in a good shape.
For example, one participant mentioned, “I promptly repair clothes 
that need repair and I wash them gently and regularly and I follow 
the instructions on the tag. I store them with wooden hangers and I 
fold them carefully …” Hand-washing, reducing the frequency of laundering, prompt repair, and avoiding the use of a dryer were the most 
common strategies that participants applied in the maintenance of their 
clothing. As one participant said, “I only wash my clothing in cold 
water and I don’t dry anything. That way, none of my clothing has the 
chance to fade or shrink.”
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
PHASE THEME & DEFINITION PARTICIPANT COMMENTS
PURCHASE Strategic purchasing
Participants know specific items they are 
looking for and focus on that during shopping, including seeking items that work 
with existing wardrobe and selecting items 
the permit longevity and are congruent 
with personal style.
“When I shop, I will look for things that 
will go well with the things I already have.”
“I rarely buy something that I don’t wear.” 
USE AND
MAINTENANCE
Wardrobe preservation
The care and maintenance of clothing, 
including rotating wear, repair, laundering, 
and storage.
“I store them with wooden hangers; and
I folder them carefully.”
“I don’t wash some of my more expensive 
pieces after I wear them because of how 
it ages the fabric.”
Wardrobe engagement
Knowing what is in one’s closet, organization for the purpose of developing 
outfit ideas and identifying items to keep 
/discard.
“I like to be able to see everything.
I have several scarf hangers and all my 
jewelry is out on display. My closet is 
very organized. This also helps me to be 
creative because I can see all my options.”
“I try to go through my closet every few
months. If there’s something that I can’t 
remember the last time I wore it, I set it 
aside for donation. This keeps my wardrobe much smaller.”
DISPOSAL Infrequent clothing disposal
Clothing disposition is rare but a 
necessary part of maintaining active 
engagement in the wardrobe.
“I rarely discard, if I am tired of it, usually 
if I wait a little bit, I’ll find another way to 
wear it.”
“It is hard for me to get rid of something 
because even if it is ridiculous or I’m tired 
of it, usually if I wait a little bit I’ll find 
another way to wear it.”
Reuse and repurpose
Disposal is often avoided via ideas about 
how to utilize existing clothing in new 
ways.
“If I have a jacket that doesn’t fit my 
shoulders anymore, I’ll cut off the sleeves 
and make a vest.”
“I repurpose a lot. Or just keep the 
garment to use the fabric for something 
else. I never throw anything away. If I can’t 
repurpose it, then it gets donated.”
Table 2. Clothing Style Confidence and Consumption Behaviors.
57
Further, participants also discussed active wardrobe engagement.
Regularly sorting through their wardrobes often enables them to have 
an idea in their minds of what they can use to create different looks 
each day. For example, one participant stated, “… I go through my 
closet about every 3–6 months … this keeps me from holding on to 
things I don’t need and it keeps my entire closet in front of my eyes, so 
I don’t go out and buy something too similar to what I already own.” 
One of the characteristics of style confidence is being creative through 
more frequent wardrobe engagement, which enables them to have a 
better idea of how to mix and match their existing wardrobe.
Disposal behaviors are also impacted by the confidence in personal style. Participants noted they engaged in infrequent clothing 
disposal. Participants explained that though clothing disposition was 
part of maintaining active engagement in the wardrobe, being creative enables them to mix and match their existing clothing to create 
new looks and experience longevity in the wardrobe. Further, instead 
of throwing away their used clothing, many participants noted they 
would reuse or repurpose items: “I repurpose a lot. Or just keep the 
garment to use the fabric for something else. I never throw anything 
away.” Another participant remarked, “I never throw away my necklaces 
if they break. I usually keep the charms and buy new chains or change 
the chains out depending on what charm I’d like to wear. I also sew my 
clothing when it tears.” Participants discussed that they frequently have 
ideas about how to use their existing clothing in new ways.
Implications and conclusions
The current dialogue surrounding style and its potential role in sustainable consumption deserves much more exploration, particularly to 
define this type of style and how this attribute may influence clothing 
consumption behaviors: purchase, use and maintenance, and disposal.
This study has provided a window to illuminate clothing style confidence (CSC) as an important and emerging sustainability concept. To 
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
58
be sure, CSC is situated in a transitional space in the present day where 
appearance-modifying tools like clothing are far more abundant, and 
consequently, personal style has become more heterogeneous (Kaiser et 
al. 1991; 1995).
The study has advanced a formal definition of clothing style confident (CSC) as confidence about the individual way one expresses themselves 
with clothing and accessories, which includes a preference for style longevity, 
an aesthetic perceptual ability, engagement in creativity, a priority given to 
appearance, and an emphasis on personal authenticity. CSC is distinct from 
style-oriented consumers, who prioritize their interest in clothing style 
and quality, because those who exhibit CSC are confident in choosing styles and color as well as generally prioritize dressing well while 
style-oriented consumers may not (Gadel 1985). CSC consumers are 
also distinct from pragmatic individuals who are focused on easy care 
and low-cost maintenance of clothing (Kaiser 1997). The style confident are not necessarily fashion-oriented, which is an interest in staying 
up-to-date with trends (ibid.), but instead participate in the fashion 
system much more strategically and mindfully, preferring longevity in 
the wardrobe by avoiding quickly fading trends and carefully selecting only current fashion that supports their style. Though CSC shares 
some attributes with the slow fashion consumer (Watson & Yan 2013) as 
well as the concept of style consumption (Cho et al. 2015), especially in 
regards to seeking versatility with fewer items or avoiding quickly-passing fashion trends in an effort to achieve longer wear in the wardrobe.
But, the CSC consumer does not appear to prioritize specific garment 
styling, like seasonless or simplistic or classic. There was, indeed, a diverse 
array of expressive styles communicated among the research participants.
Notably, CSC consumers do not exist in isolation of the fashion system; 
rather, they participate in current fashion by strategically selecting only 
what they know tightly aligns with their own style agenda (Bly et al.
2015; Fletcher 2016). Fletcher and Tham (2004) found consumers who 
had a lower material throughput and environmental impact were either 
interested in timelessness or consuming for creative ends. The current 
research project seems to support these aspects of style experience.
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
59
Study findings support that this confidence in personal style appears 
to play a role in regards to some consumer behaviors supportive of sustainability aims, including strategic purchasing, wardrobe preservation, 
wardrobe engagement, infrequent disposal, and a penchant for reuse or 
redesign. This confirms some findings by Cho et al. (2015) who found 
the aforementioned style consumption associated with environmentallyoriented purchasing and divestment practices.
If style confidence strengthens the potential for sustainable clothing 
consumption, the implications are assuredly of the educational variety.
The marketplace has seen a proliferation of style consulting services as 
well as style-related retail offerings, such as Stitch Fix or Trunk Club, 
that aid the consumer in better understanding their personal style and 
aligning their purchases to that style. On the surface, these emerging 
industry models appear to aid consumers in clarifying their personal 
style, which is a part of CSC. Consumers with a high level of confidence in personal style have a greater sense of who they are and how 
to express the self. They do not simply follow the latest trends or copy 
what other people are wearing while shopping. Instead, they create 
their own look that reflects their personal style and exemplifies who 
they are. They know what will reflect the “real” self and dress in a way 
that is satisfying to them.
Yet, the skill set described by these research participants goes much 
deeper than clarity in style alone. Specifically, creativity (RuppertStroescu et al. 2015) and aesthetic perceptual ability (Lowe & Anspach 
1978) enable consumers with CSC to know what clothing looks good, 
including what flatters the body and the ability to put clothing together 
in an aesthetically appealing way. They utilize this creativity and aesthetic sense to mix and match everyday looks, maintaining active use 
and organization of the wardrobe. These consumers consequently 
dispose of clothing less frequently because their creativity enables 
them to create different looks from their older clothing items or to 
know how to reuse or redesign the item. Some of these characteristics 
align with other studies by Ruppert-Stroescu et al. (2015) and Lapolla 
et al. (2015) that associate creativity with style exploration and longer 
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
60
wear. Finally, CSC consumers also have knowledge about the impacts 
of laundering, taking care to preserve their wardrobes through fewer 
washings, careful storage, and occasional repair. These competences in 
creativity, aesthetics and garment care and maintenance describe key 
areas of consumer education that may strengthen the sustainable clothing consumption imperative. This education will be central to transform consumer mindsets and better support clothing product longevity, 
and therefore, a circular economy. Future research is now needed to 
better understand how to shape specific interventions to increase CSC 
among those who evidence higher material throughput and environmental impact in the wardrobe.
References
Baudrillard, J. (1994). The body, in theory: Histories of cultural materialism.
Michigan. University of Michigan Press.
Bly, S., Gwozdz, W. & Reisch, A. (2015). Exit from the high street:
An exploratory study of sustainable fashion consumption pioneers.
International journal of consumer studies. Vol. 39:2, pp. 125–135.
Cho, E., Gupta, S. & Kim, Y-K. (2015). Style consumption: Its drivers and role 
in sustainable apparel consumption. International journal of consumer studies.
Vol. 39:6, pp. 661–669.
Cooper, T. (2010). Longer lasting products: alternatives to the throwaway society.
Oxford. Routledge.
Fletcher, K. (2012). Durability, fashion, sustainability: The processes and 
practices of use. Fashion practice. Vol. 4, pp. 221–238.
Fletcher, K. (2016). The craft of use: Post-growth fashion. New York. Routledge.
Fletcher, K. & Grose, L. (2012). Fashion and sustainability: Design for change.
London. Laurence King Publishing Ltd.
Fletcher, K. & Tham, (2004). Routledge handbook on sustainability and fashion.
New York. Routledge.
Gadel, M.S. (1985). Commentary: Style-oriented apparel consumers.
In: Solomon MR (ed.) The psychology of fashion. Massachusetts. D.C.
Heath and Company, pp. 155–157.
Gwozdz, W., Nielsen, K.S., Gupta, S. & Gentry, J. (2017). The relationship 
between fashion and style orientation and well-being. A Mistra future 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
61
fashion report. Available from: http://mistrafuturefashion.com/wp-content/
uploads/2017/11/D3.1.1.2-Style-versus-fashion-and-wellbeing.pdf.
Kaiser, S.B. (1997). The social psychology of clothing: Symbolic appearances in context
(2nd ed.). New York. Fairchild Publications.
Kaiser, S.B., Nagasawa R.H. & Hutton S.S. (1991). A symbolic interactionist 
formulation. Symbolic interaction. Vol. 14:2, pp. 165–185.
Kaiser, S.B., Nagasawa R.H. & Hutton, S.S. (1995). Construction of an SI 
theory of fashion: Part I. Ambivalence and change. Clothing and textiles 
research journal Vol. 13:3, pp. 172–183.
Kang, J. & Park-Poaps, H. (2010). Hedonic and utilitarian shopping motivations 
of fashion leadership. Journal of fashion marketing and management. Vol. 14:2, 
pp. 312–328.
Kim, H-S. & Hong, H. (2011). Fashion leadership and hedonic shopping 
motivations of female consumers. Clothing textiles research journal. Vol. 4:3, 
pp. 314–330.
Lapolla, K. & Sanders, E. B.-N. (2015). Using cocreation to engage everyday 
creativity in reusing and reparing apparel. Clothing and textile research journal.
Vol 3:3, pp. 183–198.
Lowe, E.D. & Anspach, K. (1973). Toward a definition of freedom in dress.
Home economics Research Journal. Vol. 1:4, pp. 246–150.
Lowe, E.D. & Anspach, K. (1978). Freedom in dress: A search for related factors.
Home economics research journal. Vol. 7:2, pp. 121–127.
Niinimäki, K. (2017). Fashion in a circular economy. In Henninger, C., 
Alevizou, P., Goworek, H. & Ryding, D. (eds.) Sustainability in fashion
– A cradle to upcycle approach. Cham, Switzerland. Palgrave Macmillan/
Springer, pp. 151–169.
Ritch, E.L. & Schröder, M.J. (2012). Accessing and affording sustainability:
The experience of fashion consumption within young families. International 
journal of consumer studies. Vol. 36, pp. 203–210.
Ruppert-Stroescu, M., LeHew, M.L.A., Armstrong, C.M. & Hiller Connell, 
K.Y. (2015). Creativity and sustainable fashion apparel consumption:
The fashion detox. Clothing and textiles research journal. Vol. 33:3, pp. 167–182.
Tian, K.T., Bearden, W.O. & Hunter, G.L. (2001). Consumers’ need for 
uniqueness: scale development and validation. The journal of consumer 
research. Vol. 28:1, pp. 50–66.
Watson, M.Z. & Yan, R-N. (2013). An exploratory study of the decision 
processes of fast versus slow fashion consumers. Journal of fashion marketing 
and management. Vol. 17:2, pp. 141–159.
2 | The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset... |
62
Claudia E. Henninger, Celina Jones, 
Rosy Boardman, Helen McCormick
Sustainable Fashion Consumption
Collaborative
Consumption and 03 the Fashion Industry
63
This chapter focuses on collaborative consumption, a 
‘newly’ emerging phenomenon within the UK fashion 
industry. Although not new per se the topic area 
remains under researched and lacks clear-cut definitions.
This chapter provides an introduction to collaborative 
consumption by exploring its origins, definitions, key 
characteristics, and terminologies used, before moving 
onto exploring collaborative consumption examples.
Future areas of research are highlighted to further examine 
a field of increased interested within the fashion industry.
Keywords: Collaborative consumption, UK fashion industry, swapping, 
emerging phenomenon, sharing
64
Emergence and definition
of collaborative consumption
The 21st century has seen dramatic changes in the fashion industry’s landscape; not only are consumers more conscious of the impact 
that their clothing has on the environment (e.g. Eckhardt et al. 2010; 
Hamari et al. 2016), but also media outlets globally report on a relatively 
new trend in the fashion industry: collaborative consumption (e.g. Purvis & 
Evrenos 2014; Hoh 2017). Although collaborative consumption is not new 
per se, it thus far lacks a clear-cut definition and can best be described 
as an intuitively understood, yet fuzzy concept (Markusen 1999; Codagnone & Martens 2016). This chapter explores the current debate in the 
literature on collaborative consumption by investigating its origins and providing an overview of key definitions, before moving on to discussing its terminologies and examining challenges associated with it, by 
further providing examples.
In its simplest form collaborative consumption can be described as a 
transactional exchange between parties, and thus is “as old as humankind” (Belk 2014, 1595). Sheth et al. (2011) emphasise that consumers 
participating in these exchanges seek to ‘trade up’; they aspire to gain 
products better than those they have traded in, as individuals associate their belongings with self-expression and self-worth (Belk 1988). As 
such, trading in their own clothes for ‘better’ ones may enable individuals to also move up the ‘social ladder’, as the items they have gained 
may be associated with a higher social class and/or the individual’s aspirational group. In its early stages these exchanges have predominantly 
happened in close-knit circles, among friends and family, which is often 
referred to as sharing-in (Ingold 1986; Belk 2010). Today, exchanges and 
sharing transactions are increasingly common among strangers and have 
been described as sharing-out activities (Ingold 1986; Belk 2010). The 
latter is accelerated with the emergences of new technologies and Web 
2.0, as it has facilitated the creation of sharing platforms that can be 
used and accessed on a global scale. The most prominent sharing platforms can be found within the tourism industry (e.g. CouchSurfing, 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
65
Airbnb, SpareRoom) or in the transportation industry (e.g. Uber, Didi, 
CarShare), yet the fashion landscape has also seen some success stories 
in recent years, such as Rent the Runway, Lena the Fashion Library, 
and Chic by Choice (Pike, 2016). However, before engaging further 
with what challenges and opportunities are arising from these collaborative consumption business models, it is vital to define the term.
Felson and Spaeth (1978, 614) define the term collaborative consumption as “those events in which one or more persons consume economic 
goods or services in the process of engaging in joint activities with one 
or more others”. Whilst instructive, this definition has been criticised 
for being too broad and too inclusive (e.g. Belk 2014; Codagnone & 
Martens 2016; Iran & Schrader 2017), as any social situation in which 
individuals come together and ‘share’ something, whether purposefully 
(e.g. arranged) or accidentally, could be described as consuming something collaboratively. As such, this type of consumption could be more 
accurately described as ‘coordinated’, whereby individuals happen to 
be at the same place at the same time and consuming as a collective, 
yet the actual act of consumption is based on a marketplace exchange.
Thus, Belk (2014) insists that Felson and Spaeth’s (1978) definition lacks 
a focus on acquisition and distribution of the actual resources. Botsman 
and Rogers (2010, xv) narrow down the meaning of the concept by 
providing a more focused definition, which sees collaborative consumption
to include “transactional sharing, bartering, lending, trading, renting, 
gifting, and swapping”. Yet, a question that arises here is whether gift 
giving, sharing, and actual market transactions can and should be combined, as each have their own characteristics (Belk 2014)? To reiterate 
this further, gifting to someone means an item changes ownership from 
one party to the next, yet this may not necessarily imply that multiple people collaboratively consume this gift. Further, the motivations 
underpinning gift giving can fundamentally be different to those of 
collaborative consumption (Hollenbeck et al. 2006; Belk 2014; Corciolani & Dalli 2014).
Belk (2014) indicates that the definition of collaborative consumption
needs to be inclusive, yet narrow at the same time. For him collaborative 
3 | Collaborative Consumption and... |
66
consumption is defined as “people coordinating the acquisition and distribution of a resource for a fee or other compensation” (ibid. 1597).
Although he recognises that acquisition and distribution of a resource 
takes place, through fee payment or other compensations, Belk (2014) 
broadens the definition to include transactions that entail a nonmonetary exchange, such as bartering, trading, and swapping. This 
chapter follows Belk’s (2014) definition when discussing examples of 
collaborative consumption within the UK fashion industry.
Characteristics and terminology
of collaborative consumption
The emergence of Web 2.0 and the creation of peer-to-peer platforms 
have enabled collaborative consumption to flourish, whereby individuals can make use of their idle capacities by simply exchanging them or 
renting them out, and thus, extending, in this case, the garment’s useful 
life and average time of wear (Kaplan & Haenlein 2010; Hamari et al.
2015). An example of this is Facebook Marketplace, which has boomed 
in popularity since its inception in 2016, whereby consumers can sell, 
giveaway or exchange any items, including clothes, shoes or accessories, 
to people in their local area. This has various implications for the industry in that consumers now no longer need to actually purchase garments and accessories, but can instead rent, swap, or exchange these in 
any other way (Bardhi & Eckhardt 2012; Benoit et al. 2017). It may thus 
not be surprising that collaborative consumption and its associated business 
models have previously been described as disruptive, as they are breaking the rules and norms of existing business practices. Although often 
said to be inferior to established business models, disruptive innovations 
provide alternative benefits that may attract consumers (Christensen & 
Raynor 2003; Markides 2006). For example, swap shops allow individuals to exchange their garments without having to make a monetary 
transaction, enabling consumers to change and revamp their wardrobe, 
whilst simultaneously discarding their unwanted items. Although the 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
67
economic aspect (Akbar et al. 2016; Park & Armstrong 2017) is seen as a 
draw for individuals into engaging with collaborative consumption, it is not 
always guaranteed that individuals will receive high quality items and/or 
have a consistent experience when embracing these disruptive business 
models (Richard & Cleveland 2016). Whilst the focus of this chapter is 
not on investigating the impact of disruptive innovations on the fashion 
industry – as this would exceed the scope of this chapter – it is vital 
to understand that these models can have both positive and negative 
impacts on the economy at large (Christensen & Raynor 2003; Park & 
Armstrong 2017). This, in turn, has implications for their popularity and 
the acceptance of some models over others, e.g. swapping versus renting.
THEME KEY TERMINOLOGY SOURCE IN WHICH 
TERMINOLOGY IS MENTIONED 
CONSUMPTION 
PRACTICES 
DESCRIBED
AS ‘SHARING’
• Collaborative consumption
• Commercial sharing systems
• Co-production
• Co-creation (linked to S-DL
 (service-dominant logic))
• Pro-sumption
• Product-service systems
• Access based consumption
• Non-ownership services
• Two-sided market
• Sharing economy or Shareconomy
• Collaborative consumption
Mont, 2002
Prahala & Ramaswamy, 2004
Vargo & Lusch, 2004
Rochet & Tirole, 2006
Humphreys & Grayson, 2008
Belk, 2010
Botsman & Rogers, 2010
Ritzer & Jurgenson, 2010
Bahrdi & Eckhardt, 2012
Lamberton & Rose, 2012
Wittkowski et al., 2013
Botsman, 2015
Hamari et al., 2015
VIEWPOINTS OF 
COLLABORATIVE 
CONSUMPTION
• Sharing
• Borrowing
• Reuse and remix culture
• Charity
• Secondhand market and sustainable
 consumption
• Anti-consumption
Hibbert & Horne, 1996
Lessig, 2008
Young et al., 2010
Ozanne & Ballantine, 2010
Belk, 2014
Jenkins et al, 2014
Table 1. Terminology – Collaborative Consumption
(adapted from Belk 2014; Hamari et al. 2015; Benoit et al. 2017).
3 | Collaborative Consumption and... |
68
Thus far we have only focused on collaborative consumption as an isolated concept, rather than linking it to the wider field of the sharing 
economy. Within the academic literature both the sharing economy 
and collaborative consumption, have received an increased interest across a 
multitude of different fields. It may be unsurprising that various terms 
have emerged that all describe similar consumption practices, all of 
which have ‘sharing’ as a common theme. An explanation could be that 
‘sharing’ practices, and collaborative consumption more specifically, lack a 
clear-cut definition, which implies that the lines are blurred as to what 
collaborative consumption actually is. Reviewing the literature further, 
collaborative consumption can be researched from a variety of different 
viewpoints, which further adds to the complexity of the topic. Table 1 
MODES OF 
EXCHANGE
TRADING
ACTIVITY
MONETARY 
TRANSACTION
MODE OF
ACCESS
FORMAT
ACCESS OF 
OWNERSHIP
Renting Yes Temporary Business- to 
Consumer or
Peer-to-peer
Lending No Temporary Peer-to-peer
Borrowing No Temporary (in 
some instances 
return not 
expected, e.g. 
piece of paper)
Peer-to-peer
TRANSFER OF 
OWNERSHIP
Donating No Unlimited Consumer-tobusiness
Purchasing
pre-loved 
garments
No Unlimited Business- to 
Consumer or
Peer-to-peer
REDISTRIBUTION Swapping No Unlimited Peer-to-peer
Table 2. Overview of collaborative consumption services
(adapted from Armstrong et al. 2015; Park & Armstrong 2017).
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
69
provides a brief summary of key terms used within the context of collaborative consumption. It has to be highlighted that Table 1 is not based 
on a systematic literature review, but rather was added to illustrate the 
complexity of the topic area and provide a basis of discussion.
Aside from the notion of ‘sharing’, Table 1 further highlights that sustainability features are dominant within the references associated with 
consumption practices and the viewpoints of collaborative consumption
(Piscicelli et al. 2015). Sustainability here is defined in accordance with 
Elkington’s (2004) Triple Bottom Line, which suggests a three-pillar 
structure focusing on social, environmental and economic aspects. To 
reiterate this further, key to both the sharing economy, of which collaborative consumption is a part of, is the reduction of waste and the delay in 
discarding products, in this case garments, for as long as possible.
Overall, it can be said that the sharing economy and collaborative consumption, share two key similarities: first, consumers are able to access 
goods (garments, accessories) without necessarily acquiring ownership, 
and second, they have thrived through Web 2.0 and the emergence of 
peer-to-peer platforms (Belk 2014).
Examples of collaborative
consumption – swapping
in the UK
Although collaborative consumption has accelerated since Web 2.0, different business models exist that facilitate both online and offline ‘trading 
activities’, which allows for an inclusive approach. Hamari et al. (2015) 
started to map 254 consumption services in their study dividing them 
into two modes of exchange and multiple trading activities that can 
have a monetary transaction attached to them or not. Table 2 is an adaptation of their overview, with the addition of redistribution of ownership discussed by authors, such as Armstrong et al. (2015) and Park and 
Armstrong (2017).
3 | Collaborative Consumption and... |
70
It is argued that although ownership of garments change hands 
during swap shops, they can also be returned at any point in time and 
swapped for yet another garment or swapped back by the original 
owner. Thus, ownership is redistributed for an unlimited time rather 
than fully transferred. As such, this mode is rather unique and provides 
interesting avenues for further studies.
A key question that may emerge at this stage is why explore collaborative consumption, and specifically swapping behaviour, in the UK? What 
makes this topic interesting and significant? From an economic perspective the sharing economy, which includes swapping and renting, facilitates €28bn worth of transactions within Europe alone (ONS 2017).
This clearly highlights that this industry sector is of growing importance. The Office for National Statistics (cited in Daneshku & Vandevelde 2016) further indicates that whilst retail shopping has seen an 
increase of 4% overall, spending on footwear and clothes has decreased 
by 4%. This further suggests that consumers may look for alternatives to 
purchasing new fashion items in traditional high street shops or online 
and engage more with the collaborative consumption phenomenon, which 
would link to and further support the fact that they are disruptive innovations (Markides 2006).
In the UK market, swap shops are increasingly popular with websites such as ‘Love your Clothes’ or ‘Swishing’ providing information on 
how consumers can set up their own swaps, as well as informing them 
about events happening in their local area. Clothes swapping implies 
that people meet either online or in person and exchange garments, 
without making any monetary transactions (Perlacia et al. 2016; Battle 
et al. 2018). Yet, the latter aspect might be slightly misleading, as participants do not have to pay for the items swapped, as they are simply 
trading in their own clothes and gain new garments, however the actual 
event may have a small fee attached, which allows organisers to cover 
their overheads. Although consumers seem to be wary of swapping 
events, as they are relatively informal and unstructured (Armstrong et al.
2013) they have been increasingly popular, especially amongst millennials and during Fashion Revolution Week, which marks the anniversary 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
71
of the Rana Plaza Factory accident that saw thousands of people lose 
their lives (Tuttle 2012; Parveen 2014). Indeed, it is events such as the 
Rana Plaza factory collapse in 2013 that have really brought the negative side of the fashion industry to light, thrusting issues such as poor 
working conditions, low wages and other ethical issues such as slave/
child labour, alongside the negative environmental impact, into the 
media spotlight around the world. The increased awareness of such 
issues have created a more conscious consumer, particularly amongst 
the millennial generation, whereby the move for change in consumption practices is gaining momentum.
Although swap shops are becoming increasingly popular, this is not 
yet been reflected in mainstream research. We would, thus, like to take 
the opportunity to raise a couple of key questions and discussion points 
that may encourage future explorations in this area. When observing 
swapping events we found that people have different ‘strategies’ in 
terms of when they arrive at the event, how they search for clothes and 
how long they stay for. A question that emerges here is whether there 
are consumer typologies emerging and whether these are also reflected 
in their every day behaviour. This aspect is of importance as it would 
also shed light on sustainable behaviour and green consumption, with 
Young et al. (2010) pointing out that there are a variety of shades of 
green consumers, yet their study excluded fashion products. A further 
enquiry could investigate the underpinning motivations of participating (or not) in swapping events. Although authors (Armstrong et al.
2015; Park & Armstrong 2017) have started to problematize the sharing 
economy and collaborative consumption, research thus far lacks an exploration into the underpinning drivers and barriers. This issue is important as sustainability, and more specifically sustainable consumption, has 
become a top global priority for the UN (2018).
3 | Collaborative Consumption and... |
72
Conclusion
This chapter provided an overview of collaborative consumption by offering an insight into current debates on its definitions and the variety 
of terminology used to discuss this emerging phenomenon. Although 
collaborative consumption is not as mainstream in the fashion industry as 
it is in the tourism and transportation industry, it has seen some success 
stories that are continuously growing, indicating that it has potential.
Further research is needed into this area in light of the recent rise in 
media coverage associated with these disruptive innovations ranging 
from safety issues (e.g. in Airbnb accommodation), assaults (e.g. towards 
and from Uber drivers ), as well as recent bans of some of these platforms in countries such as Denmark. There is a question of whether 
any of these issues will affect the fashion industry, seeing as many of the 
issues raised relate to the close proximity of the user and those providing the good and/or service, yet this is slightly different for the fashion 
industry, therefore requiring future research.
References
Akbar, P., Mai, R., & Hoffman, S. (2016). When do materialistic consumers join 
commercial sharing systems. Journal of business research. Vol. 69, pp. 4215–4224.
Armstrong, C.M., Niinimäki, K., Kujala, S., Karell, E., & Lang, C. (2015).
Sustainable product-service systems for clothing: exploring perceptions of 
consumption alternatives in Finland. Journal of cleaner production. Vol. 97,
pp. 30–39.
Bardhi, F., & Eckhardt, G.M. (2012). Access-based consumption: The case of car 
sharing. Journal of consumer research. Vol. 39:4, pp. 881– 898.
Battle, A., Ryding, D., & Henninger, C.E. (2018). Access-based consumption_ 
a new business model for luxury and secondhand fashion business? In: 
Ryding, D., Henninger, C.E., & Blazquez Cano, M. (eds.). Vintage luxury 
fashion. Cham, Switzerland. Palgrave, pp. 29–44.
Belk, R. (1988). Possessions and the extended self. Journal of consumer research.
Vol. 15, pp. 139–168.
Belk, R. (2010). Sharing. Journal of consumer research. Vol. 36, pp. 715–734. 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
73
Belk, R. (2014). You are what you can access: Sharing and collaborative 
consumption online. Journal of business research. Vol. 67:8, pp. 1595–1600. 
Benoit, S., Baker, T.L., Bolton, R.N., Gruber, T., & Kandampully, J. (2017).
A triadic framework for collaborative consumption (CC). Journal of
business research. Vol. 79, pp. 219–227.
Botsman, R. (2015). Defining the sharing economy: What is collaborative 
consumption—and what isn’t. Fast Company (online), retrieved: https://
www.fastcoexist.com/3046119/defining-the-sharing-economy-what-iscollaborative-consumption-and-what-isnt [Accessed 22.4.2018]. 
Botsman, R., & Rogers, R. (2010). What’s mine is yours: The rise of collaborative 
consumption. New York, USA. Harper Collins.
Christensen, C.M. & Raynor, M.E. (2003). The innovator’s solution: Creating
and sustaining successful growth. Boston, MA. Harvard Business School Press.
Codagnone, C., & Martens, M. (2016). Scoping the sharing economy: origins, 
definitions, impact and regulatory issues. Europa (online), retrieved: https://
ec.europa.eu/jrc/sites/jrcsh/files/JRC100369.pdf [Accessed 22.4.2018].
Corciolani, M. & Dalli, D. (2014). Gift-giving, sharing and commodity 
exchange at Bookcrossing.com. Management decision. Vol. 52:4, pp. 755–776.
Daneshku, S., & Vandevelde, M. (2016). Clothes buying goes out of fashion 
in the UK, Financial Times (online), retrieved: https://www.ft.com/
content/5c274b28-7f3d-11e6-8e50-8ec15fb462f4 [Accessed 22.4.2018].
Eckhardt, G.M., Belk, R., & Devinney, T.M. (2010). Why don’t consumers 
consume ethically? Journal of consumer behaviour. Vol. 9:6, pp. 426–436.
Elkington, J. (2004) Enter the triple bottom line. In: Henriques, A. and 
Richardson, J. (eds.). The triple bottom line, does it all add up? London.
Earthscan, pp. 1–16.
Felson, M. & Spaeth, J.L. (1978). Community structure and collaborative 
consumption. American behavioural scientist. Vol. 21:4, pp. 614–624.
Hamari, J., Sjöklint, M., & Ukkonen, A. (2016). The sharing economy: Why 
people participate in collaborative consumption. Journal of the association
for information science & technology. Vol. 67:9, pp. 2047–2059.
Hibbert, S., & Horne, S. (1996). Giving to charity: Questioning the donor 
decision process. Journal of consumer marketing. Vol. 13:2, pp. 4–13.
Hoh, A. (2017). Rise of clothes swapping helps make a small dent in the war on 
fashion waste, ABC News (online), retrieved: http://www.abc.net.au/
news/2017-05-19/clothes-swap-making-small-dent-in-war-on-fashionwaste/8537090 [Accessed 21.4.2018].
Hollenbeck, C.R., Peters, C., & Zinkhan, G.M. (2006). Gift giving: a 
community paradigm. Psychology and marketing. Vol. 23:7, pp. 573–595.
3 | Collaborative Consumption and... |
74
Humphreys, A., & Grayson, K. (2008). The intersecting roles of consumer 
and producer: A critical perspective on co-production, co-creation and 
prosumption. Sociological compass. Vol. 2, pp. 963–980.
Ingold, T. (1986). The appropriation of nature: Essays on human ecology and social 
relations. Manchester. Manchester University Press.
Iran, S., & Schrader, U. (2017). Collaborative fashion consumption and its 
environmental effects. Journal of fashion marketing & management. Vol. 21:4, 
pp. 468–482.
Jenkins, R., Molesworth, M., & Scullion, R. (2014). The messy social lives of 
objects: Inter-personal borrowing and the ambiguity of possession and 
ownership. Journal of consumer behaviour. Vol. 13:2, pp. 131–139.
Kaplan, A.M., & Haenlein, M. (2010). Users of the world, unite! The challenges 
and opportunities of social media. Business horizons. Vol. 53:1, pp. 59–68.
Lamberton, C., & Rose, R. (2012). When is ours better than mine?
A framework for understanding and altering participation in commercial 
sharing systems. Journal of marketing. Vol. 76, pp. 109–125. 
Lessig, L. (2008). Remix: Making art and commerce thrive in the hybrid economy.
New York, USA. Penguin Press.
Markides, C. (2006). Disruptive innovation: in need of better theory. Journal of 
product innovation management. Vol. 23, pp. 19–25.
Markusen, A. (1999). Fuzzy concepts, scanty evidence, policy distance: The case 
for rigour and policy relevance in critical regional Studies. Regional studies.
Vol. 33:9, pp. 869–884.
Mont, O. (2002). Clarifying the concept of product-service system. Journal of 
cleaner production, Vol. 10, pp. 237–245. 
ONS (Office for National Statistics) (2017). The feasibility of measuring the 
sharing economy: November 2017 progress update. ONS (online), retrieved: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/
output/articles/thefeasibilityofmeasuringthesharingeconomy/
november2017progressupdate [Accessed 27.5.2018].
Ozanne, L.K., & Ballantine, P.W. (2010). Sharing as a form of anticonsumption? An examination of toy library users. Journal of consumer 
behaviour. Vol. 9:6, pp. 485–498.
Park, H., & Armstrong, C.M.J. (2017). Collaborative apparel consumption in 
the digital sharing economy: an agenda for academic inquiry. International 
journal of consumer Studies. Vol. 41, pp. 465–474.
Parveen, S. (2014). Rana Plaza factory collapse survivors struggle one year on, BBC 
(online), retrieved: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-27107860 
[Accessed 15.4.2018].
Perlacia, A., Duml, V. & Saebi, T. (2016). Collaborative consumption: Live fashion, 
| Sustainable Fashion Consumption
75
don’t own it. SSRN (online), retrieved: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2860021 
[Accessed 27.6.2017].
Pike, H. (2016). Will the ‘sharing economy’ work for fashion? Business of fashion 
(online), retrieved: https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/fashiontech/will-the-sharing-economy-work-for-fashion-rent-the-runway-rental 
[Accessed 23.4.2018].
Piscicelli, L., Cooper, T., & Fisher, T. (2014). The role of values in collaborative 
consumption: insights from a product-service system for lending and 
borrowing in the UK. Journal of cleaner production. Vol. 97, pp. 21–29.
Prahalad, C. K., & Ramaswamy, V. (2004). Co-creation experiences the net 
practice in value creation. Journal of interactive marketing. Vol. 18, pp. 5–14.
Purvis, K., & Evrenos, M. (2014). How to set up a clothes swap in your area.
The guardian (online), retrieved: https://www.theguardian.com/
lifeandstyle/2014/sep/15/how-to-set-up-clothes-swap-in-your-area 
[Accessed 21.4.2018].
Richard, B. & Cleveland, S. (2016). The future of hotel chains: branded marketplaces driven by the sharing economy. Journal of vacation marketing. Vol. 22:3, 
pp. 239–248.
Ritzer, G., & Jurgenson, N. (2010). Production, consumption, prosumption:
The nature of capitalism in the age of the digital ‘prosumer’. Journal of 
consumer culture. Vol. 10, pp. 13–36.
Rochet, J.-C., & Tirole, J. (2006). Two-sided markets: A progress report. Journal 
of economics. Vol. 37:3, pp. 645–667. 
Sheth, J. N., Sethia, N., & Srinivas, S. (2011). Mindful consumption: A customercentric approach to sustainability. Journal of the academy of marketing science.
Vol. 39:1, pp. 21–39.
Tuttle, B. (2012). I’ll trade you my skinny jeans for your skinny jeans. Time (online), 
retrieved: http://business.time.com/2012/05/07/ill-trade-you-my-skinnyjeans-for-your-skinny-jeans/ [Accessed 23.4.2018].
UN (United Nations) (2018). Goal 12: Ensuing sustainable consumption 
and production patterns. UN (online), retrieved: https://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-consumption-production/ [Accessed 
23.4.2018].
Vargo, S.L., & Lusch, R.F. (2004a). Evolving to a new dominant logic for 
marketing. Journal of marketing. Vol. 68, pp. 1–17. 
Wittkowski, K., Moeller, S., & Wirtz, J. (2013). Firms’ intentions to use non 
ownership services. Journal of service research. Vol. 16:2, pp. 171–185.
Young, W., Hwang, K., McDonald, S., & Oates, C.J. (2010). Sustainable 
consumption: Green consumer behaviour when purchasing products.
Sustainable development. Vol. 18:1, pp. 20–31.
3 | Collaborative Consumption and... |
76
Ruud Balkenende, Conny Bakker
Design Strategies
Designing for a Circular 
Economy: Make, Use 04 and Recover Products
77
Design for a circular economy emphasises the importance 
of recovery of products and materials, if possible, through 
maintaining the performance and value of a product over 
multiple use cycles. Preferred recovery operations are reuse, 
repair, refurbishment, remanufacturing and parts harvesting, 
as these processes maintain or restore the functionality of 
products and parts. Furthermore, enabling the recycling of 
materials is an essential step, although also a last resort. In 
design this brings about the need for strategic thinking and 
a long-time horizon with increasing attention to business 
models.
Keywords: Product design, recovery, circular economy
78 | Design Strategies
Introduction
Instead of “less is more,” we can now say: “endless is more.”
(William McDonough, https://www.greenbiz.com/article/ 
davos-meets-circular-economy)
Through the design of products, materials are shaped and combined 
with other materials, often in a complex way, leading to highly integrated products. The energy and effort put into the sequence of manufacturing processes determines the functionality, quality and value of 
a product. Surprisingly, at the end-of-life of a product we take it for 
granted that its functionality, all the energy put into manufacturing as 
well as its value will be lost. Most products are simply wasted, i.e. landfilled or incinerated. This leads to a large environmental burden and 
significant economic loss. To avoid this, the recovery of products and 
their constituent materials should be explicitly addressed in the design 
of products. Although recycling is receiving increasing attention, implying that at least part of the materials and a fraction of the value are 
recovered, this hardly reduces the losses. To maintain environmental 
quality and economic value, dealing with products in a different way is 
a necessity. Repairing a product that is broken or upgrading a product 
that is still functional. This asks for a change in the way in which products are designed, made, sold, used and treated at the end of a life cycle.
This is essentially what circular product design is about. In this chapter 
we will outline how the principles of circular economy can be implemented in the design of products and services.
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... | 79
Designing for
a circular economy
Starting with the broader context, the major driver of the transition to 
a circular economy is the need for a more sustainable world. We face a 
number of urgent global problems that are summarised in the United 
Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Design offers great opportunities to improve the environmental performance of products. This 
has been the focus of design for sustainability over the past 25 years.
Design for sustainability integrates environmental aspects in the design 
of products and services and aims to reduce negative environmental 
impacts while maintaining the performance of a product. In practice 
the focus has been largely on optimising the material usage and energy 
consumption of products, and on increasing the amount of recycled 
materials. This has led to considerable improvements in the design 
of products, in part also stimulated by regulations that have enforced 
companies to follow an eco-design approach. However, results are 
only implemented at an incremental pace, and as our challenges have 
increased new technologies have emerged. Instead of trying to solve 
environmental issues we should step up to preventing them. It is time 
for a next step in design for sustainability, and it is time to increase 
the impact of what designers do. This is where design for a circular 
economy comes in. Instead of saving just materials, we can save functionality and value. To achieve this, the loop must be closed at the level 
of the user, the level of the service provider or the level of the manufacturer. This will only work when not only environmental impacts, 
but also business and user aspects are taken into account. This means a 
more complex approach, which is strongly promoted in design for the 
circular economy.
Circular economy is not yet a well-defined scientific concept. A 
recent paper (Kirchherr 2017) made an inventory and found 95 different definitions. Therefore, it is necessary to clearly describe what we 
consider the core values of a circular economy. We will not do this by 
adding another definition but by noting the aspects that we consider 
80
essential. First the ultimate aim of CE: this is sustainable development, 
implying environmental quality, social equity and economic attractiveness. The positive economic approach, in particular, makes CE stand 
out. Increasing product lifetime by making products more durable and 
by enabling recovery of product functionality, not only minimises environmental impact, but also has the potential to maximise economic 
benefit. This perspective helps companies to see the opportunity to 
really combine sustainability with a business approach that is versatile.
All this requires taking a systemic approach, a second essential 
aspect of CE. It has been inspired by influential holistic strategies, 
like Biomimicry (Benyus 1997) and Cradle-to-Cradle (McDonough & 
Braungart 2002). These aim for closing resource loops by optimizing 
systems instead of improving the components within a system, and 
have inspired many companies and designers to explore new solution 
spaces. The high level of abstraction of these strategies, however, makes 
Figure 1. Aspects that we consider essential to the concept of Circular Economy.
| Design Strategies
WHY
Environment
Society
Economy
FOCUS
System
Recovery
Scalable
HOW
Technology
Business
User
people
design
technology business
81
it difficult to directly implement them. Although inspiring, they also 
tend to be dogmatic, making practical application difficult for many 
companies. In contrast, circular economy provides a more pragmatic 
approach, recognizing that closing loops from a business perspective 
requires addressing not only material related issues, but also business 
models, logistics and financing, and actively encouraging companies to 
explore new directions that explicitly include recovery.
Recovery is a third essential aspect of CE. The emphasis on creating 
opportunities for reusing or remaking a product by recovery operations 
like reuse, repair, refurbishment, remanufacturing and parts harvesting 
is a distinguishing aspect of a circular economy compared to the traditional linear economy. For these aspects to work, we need knowledge 
that enables practical implementation, for instance regarding sustainable business models, or regarding technological developments in manufacturing, data acquisition and data management. The final core aspect, 
often undervalued, is the way people deal with products and services, 
their behaviour and their acceptance of new offerings.
The implications of the transition to a circular economy for product 
and service design are considerable. Although product design already 
integrates knowledge of people, business and technology, our current 
way of designing misses out on the recovery of products and materials.
Therefore, two basic questions that should be addressed from a circular 
product design perspective are:
• How can we change the design process of products and services to 
make recovery an integral part of design?
• And how can we implement this in the actual design process as it 
takes place within companies?
Because only then will circular product design be able to reach scale 
and have a real impact on society. In this chapter we will focus on 
recovery (the first question) as an integral part of the design process.
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
82
Recovery as an intrinsic
part of design
The classic product innovation process models that have been developed over the past 40 years (see example in Figure 2) describe how 
product development moves in a relatively straight line from a strategic stage, where the need for a new product is determined, to the 
more operational stages concerning detailed design, production, marketing, distribution and eventually, product use. None of these models, 
however, considers how a product can be recovered at the end of its 
functional life.
Adding the recovery step to the strategic models of the product 
innovation process is a crucial addition (see Figure 3). The recovery stage describes what happens to a product after ‘use.’ It includes 
reuse, refurbishment, remanufacturing and recycling. Designers use 
models like these to plan and organize the design process, and to discuss 
and communicate the various steps with each other and with clients.
They also use the models as checklists when drawing up a program of 
requirements. In other words, these product innovation process models 
are part of designers’ mental models of the design process – they form 
a kind of shared language. And when a step such as recovery is missing 
from these mental models, it will not be addressed during design, at 
least not structurally, risking the situation that topics such as sustainability and circularity will not exert strategic influence on product policy 
and product planning beyond legal compliance.
Just as technology links user and business from the perspective of 
manufacturing and functionality, so does recovery link user and business from the perspective of a complete and closed life cycle. In circular 
product design it is essential that such a life cycle perspective is already 
present at the initial conceptual level of product design. Adding recovery thus implies that all actions that might be needed after the use of 
a product should always be taken into account. By making circularity 
an explicit but integrated part of the design concept, opportunities to 
start a new cycle instead of wasting the product will become part of the 
| Design Strategies
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
Figure 2. The original Product Innovation Process model by Roozenburg and 
Eekels (1991). The product recovery step, after ‘use,’ is missing.
Figure 3. The adapted Product Innovation Process model, with the recovery 
step added (by Bakker).
Formulating
goals and
strategies
Product
policy
Generating
and
selecting
ideas
New
business
ideas
Production
development
Product
designing
Marketing
planning
Production
plan
Product
design
Marketing
plan
Production Distribution
and sale Use Recovery
Policy
formulation Ideas nding
Product planning
Product development
Strict development
Innovation
Realization
Formulating
goals and
strategies
Product
policy
Generating
and
selecting
ideas
New
business
ideas
Production
development
Product
designing
Marketing
planning
Production
plan
Product
design
Marketing
plan
Production Distribution
and sale Use
Policy
formulation Ideas nding
Product planning
Product development
Strict development
Innovation
Realization
83
84
earliest stages of product design. To achieve this, a variety of opportunities exist to reuse the product, either directly, through repair, refurbishment, remanufacturing or parts harvesting, or indirectly through 
materials recycling.
In the following we will explore opportunities for design and illustrate these with examples. The examples are taken from a diversity of 
cases, the underlying way of thinking about effects at the system level 
and the integration of business, technology and human aspects, however, 
can be transferred to many other types of products and services.
Material recovery: Recycling
Recycling is the outer loop of circular economy. Materials are recovered, but product functionality is lost (Figure 4). It can be considered 
a last resort, but recyclability is also a prerequisite for any product 
once extension of its useful life is no longer possible. The first step 
in the recycling process for most products is shredding. This is a very 
forceful treatment of a product, consisting, for example, of hammering or cutting, with limited control over the final result. The purpose 
of this process is to yield fragments that are sufficiently homogeneous 
to be suited for subsequent sorting and further processing, in which 
the actual material recovery takes place. Almost all consumer goods, 
whether a phone, a hairdryer, a pair of jeans, or a fridge, end in this way.
So, designing for recycling essentially means designing for shredding.
Let’s take as an example a simple lamp, an LED spotlight (see Figure 
5, top left), which basically consists of an LED board (that contains the 
LED lights), a heat spreader, an electronic driver for the LEDs and connector pins. This lamp type has been extensively investigated in the 
European GreenElec innovation project, which ran from 2011 to 2015, 
and aimed to improve the recyclability of small electronic products 
(Balkenende 2014). The fragments that result after shredding the LED 
lamp are not homogeneous but contain many different materials that are 
stuck together and cannot be recycled simultaneously. The electronics 
| Design Strategies
85
for instance largely remain fixed to the aluminium heat spreader due 
to the screw connections between them. This is problematic, because 
aluminium and printed circuit boards need to be separated in order to 
be successfully recycled. With this specific product, about 40% of the 
weight, mainly aluminium, is recovered in the end. However, most of 
the more valuable materials present in the electronics (such as copper, 
silver and gold) are lost.
The lesson learned is that it is not sufficient to have products with 
only recyclable materials; in the recycling process these materials should 
also become disconnected, because otherwise they cannot be recovered.
A number of LED lamps were redesigned taking these two simple rules 
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
Figure 4. The product life cycle for products in a linear 
economy. Although recycling takes place to some extent, 
from a design perspective the result is often coincidental.
MAKE
Materials
Recycle
Transport
USE
Collect
Waste
Design for Recycling
86
into account: the lamps consist of recyclable materials and they have 
connections that break easily in the recycling process. This resulted in a 
variety of design solutions. In the existing LED lamp, the focus was on 
breaking down the screw connection during the shredding process. This 
was achieved by adding fracture lines along the screw holes. The fracture lines guide fragmentation during the shredding process (without 
hampering reliability during normal operation). A shredder test resulted 
in considerable improvement of the homogeneity of fragments and 
| Design Strategies
Figure 5. A LED spot light (top left) and three redesigns employing 
different materials and connections to improve the recycling result. The 
images at the bottom show typical fragments resulting from a shredding 
test. Recovered fractions are given in weight-%.
Original Fracture lines Stacked aluminium Stacked glass
40%
Recovered
70%
Recovered
90%
Recovered
80%
Recovered
87
therefore much better separation of different materials, with 70% of the 
materials recovered (see Figure 5).
In the subsequent redesigns of the lamp, the requirements regarding 
recycling were already considered at the start of the design process. The 
internal connection was completely eliminated, and different material 
choices were made. The redesigns have been described in more detailed 
elsewhere (Aerts 2014), but here we summarise the main results. In the 
redesigns, no fixed internal connections were used, and the housing 
material was made more uniform to eliminate the non-recyclable 
plastic originally used. Small-scale shredding tests showed very convincing results with recovery of 80 to 90% of the materials. In both cases 
most of the LED boards were released and could be separated. Furthermore, the cost of the newly designed lamps were the same or lower 
than that of the original. This implies that such redesigns are attractive 
from the perspective of the manufacturer and contribute to improved 
revenues once it comes to recycling. By setting the problem in the 
right way and dealing with it in the early design stage, a new solution 
space was opened up.
In design for recycling, special attention should be given to the 
use of highly tailored ‘materials’ that are crucial to many applications.
What we call a material is actually often a complex combination of a 
number of materials. Composite materials, which have unique properties that can be tailored to a large extent to make them very suited 
for specific applications, are a prominent example. This ranges from 
the complex layered structures used, for example, in airplanes and 
wind turbine blades to the elastomer coating on textile fibers. Electronics, where up to 50 different elements are highly integrated in 
small volumes, form another example. Additional complications arise 
when embedding electronics in all kinds of products, for instance by 
adding sensors and connecting them to the Internet. Luminous textiles 
in which electronic wiring and LEDs are interwoven with the fabric, 
and the incorporation of electronics in objects made by 3D printing, 
are other examples where the degree of integration will hamper the 
proper end-of-life treatment of a product. We encounter these materials 
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
88
in textiles, furniture, electronic equipment, but also in cars, airplanes, 
wind turbines, and even in bridges. In most applications these materials 
are essential for performance and therefore difficult to replace. Due to 
their tailored properties, reuse is very difficult and unfortunately, due to 
the mixing of materials, recycling is almost impossible. Here new design 
strategies need to be developed that already consider next use cycle of 
the materials when designing products which employ them.
Through design for recycling we can ensure that the materials in a 
product are recovered as best as possible. Applying recovered (‘recycled’) 
materials in new products is also an important part of design for recycling. An inspiring example in the field of textiles is the use of 100% 
recycled yarn by Interface, a global manufacturer of carpets, in their 
Net Effect tiles (Pauw 2015). The nylon of these tiles is sourced by collecting discarded fishing nets from oceans and beaches. In addition to 
the use of recycled nylon, a random pattern is applied in a smart way, 
hiding quality variations in the nylon. Further, Interface started applying polyvinylbutyral, obtained from recycled car windows, to replace 
the latex in the precoat that takes care of adhering the yarn to the tile 
backing. This decreases the environmental load of the precoat by 80%.
Product and part recovery: repair, 
refurbishment, remanufacturing
and parts harvesting
To maintain or recover functionality at the end of the life cycle of a 
product, i.e. to enable a subsequent life cycle, products can be reused, 
repaired, refurbished or remanufactured. If complete products cannot 
be recovered, it might be worthwhile to harvest some of their parts and 
refurbish or remanufacture them (Figure 6). Repair, refurbishment and 
remanufacture are differentiated according to the quality of the recovered product relative to the original. In the case of remanufacturing, 
the product gets an extensive overhaul and is brought back at least to 
| Design Strategies
89
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) specification (Hollander 
2017). In the case of repair and refurbishing, the process is less comprehensive and the condition of the repaired or refurbished product may 
be inferior to the original specification (Gray 2007). The handling and 
treatment of a product at the end of a life cycle is to a large extent 
similar, although repair is usually a limited operation (e.g. fixing a flat 
tyre or replacing a broken zipper) whereas refurbishment and remanufacturing require more elaborate processes, involving operations like 
disassembly, cleaning, inspection, diagnosis, testing, upgrading, aesthetic 
touch-ups and reassembly. Design should therefore optimally allow for 
such operations.
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
Figure 6. The product life cycle for products in a circular 
economy. The emphasis is on keeping products and materials 
in use through recovery operations.
MAKE
Materials
Recycle
Transport
USE
Collect
Waste
Design for Recycling
Design for Parts harvesting
 Remanufacturing
Refurbishment
 Repair
 Reuse
Remake
Reuse
SAVE
90
Repair
Design for repair tends to focus on self-repair by product owners.
Typical design for repair criteria are the use of standard, universally 
applicable components and the use of standard interfaces to enable the 
quick replacement of broken parts with a minimum number of tools.
Other criteria include the provision of (free) repair instructions and 
the design of ‘use cues’ in the product that guide repair. Also, it is considered important that the most fragile parts (liable to break or wear 
down) are easy to access and handle. However, this design for repair 
approach strongly focuses on self-repair and neglects serviced repairs.
The comparison between smartphones from Fairphone and Apple is 
interesting in this respect. The Fairphone II (a smartphone designed by 
a company in the Netherlands) is built in a modular way, with a relatively low level of integration. Easy accessibility and facile replacement 
of all modules is enabled. This allows easy repair and even upgrading 
of parts by the user. Apple’s iPhone X on the other hand has an integrated design: the interior of the smartphone is almost inaccessible 
unless special actions with specific equipment are carried out. Even if 
the interior of the phone is accessed, the way in which modules are 
connected make this product very difficult to repair by ordinary users.
However, repair is still straightforward for an expert repair service, the 
advantage for the company being that the quality of repairs can be 
guaranteed. Also, the reliability and durability of the product is related 
to the quality of its construction. From a sustainability point of view 
this points to an interesting trade-off between durability and reliability 
as such, and ease of repair.
From a circular economy perspective both approaches can be seen as 
different routes towards a longer than average product lifetime. Which 
approach is preferable from a sustainability point of view? Interestingly, 
both approaches can be justified. It will depend on the business model 
as well as on the behaviour of the user. Fairphone has chosen to operate 
in an open system, where the input and active participation of others is 
crucial. Fairphone has used design explicitly to enable its users to take 
actions that are necessary to recover the product. This also means that its 
| Design Strategies
91
customers need to act accordingly. This is a model that will work well 
with sufficiently motivated users. Apple on the other hand targets users 
who desire a high-end phone which is built for performance. Apple has 
opted to operate in a fairly closed and controlled system. The user is 
dependent on Apple or qualified repair shops to restore the product if it 
fails. Such a controlled closed system can be a perfectly valid approach, 
also from a sustainability perspective, but the model only works when 
the manufacturer takes full responsibility for recovery of the product 
and enables the user easy and affordable access to repair. To summarize, 
two different design approaches to repair which can both be successful 
when it comes to product lifetime extension. But to be successful, they 
both need to explicitly take into account the opportunities for recovery 
at the end-of-life of the product, not only from a technological perspective, but also involving business model and user involvement.
Refurbishment, remanufacturing
and part harvesting
Refurbishment, remanufacturing and parts harvesting close the product 
loop at the level of the manufacturer. The success of these recovery 
strategies depends on the long-term vision of and the responsibility 
taken by manufacturers. By their nature these operations require foresight and planning regarding business perspective and developments 
in product design. Offering products in multiple use cycles will only 
succeed if these recovery strategies are an integrated part of the business 
model and product design.
Refurbishment and remanufacturing imply that used products are 
collected, involving reverse logistics, and subsequent disassembly. The 
resulting parts and modules are then cleaned, inspected, and if necessary repaired, revised, and sometimes adapted, replaced or upgraded.
This is followed by the re-assembly and testing of the system. Product 
design should facilitate the refurbishment and remanufacturing process, 
including component durability, ease of disassembly and reassembly 
operations, accessibility, and cleaning, but also reverse logistics and 
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
92
marketing (Shu 1999; Nasr 2006). Most of these concepts are familiar in common product design but are now applied with a different 
aim. As an example, modularization and platform design are commonly intended to improve production efficiency and lower costs, for 
example enabling an extended product family while building upon 
a limited set of modules. Although future generations might use the 
same set of modules, planning is usually limited to a 3 to 5-year timeframe. In remanufacturing the focus will change to efficient disassembly and process organization, where a time horizon of at least 10–15 
years should be considered.
Neopost, for example, designs and manufactures a variety of products to facilitate mail management, such as franking machines. In 2012, 
the company undertook an ambitious remanufacturing strategy. Instead 
of selling their franking machines they now offer them as a service 
through lease contracts. The products are designed with a time horizon 
of 10 years, in order to facilitate two commercial life cycles of five 
years. Neopost needed to think about the upgradeability of the electronic motherboard in the current range. The functional requirement is 
32MB whereas the next generation is likely to be 64MB, so to provide 
the possibility to rework the Printed Circuit Board Assembly (PCBA) 
the design team opted for a 64MB at the outset. This shows how the 
designers had to think ahead and plan for the multiple use cycles of the 
franking machine (ERN 2018).
While remanufacturing is typically controlled by OEMs or 
OEM-licensed third parties, refurbishment is more often done by unlicensed third parties, the so-called Gap Exploiters: entrepreneurs who 
exploit leftover lifetime value in products (Hollander 2016). Refurbishment of smartphones, for instance, is a rapidly growing market. In 
2017, the global market for refurbished smartphones grew 13%, whereas 
the market for new smartphones only grew by 3% (Kang, 2018). The 
refurbished phone market is now 10% of the total global smartphone 
market, with refurbished phones available in many different grades and 
qualities and advertised with poetic qualifiers such as ‘reborn,’ ‘preloved,’ or ‘certified pre-owned.’ This is a marker of the success of the 
| Design Strategies
93
circular economy but it also requires vigilance, because consumers 
are increasingly confused with the different quality indicators leaving 
open a risk of back-lash if poorly refurbished devices flood the market.
The example shows again that OEMs (and designers) need to plan for 
the future use-cycles of their products, in particular those with a high 
resale value, such as smartphones. They need to recognize the possibility that their devices may be repaired and refurbished by unlicensed 
third parties or consumers and plan their design and business model 
accordingly.
Parts harvesting is the retrieval of components, modules or parts 
from obsolete products with the purpose of using them as spares, parts 
for servicing, maintenance and repair. From the perspective of the 
parts supplier, the harvesting and revision of parts can be considered as 
equivalent to remanufacturing. This is quite common in the automotive 
industry, for ICT equipment and professional machinery (ranging from 
heavy duty machinery to medical equipment). Parts harvesting is often 
closely connected to refurbishment and remanufacturing, with which it 
has most of the associated design principles in common.
Product recovery strategies are mainly observed in the case of capitalintensive business-to-business (B2B) products, like medical scanners 
and heavy machinery. The automotive industry provides an interesting example, where remanufactured parts purchased at the aftermarket 
often replace defective parts. After repair, the replaced part is returned 
to a remanufacturing plant against a financial incentive. Although in 
this example, the harvesting and subsequent remanufacturing of parts 
takes place in a B2B environment, the operations concern a consumer 
product.
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... |
94 | Design Strategies
Conclusion
Design for CE puts attention for product life extension and recovery 
firmly on the agenda, with some surprising new insights for design.
One of these new insights is the need for a long-time horizon, beyond 
product use and towards multiple use cycles, i.e. foresight. This needs 
to be reflected upon in the strategic stages of the product innovation process and may eventually change the role of design to become 
more strategic. Related to this is the need for designers to engage with 
business models. Repair and refurbishment examples show that the 
meaning and implications of these processes can be different in different contexts. Basic aspects here are related to ownership of the product, 
the responsibility for the recovery processes, and execution of the 
recovery processes. Designers need to be aware of these aspects and take 
them into account in the early stages of product design. Lastly, design 
for recycling needs to mature. Recycling technology is rapidly developing, and designers cannot afford to be ‘out of the loop.’
4 | Designing for a Circular Economy... | 95
References
Aerts, M., Felix, J., Huisman, J. & Balkenende, A.R. (2014). Lamp redesign: 
shredding before selling. In: Proceedings of going green – CARE innovation 
2014: Towards a resource efficient economy. Vienna.
Balkenende, A.R., Occhionorelli, V., Meensel, W. Van, Felix, J., Sjölin, S.,
Aerts, M., Huisman, J., Becker, J., Schaik, A. Van & Reuter, M. (2014).
Greenelec: Product design linked to recycling. Proceedings of going green – 
CARE innovation 2014: Towards a resource efficient economy. Vienna.
Benyus, J.M. (1997). Biomimicry: innovation inspired by nature. New York, USA.
Morrow.
ERN. (2018). Neopost case study. Retrieved from: http://www.remanufacturing.
eu/studies/75ad48b0e5be3b1bc58a.pdf
Gray, C. & Charter, M. (2007). Remanufacturing and product design; Design for the
7th generation. A report by the Centre for Sustainable Design. Farnham, UK.
Hollander, M. den, Bakker, C.A. & Hultink, E.J. (2016). Mind the gap exploiter; 
Circular business models for product lifetime extension. In: Proceedings 
of electronics goes green 2016. Sept 7–9, Berlin, Germany. Published by 
Fraunhofer IZM and Technische Universität Berlin.
Hollander, M. den, Bakker, C.A. & Hultink, E.J. (2017). Product design in a 
circular economy; development of a typology of key concepts and terms.
Journal of industrial ecology. Vol. 21, pp. 517–525.
Kang, T. (2018). The surprising growth of used smartphones. https://www.
counterpointresearch.com/surprising-growth-used-smartphones/ 
[Accessed 7.3.2018].
Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., & Hekkert, M. (2017). Conceptualizing the circular 
economy: An analysis of 114 definitions. Resources, conservation & recycling.
Vol. 127, pp. 221–232.
McDonough, W. & Braungart, M. (2002). Cradle to cradle: Remaking the way we 
make things. New York, USA: North Point Press.
Nasr, N. & Thurston, M. (2006). Remanufacturing: A key enabler to sustainable 
product systems. In: Proceedings of LCE2006, pp. 15–18.
Pauw, I. de (2015). Nature-inspired design. PhD thesis. Delft Academic Press.
Roozenburg, N.F.Mf & Eekels, J. (1995). Product design: Fundamentals and 
methods. Chichester, UK. John Wiley & Sons.
Shu, L. H. & Flowers, W. C. (1999). Application of a design-for-remanufacture 
framework to the selection of product life-cycle fastening and joining 
methods. Robotics and computer-integrated manufacturing. Vol. 15, pp. 179–190.
96
Essi Karell
Design Strategies
Design for Circularity:
The Case of 05 circular.fashion
97
What does it mean in practice to design clothes that at 
their end-of-life could be circulated into new fibers, yarns, 
fabrics and textile products? This chapter adresses the 
question through a descriptive case study of a sustainable 
design consultancy circular.fashion which has developed 
a novel approach to circularity. Multiple challenges 
and solutions regarding circularity within the company 
practice are introduced and reflected upon with respect to 
different phases within the circular textile value chain and 
previous literature. The chapter contributes to a deeper 
understanding of required changes in clothing design 
practices when aiming to accelerate the transition from 
a linear production-consumption system to a circular 
alternative.
Keywords: Design for circularity, circular fashion, circular design strategies,
chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling
98
Introduction
Fundamental problems within the fashion industry originate from the 
pace of production and consumption, which further brings forth many 
environmental and societal crises. Fortunately, the problems are being 
increasingly recognised by various stakeholders throughout the fashion 
value chain. This can be seen in the growing interest in the circular 
economy (CE), which has been recognised as a viable concept towards 
a more sustainable production-consumption system.
CE is an economic model that is restorative and regenerative by 
design (Ellen MacArthur Foundation 2012). The concept builds on 
various ideologies and approaches, from which cradle-to-cradle by Braungart & McDonough (2002) is probably the most well-known. In the 
cradle-to-cradle approach, technical and biological materials are viewed 
as nutrients (excluding harmful chemicals) that can circulate infinitely 
creating closed material loops in a waste-free system. The closed-loop 
system provides countless steps to add value to products and materials, 
upon which the global fashion industry also depends when taking into 
account the decreasing virgin resources.
When envisioning the future without textile waste, closed-loop 
recycling (CLR) is required. As emphasised by Payne (2015, 111–114), 
closed-loop recycling in the fashion industry can be defined in many 
ways. One definition refers to recycling methods, through which the 
waste textile is reused in the garment production chain (ibid.). It 
includes, for example, remanufacturing and the mechanical fiber-tofiber recycling of textiles. Also, the reuse of garments (second-hand 
market) can be considered an example of closed-loop recycling as 
the “product may enter a new life cycle within the same production 
chain” (Payne 2015, 114). Thirdly, and the most radical means of CLR, 
is linked to the cradle-to-cradle method (Payne 2015). In this approach, 
infinite material recycling becomes possible through chemical fiberto-fiber recycling. It indicates processes where textile product can be 
broken down to a fiber level and reprocessed into a similar or higher 
quality textile application than before. In this chapter, closed-loop 
| Design Strategies
99
recycling based on the cradle-to-cradle method has been chosen as the 
basis of discussion.
When illustrating closed-loop models, the interrelations between different stakeholders within the fashion value chain are easier to perceive 
than in the current linear value chain. Everything effects everything.
This relatedness also obligates designers to participate in the discussion 
of a circular economy. As reported by Elander and Ljungkvist (2016, 51), 
fashion companies represent a stakeholder group able to influence most 
aspects of the circular textile value chain. Hence, approaches to new 
product design are critical in supporting recyclability (Kant Hvass 2016).
But what will this actually imply regarding fashion designers’ daily practices? What does it mean today when the ambition to move towards CE 
is only just emerging? 
This chapter presents a case study that provides understanding of the 
systemic challenges for textile circularity and how they relate to designers’ work. Berlin-based sustainable design consultancy, circular.fashion, has 
developed a novel approach to circularity and thus embodies multiple 
ways to address the barriers to it. A descriptive case study* of circular.
fashion examines the company’s philosophy and practices when designing for closed-loops. The case reveals challenges and solutions in circular fashion design practices which are addressed in respect to different 
phases within the circular textile value chain.
The current study aims to provide solutions to how to contribute to 
CE through design, and supports the ideation of an alternative design 
practice. New technologies are constantly emerging, and commitment 
to CE throughout the industry is increasing. The situation pictured on 
* The intent of a descriptive case study is to understand a specific issue, 
problem or concern (Creswell 2013). In the case of circular.fashion, the issue 
at hand is the overall challenge of design for cirularity in such a complex 
system as the clothing industry. Circular.fashion can be labeled as an instrumental case as it holds potential to provide insights that can go beyond the 
case at hand (Lazar et al. 2010).
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
100
the following pages is a snapshot of the design consultancy and its practices at a specific time and place.** As Niinimäki (2017) states, examples 
of real life design are needed to support the change on multiple levels 
towards CE. With its novel approach, circular.fashion can be considered a 
crucial example.
Challenges for textile
product circularity
There are many challenges in the chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling 
of post-consumer textiles. Following Elander and Ljungkvist’s (2016) 
expert interview study, some critical aspects are specified below based 
on four categories: Material input for recycling, markets, information, 
and technology.
First, however, it is important to picture the state of legislation 
in textile recycling. As noted by many (e.g. Hvass 2014; Payne 2015; 
Bouzon & Govindan 2015), legislation is an influential driver regarding the practice of reverse logistics and, consequently, effective recycling systems. For example, in the European Union common legislation 
for textile waste management is currently lacking, and regulations 
vary between countries. Yet, in February 2018 the Council of the EU 
** The case study of circular.fashion was conducted between January 2018 and 
March 2018. The data is based on interviews with the company founder 
Ina Budde. Interviews were conducted by email (23.01.2018) and through 
Skype conference calls (29.01.2018 & 09.03.2018). The first Skype call interview was transcribed. Emails and the transription in combination with the 
company’s marketing material were analysed based on open coding (more 
precisely descriptive, in-vivo and process coding). Codes were categorised 
thematically and used for researching links between challenges, solutions 
and future visions. A holistic approach was taken for the analysis, meaning 
that the case was viewed as a whole rather than as separate units of analysis.
Reporting is based on thematic categories.
| Design Strategies
101
published a press release about a provisional agreement on the waste 
package, which was described to “lead to more recycling of waste 
and contribute to the creation of a circular economy” (The Council 
of the EU 2018). If the agreement passes it implies that member states 
will have to set up, by 1st of January 2025, a separate collection for 
post-consumer textiles (ibid.). How this would ultimately effect the disposal practices of European consumers remains to be seen. At least from 
the perspective of other stakeholders in the fashion industry, this holds 
potential to develop functional reverse supply chains and re-arrange 
industrial operations – at least within the European Union.
Material input
Regarding materials, the low volume of textiles suitable for recycling 
is one of the main challenges (Payne 2015), while the functionality of 
reverse logistics is another. Currently, the collection and sorting of textiles is insufficient (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016) despite being based on 
multiple collection systems. Increasing amounts of fashion companies 
are setting up take-back systems, but there the challenges that arise are 
related to textile volumes as well as quality (Hvass 2014). Consumer 
awareness of the negative impacts of clothing disposal is a further 
concern (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016). Because consumers are responsible for the products end-of-life, the functionality of reverse logistics is 
ultimately dependent on their disposal habits.
The efficiency of textile recycling also depends on the design of 
easy-to-recycle products (Gulich 2006). A major concern is the complexity of textile products due to the use of material blends, layering of 
different materials, presence of prints, elastane and trims which include 
chemicals, colours/dyes, harmful substances etc. (Elander & Ljungkvist 
2016; Franco 2017; Niinimäki 2017; Wedin et al. 2017). This implies that 
very limited amounts of textiles are suitable for chemical fiber-to-fiber 
recycling.
Increasing the volume of suitable textiles requires the commitment 
of various stakeholders. Each fashion, sorting and recycling company, 
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
102
however, has their own demands, which complicate industry-wide collaboration. “As there are no best practices available and no legislation 
to guide the industry, companies are currently alone in developing a 
reverse logistics system that matches their needs”, as highlighted by 
Hvass (2014, 425).
Market
The complexity of the fashion value chain and the relatedness of different stakeholders within complicates assessing the functionality and economical viability of closed-loop recycling. When it comes to markets, 
cost is a serious factor. Sorting and recycling costs are high, transportation costs for textile waste are high and, furthermore, the incentives for 
investment in textile recycling are lacking (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016).
This results in the high price of recycled textiles (Franco 2017) that 
many small brands or design teams in commercial fashion companies 
(often under extreme price pressure) cannot afford. Meanwhile, fashion 
companies perceive there is a limited supply of recycled fibers/textiles 
available for designing new textile products (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016; 
Franco 2017). On the other hand, suppliers of recycled textile fibers 
report the lack of demand for recycled textiles amongst fashion companies and textile producers (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016). This aligns with 
the statement by Gulich (2006), according to which recycled products 
are hard to market, exacerbated by high prices (Franco 2017).
Information
In terms of information, fashion companies seem to lack knowledge 
of collection and recycling aspects of textiles, as well as reverse logistics (Hvass 2014; Elander & Ljungkvist 2016). There is also a lack of 
information regarding product content (material composition, dyes, 
chemicals, other substances) (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016, Wedin et al.
2017). Accessing information about the complete chemical content of 
products is said to be difficult for fashion companies “due to long and 
| Design Strategies
103
complex supply chains, the discrepancy in national and regional legistalation (REACH) and very limited transparency of the chemical industry” (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016). Going further in the textile value 
chain, the dialogue between sorters and recyclers seems to be missing.
Sorters need to know what textiles to sort out in order to match 
recyclers’ needs and requirements, while recyclers need information 
about the chemicals used in recyclable textiles in order to regenerate 
fibers of good quality (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016, Wedin et al. 2017).
Moreover, the requirements of both sorters and recyclers would be 
crucial information for designers in order to effect the sortability and 
recyclability early on in the design phase.
Technology
Critical aspects regarding technology relate to the readiness level of 
different processes. Automated textile sorting technologies that could 
increase the volumes and purity of textile waste sorted for recycling 
are under development but currently there is none functioning on an 
industrial scale (Cura & Heikinheimo 2017; Wedin et al. 2017, Circle 
Economy & Fibersort). In addition, scaling up chemical fiber-to-fiber 
recycling technologies is challenging due to the lack of investment in 
recycling technology (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016). Even though the 
separation of cotton and polyester fibers (the most common fibers on 
the market) has been recently proven (H&M & HKRITA 2017; Mistra 
Future Fashion 2017; Palme et al. 2017; ), the separation of different 
fiber types and handling impurities in chemical recycling processes 
remains challenging.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
104
The case of circular.fashion
Company: Circular.fashion
Registered office: Berlin, Germany
Established in: 2015
Main service: Design consulting, online tool Circular.fashion System
Main product: Circularfashion.ID
Revenue model: Yearly membership fee, price per product and service
In our current planetary state, the idea of a future without waste 
appears somewhat impossible to attain. Especially if working in the 
global fashion industry, the picture of a world without resource scarcity and waste requires plenty of imagination, passion, as well as trust 
in the human capacity to change and to make changes. Dedicated to 
this idea is Berlin-based fashion designer Ina Budde. As a founder of 
sustainable design consultancy circular.fashion, she believes that if every 
single product around us could be recycled into a product of the same 
quality we could eliminate the concept of waste and the need for virgin 
resources. Inspired by the concepts of cradle-to-cradle and closed-loop 
ideology, circular.fashion provides support for fashion companies in the 
creation of products and systems suitable for CE. Under the umbrella 
term design for circularity, the company offers consulting, development 
of recyclable and biodegradable textiles, products and full collections.
Additional services to both academia and industry include workshops 
and trainings focusing on sustainable fashion, circular retail models and 
systems. At the core of circular.fashion is a novel digital system for textile 
circularity providing one of the best practices currently operating in the 
fashion industry.
Today circular.fashion employs six people embodying different competencies related to recyclable materials and material research, closedloop design, consumer demands, sustainable business models, reverse 
logistics, and software development. Close collaboration with material 
suppliers, material scientists, textile collectors, sorters and recyclers continuously feeds into the company practices and services.
| Design Strategies
105
Customer brands of circular.fashion are established and mainly producing in Europe. Today, all the company’s operations (collecting, 
sorting and recycling) are also based in Europe. Regarding sorting, the 
company is in contact both with global and local actors in order to 
develop a solution that would be globally possible. Current focus is on 
developing Berlin-based pilots, which can later be transfered to other 
situations. The aim is to demonstrate that the concept works in regional 
loops before expansion is considered.
Design for circularity 
As there are many ways to define closed-loop recycling, there are certainly many ways to approach and define circularity. For circular.fashion
consultancy, circularity in fashion does not only mean recycling of discarded materials and products based on cradle-to-cradle, but also reusing 
the existing garments to keep them at their highest value. However, 
when it comes to designing for circularity, the base line for each product 
should be the suitability for chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling.
Currently, two ways to approach material recycling for designers 
have been identified (Goldsworthy 2012). The first – re-active approach – 
refers to working with existing material and product streams. These can 
be linked to various business models such as redesign services, second 
hand and leasing models but also downcycling of materials through 
remanufacture (ibid.). In circular.fashion, the re-active approach is referred 
to also as a transitional approach. Even though the approach can provide 
enormous business potential and slightly reduces the amount of waste, 
it will not change the linear system from within (Budde 23.01.2018). In 
order to change the system, a pro-active approach that follows closedloop idealogy should be integrated into product desing from the start 
(Goldsworthy 2012, Budde 23.01.2018). In circular.fashion this means 
focusing on full material recyclability, i.e. the creation of products that 
have the ability to be regenerated 100%.
As an innovative solution, circular.fashion has developed a webbased tool called the circular.fashion system. It is an industry-connecting 
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
106
platform and tool for all stakeholders to create circular products and to 
keep them in the loop. The tool can be purchased and used as Software 
as a Service (SaaS). Today, the service is based on three different pricing 
models depending on the company size. The system includes two parts 
Circular Design Software and Reverse Supply Chain Intelligense, described 
in the following sections.
Circular Design Software
The Circular Design Software is a digital service designed for the 
pre-consumer phase in the fashion value chain. It assists fashion companies to design circular and sustainable products in a lean and efficient process. The software features three supportive tools starting from 
Circular Design Guidelines that provide hands on descriptions to designers of how to apply various circular design strategies to their products.
In the Circular Material Database, designers can look for materials that 
have been approved by the partner network of circular.fashion. Designers 
can contact material suppliers through the software, request for sample 
swatches and place their orders directly to suppliers. Through the platform, it is also possible to create the final production documents. In the 
end, Circularity Check shows if the designed product is recyclable with 
the chosen materials. Sometimes, however, it occurs that products such 
as functional clothing do not fulfill the requirements of any closed-loop 
recycler. In such cases, circular.fashion can link the customer brand with a 
mechanical recycler, although that is not their first priority.
Reverse Supply Chain Intelligence
The Reverse Supply Chain Intelligence is another part of the service 
focusing on the post-consumer phase of the product. Circular.fashion has 
allocated a closed-loop recycler for every material in their database. A 
garment that passes the circularity check receives a unique Circularfashion.ID – a code that guarantees the product is suitable for chemical 
fiber-to-fiber recycling. The ID is attached to garments as a woven label 
| Design Strategies
107
and allows tracking of each item. The labels can be purchased individually or from one of the certified suppliers. The ID can be scanned by 
end consumers as well as by sorting and recycling companies and it 
leads the user to the Customer Interface. Through the interface it is possible to access the full history of a garment (product content, material 
composition, care instructions and production network). Additionally, 
options for updating, reusing or recycling of a garment are available. At 
the point of product disposal, consumers are advised how and where 
to return the products through a Sorting Guide that is part of the Circularfashion.ID. It also provides information for sorting companies to 
identify the predefined textile recycler from the circular.fashion network.
Budde provides an example (29.01.2018):
Let’s say there’s a cellulosic based material and it has a cellulosic recycler 
allocated. A brand or designer creates shorts. They can decide then which 
materials they put into the product. For the lining, for the surface material, 
for the closure. And then the product check will prove if all the different 
components are possible to go to the same recycler … If it’s not going to the 
same recycler but they have chosen a design strategy for disassembly – let’s 
say the lining can be detached. Then it’s still approved and this information 
of detaching the lining will be added on to the product info site as well.
Through this step, chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling becomes possible.
In the future, the brands may even order the recycled textiles again for 
their own production.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
108
From challenges to solutions
As mentioned in previous literature, there are numerous critical aspects 
to consider when aiming for circular fashion through chemical fiberto-fiber recycling. The descriptive case study of circular.fashion reveals 
many similar obstacles based on the company’s experiences but also 
provides some new ones described on the following pages. In addition, their own practical approaches and solutions to overcoming the 
issues are presented. These are aimed to assist other designers and design 
teams to reflect on how they could contribute to circularity.
To help the reader to navigate through the findings, Figure 1 provides an overview of the challenges and solutions. The company aim, 
design for circularity (based on chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling), is placed 
in the centre of the diagram. The outermost circle demonstrates the 
different phases in the circular textile value chain. Policy is not regarded 
as a phase per se but an upper-level influencer, especially when it 
comes to waste management and disposal practices. Hence, it is located 
between user/consumer and textile collection & sorting and remains more 
distant from the center. The challenges and solutions for circularity 
indentified in the practices of circular.fashion are placed in between and 
in relation to the different phases.
Easing adoption of circular design strategies
A harsh fact is, however, that current products are not optimised for 
recycling. Apart from those educated in sustainable fashion and textile 
design programs, general understanding and competence in sustainable 
design practices seems to be lacking, let alone what it takes to design 
with a closed-loop mindset. As Budde (23.01.2018) describes:
Many brands want to create sustainable fashion but lack the knowledge of 
how to design for longevity, adaptability or material circularity or how to 
access sustainable materials.
| Design Strategies
109
Figure 1. Challenges and solutions identified through the practices of 
circular.fashion when aiming for circular design (illustration by the author).
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
Fast speed of
technological developments
Separation of bres
Impurities 
Multiplicity of technologies
& various requirements
DESIGN FOR 
CIRCULARITY
Missing
take-back systems
Missing EU wide 
legislation on
waste 
management &
reprocessing of
textiles
Patenting
Lacking knowledge 
of best disposal practices
Unpredictable 
user behaviour
Educating consumers
Favoring
open source
idealogy
Lacking accurate
material information
Fluctuant pricing
system
Products not optimised 
for recycling
Circular Design Software
(Guidelines, Material 
Database, Circularity Check)
Lacking knowledge of 
sustainable/circular design
strategies
Demands for sustainability
under time and price pressure
Educating designers
Missing 
transparency
& lacking 
information
Lacking 
recyclable
materials
Doubts of
sharing 
information
Changing
mindset in design
Participation in
material development
Suppliers as 
partners
Continuous
exchange
Participation in material
development
Monomaterial design
Shipping vouchers
to consumers
Reverse Supply Chain
Intelligence (Customer
Interface, Circularfashion.ID,
Sorting Guide)
Reverse Supply Chain
Intelligence (Customer
Interface, Circularfashion.ID,
Sorting Guide)
Low volume of recyclable
garments & logistical
arrangements
M
AT
E
RIAL SU
P
P
LIE
RS
USER / CONSUMER
FASHION BRANDS / DESIGNERS
FIBRE MANUFACTURERS
TEXTILE COLLECTION & SORTING
P
OLIC
Y
CHALLENGES
SOLUTIONS
110
Meanwhile, design teams working in commercial fashion companies 
should respond to the pressures of price and prodution time with sustainable and automized technological manufacturing methods. Calling 
for sustainability under extreme time and price pressure seems contradictory, but tools like the circular.fashion system can supply designers’ needs. As part of the Circular Design Software, materials and many 
sustainable design strategies are proposed that enable circular design 
solutions. Information on the software can be filtered according to 
designers’ interests. For example, designers can choose whether to 
investigate material cycles such as cellulose, polyester or biodegradable 
substances. They can also filter materials according to the country of 
production, characteristics, composition, fabric type, pattern type and 
color. Regarding strategies, filtering can be done based on material 
cyclability (e.g. monomaterial design, design for disassembly), material 
cycle (recyclability or biodegradability), design for adabtability (e.g.
modular design, multi-functional design, adjustable sizes), design for 
longevity (e.g. repairability, aesthetics, emotional durability) and also 
product types (Budde 29.01.2018.)
After filtering, compatible strategies are displayed. They are further 
illustrated as design briefings because designers are used to being 
briefed on what to do (Budde 29.01.2018). Figure 2 illustrates a briefing 
of emotionally durable design. In other words, each strategy has its own 
translation. This eases and speeds up the adoption of strategies, but also 
differentiates circular.fashion from other initiators promoting sustainable/
circular design strategies. Regarding emotionally durable design for 
example, it can be hard to imagine what a designer should actually do.
Budde (29.01.2018) explains it as follows:
We always have an example next to the strategy … a very specific product 
and how it was solved or what was the idea behind this product.
Figure 2. Briefing of emotionally durable design strategy.
Design: Jonna Haeggblom, Photographer: Erik Cronberg.
| Design Strategies
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion | 111
Design for Longevity 
Emotional Durability
MATERIAL PASSPORT
PRODUCT DETAILS
STRATEGY 
If functional durability refers to whether a garment by its physical 
attributes will last, emotional durability refers to whether a user 
wants to keep and wear a piece. Today’s use of clothing is mainly 
characterized by short-term wear and disposability, where garments 
generally are replaced due to the fact that a wearer have lost interest, 
rather than the pieces being broken. To design for emotional durability is about creating pieces that consumers wish to keep and use for 
longer, resulting in reduced consumption of new pieces and a stronger emotional connection with the pieces one already own. Factors 
that impact emotional durability are related to how a user feels when 
wearing a piece and are influenced by when, where and from whom 
the piece was acquired. Transparency of a garment‘s production will 
build on its narrative and strengthen the emotional connection as it 
reduces the distance between maker and wearer. Increased awareness 
will likely result in more responsible consumption patterns and a 
greater willingness to take care of one‘s clothing and as such improve 
sustainable behaviour in the use phase. Other factors influencing 
emotional durability is the comfort, fit and size, how well it emphasizes the users personality and how well it ages over time and use. 
CIRCULAR DESIGN BRIEFING
Designing emotional durability into garments is complex, as what affects emotional connection, naturally, 
is different for every person and depends on one’s 
own beliefs, memories and ideas. However, a few 
general guidelines that foster emotional durability: 
• Enhance a garment’s value and meaning by 
being transparent of its making and narrative
• Use co-creation and personalisation strategies 
to customize a garment’s function and aesthetics 
to the actual needs and desires of the wearer 
• Keep the interest of the wearer by using techniques for updating possibilities of the piece 
• Use materials, coatings and techniques that age 
beautifully over time or that reveal patterns by 
use
This coat created with a layered modular pattern technique fastened by 
fabric stripes. This technique gives the wearer the possibility to update 
and customize the piece by changing colours, materials and weaves of 
the fabric stripes as well as deciding whether the coat is long, short, 
sleeveless, with or without a collar. 
112
Easing the adoption of circular design strategies and the development 
of new solutions is an ongoing work for circular.fashion. Solutions are 
also developed according to specific brand environments or products.
The whole life cycle of a garment and use scenario is kept in mind.
According to the company’s consulting framework, it is essential to 
match a circular strategy with products’ functional needs, brand DNA 
and customer expectations. Hence, product ideas are combined with 
circular retail models and services. The company also educates designers 
by organising workshops and training on the issues mentioned above.
Budde (29.01.2018) highlights four main categories to keep in mind 
when designing garments. These include material choice, material combinations, product construction and surface treatments. Furthermore, 
she shares her own notion of what clever design entails:
For me when I look at the product it gets just more beautiful if I see that I 
can disassemble all the different parts again and that I don’t need to destroy 
it if I need a part of it. So for me it’s just a notion of this is beautiful because 
I don’t need to destroy it. It gives respect to every single part of this product. 
Overcoming the lack of information and materials
As earlier stated, the lack of information and materials hinders textile 
product circularity (e.g. Hvass 2014; Elander & Ljungkvist 2016). Similar 
obstacles and required activities identified in case of circular.fashion, 
are decribed below based on three categories. These relate to attitude 
changes in fashion and supplier companies, as well as exchange about 
the constantly changing requirements.
Change in attitude
Based on circular.fashion’s experience with fiber manufacturers and textile 
sorters, the ideal textile products for fiber-to-fiber recycling would be 
those made of one single material, i.e. monomaterial products (Budde 
23.01.2018), as opposed to the complex material blends and layered 
structures noted earlier (e.g. Franco 2017; Wedin et al. 2017). However, 
| Design Strategies
113
challenges arise when thinking of surface design and details. Sourcing 
of buttons, zippers and other trims that fit certain materials may be difficult to find or are not yet developed in a recyclable way (Franco 2017; 
Budde 23.01.2018). Hence, there appears to be a clear gap between the 
requirements of textile recyclers and the current material offering. In 
addition, surface treatments like prints should be avoided in monomaterial design. These challenges ask for new replacing technologies but also 
positive attitude and creativity. Budde (23.01.2018) provides an example 
related to a project made for an urban tech-wear brand Acronym: 
We decided to work with a monomaterial approach in the technical cycle 
and used a water-resistant membrane that can be regenerated with closed 
loop polyester recycling. One could assume this might be limiting or restrictive but for us it’s much more a driver for innovation and creativity that 
led us to explore new closure methods or exciting technologies such as laser 
engraving to work with the material itself instead of adding any impurities 
like print colors.
Suppliers as Partners
A further challenge in sourcing relates to transparency. Similar to earlier 
findings (e.g. Elander & Ljungkvist 2016), circular.fashion has also found 
it difficult to obtain exact information about material content. Budde 
(29.01.2018) describes the current relationship with material suppliers 
as follows:
Some are really open and collaborative but some are … First they need to 
understand the sense of why they need to make the effort.
But without transparency there is no way to assess the recyclability of 
the materials. This complicates the design process for circularity because 
many brands don’t have their own research and development (R&D) 
team and are dependent on existing materials. Moreover, missing information is a further obstacle if brands want to make a full Life-Cycle 
Assessment (LCA) of their products. Doubts about sharing information 
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
114
must be solved, which asks for trust between stakeholders but also new 
collaborative attitude. Budde (29.01.2018) gives an example of her own 
approach: 
For me suppliers are rather partners than just simply suppliers because they 
need to know that they are kind of part of the system. Because otherwise 
they maybe don’t understand why they should provide so much material 
information or why we want to check their materials so specifically. So they 
are partners as well.
A collaborative attitude builds close partnerships with suppliers, which 
is of great importance in reuse and recycling initiatives in fashion (Hvass 
2016). Today, circular.fashion participates actively in the development 
of recyclable materials with a selection of certified suppliers within 
their network, which has resulted in new material innovations (Budde 
23.01.2018), exemplified by a biodegradable polymer blended with 
natural fibers. This compostable material blend can be transformed into 
all kinds of soft and stable elements, such as textiles, buttons, zippers and 
even elastics. It implies that every part of the product can be made of 
the same molecular content and therefore the worn-out garment as a 
whole can safely enter the biological cycle (ibid.). A jacket designed for 
disassembly is another example which combines material and product 
level innovation. Budde (23.01.2018) clarifies this as follows:
The textile is designed to be disassembled into the two layers for separate 
cycles of composting and recycling. Additionally the sewing yarn is soluble 
so that the lining can be separated too. This innovation is a game-changing 
development and enables the benefits of stable synthetic materials combined 
with the flattering touch of natural fibers.
Participating in material development enables the company to easily 
access material information and set new requirements for textiles as 
other technologies advance. The work supports other fashion companies through the material database in the Circular Design Software.
| Design Strategies
115
Generally, fashion design teams in commercial companies approach 
material suppliers with sample references when sourcing new materials for upcoming collections. Newness is usually based on style, quality, 
comfort, functionality, etc. In design for circularity, however, the “new” 
indicates also the ability to fit materials to certain recycler, which 
requires changes in the dialogue and processes between fashion companies and suppliers. In the future, this may imply that fashion companies turn from pure customers to active co-developers, which might 
also extend the fashion designer’s role and require deeper knowledge of 
materials and their structures even at the fiber level.
Constant exchange with fiber manufacturers
As earlier mentioned, it is difficult to evaluate which materials could 
fit chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling due to gaps in material information (Elander & Ljungkvist 2016, Wedin et al. 2017). Developing new 
materials with suppliers, circular.fashion aims to overcome this challenge.
However, it is no easier to access the information about the requirements 
for materials suitable for chemical recycling processes. First of all, each 
recycling process has its own specific requirements. Budde (29.01.2018) 
clarifies this with an example regarding the maximum amount of elastane that does not disturb the fiber-to-fiber recycling process:
I think it’s now 2% with one recycler. But I think it’s just valid for this one 
recycler, and there is another one who can not still handle it.
Secondly, everything is in the movement. Technologies advance so 
rapidly that it is hard to stay updated. This is good news in respect to 
the targets of CE but difficult for other stakeholders. As Budde notes 
(29.01.2018):
With one recycler, the cellulosic recycler, we are working already for … I think 
3 years now. And their process changed quite a lot. In the beginning we had 
very harsh requirements for textiles that could get into the process and now 
it’s much easier. But sometimes you don’t really find out with the first one. 
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
116
When you maybe schedule a meeting again and you talk through another 
project and then by chance you realise that things have changed a little bit.
The way circular.fashion takes on the challenge of technological changes 
is now based on constant exchange with the fiber manufacturers. The 
company constantly pursue research into and analysis of the requirements of chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling processes. New materials 
with suppliers are further developed and matched according to those 
specifications and then evaluated. Materials on the Circular Material Database all fit current requirements. In order to share the information more efficiently in the future, Budde suggests the following 
(29.01.2018): 
Maybe there is actually some easier way to get this information all the time. 
… I mean we could implement it (information) on our platform so that they 
(fiber manufacturers) can post it. But I mean there are so many different 
companies, so why should they always give you the latest news. It’s also 
hard for them to spread it through their network. But yes, I think the future 
vision would be to constantly update.
Until the requirements become more accurate and technologies 
develop further, monomaterial designs are favored by fiber manufacturers and should be taken into account also in design. However, material 
recyclability is not the only attribute to consider in circularity. Material 
selection should not only be weighted according to the preferences of 
fiber manufacturers, but instead the whole product life cycle including 
various use scenarious should be taken into account and matched with 
the material properties of each design. In terms of waste management 
hierarchy for instance, reusing should always precede recycling. Hence, 
product longevity (including good quality materials, adjustable fit, etc.) 
must be considered. Sometimes certain functionalities that further 
increase longevity may require material blends, maybe even elastane.
Then a decision between the product longevity and recyclability may 
be needed until appropriate technologies are in place.
| Design Strategies
117
Increasing economical viability
through Circularfashion.ID
Currently, there are very few garments in the market that meet the 
requirements of the textile recyclers (Budde 29.01.2018). Due to low 
volumes, textile sorters practically need to set up a room to collect garments separately until they have a volume that is worth sending to a 
fiber manufacturer (Budde 29.01.2018). Logistical challenges relate to 
the economical viability of the sorting process (Elander & Ljungkvist 
2016). In the near future, however, circular.fashion aims to assess the viability of collecting and sorting by providing consumers with shipping 
vouchers so they can ship the old garments for free to a designated 
sorter within the circular.fashion network (ibid.). The effort should help 
evaluation of the overall quality of collected textiles.
Also, the lack of precise material information results in low volumes 
for chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling (e.g. Elander & Ljungkvist 2016).
The Sorting Guide of the circular.fashion system provides a solution for 
this, enabling textile sorters to assess whether garments are suitable for 
second hand use. In addition, enables reliable material identification and 
designated recyclers through Circularfashion.ID. It also provides instructions to consumers on how to increase the useful life of products. Scanning the code with a smartphone permits easy access to the customer 
interface with a full history of the purchased product (Figure 3). Moreover, it allows fashion companies possibilities to increase the rate of customer retention.
Reliability of material identification is a key in building a reverse 
supply chain. Many different solutions are currently underway, but there 
is no point in companies developing systems that only match their own 
needs – as is the situation of today (Hvass 2014). As Budde (29.01.2018) 
notes:
No one is setting up a system like us at the moment, but as soon as someone 
does I think it would be just very useful to join forces because we don’t need 
many different solutions. We need one solution that is used by many people.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
118 | Design Strategies
MYRKA studios - Spring 2018
Size: One Size
The special plush look and the oversized fit 
tranform jacket ALLISON into a real statement piece. It originated from a collaboration 
between Myrka Studios and circular.fashion 
and can be lead back into the closed circuit 
without losing any resources. The main material was a remnant textile and is made of 100% 
polyester. The silky lining, yarn and labels are 
made of recycled polyester from PET bottles. 
For each sold jacket the berlin based label 
donates 10€ to the «Clean Clothes Campaign 
Germany», which pleads for better working 
conditions along the production chain – so 
that in the future fair productions wont be the 
exception, but the norm.
Brand Material & Care Production Circularity Guide 
100% Polyester 
#recyclable 
Production Country: Germany
Recovered Overstock
Learn more
Main Material
Yarn and Labels Care Instructions
100% Rec. Polyester 
#recyclable 
Production Country: Netherlands
Learn more
100% Rec. Polyester 
#recyclable 
Production Country: Turkey
Certificate (GRS)
Learn more
Lining
ALLISON
studios
MYRKA
Oberstoff /Main fabric: 100% Polyester
Futter/Lining: 100% recyceltes Polyester
Hergestellt in Deutschland
Made in Germany
studios
MYRKA
ALLISON
119
Building an open source ecosystem
Moving towards CE means taking a systems perspective on fashion 
that includes all actors (Niinimäki 2017). Building a functional reverse 
supply chain that brings different stakeholders together has been one 
of the fundamental aims of circular.fashion consultancy. At the time of 
this case study, the company has managed to build a small ecosystem 
through which everyone within the circle is connected: the designer, 
user, retailer, sorter and recycler. Budde (29.01.2018) describes the starting point of building the multidisciplinary network as follows: 
Timewise it would start with the recycling company. So, I started to map out 
where closed-loop recyclers are popping up, and which of those technologies are 
actually already in place or what could we work with. Because a lot of them 
are not really selling yarns yet or can’t really take things back. So this was 
the first thing we researched. And then we looked for material suppliers that 
could potentially provide textiles that would fit the recyclers’ requirements. 
According to Budde (29.01.2018), the process has taken a lot of time in 
conferences and Skype calls. Having a specific project already in mind 
when contacting different actors has also been one crucial aspect in 
building the networks.
I was inviting these people to be part of the pilot project of building a circular collection and providing the information of how to close the loop for this 
collection. That was a very good basis to really have something specific to talk 
about. Like a real case.
Operating in such a manner has led to proof-of-concepts. One example 
is a collection ‘Curated circularity – designed for Infinity’ with a brand 
JAN‘N JUNE (Figure 4), to whom circular.fashion, in co-operation with 
various other partners, managed to set up its own recycling system.
Figure 3. Customer Interface showing the full history of a garment.
Jacket design by Allison, MYRKA studios.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
120
Due to insufficient legislation, companies are left largely free to 
decide about their own sustainable practices (Hvass 2016). Hence, reallife cases are crucial for proliferation of sustainable practices, because 
they hold the potential to embody a proof-of-concept that can later 
encourage and motivate other stakeholders to take action. Ideally, companies also open their processes aiming for sustainability to other actors 
in the industry, as in the case of circular.fashion. Openness and sharing 
information are fundamental in order to further accelerate the transition towards CE. However, Hvass (2016) mentions a tendency of 
companies to develop sustainable solutions only for themselves. Yet, patenting has not (to the author’s knowledge) been mentioned as a critical 
aspect in previous literature. Budde (29.01.2018) mentions patenting as 
a major concern potentially delaying material circularity. The following 
notion illustrates the approach of circular.fashion related to open source 
thinking:
I think this is really important because I think only with such an approach, 
being more open about it, can you actually accelerate this. Because if you 
Figure 4. ‘Curated circularity – designed for Infinity’ collection for JAN ‘N JUNE.
Photographer: Maximilian Probst.
| Design Strategies
121
don’t allow other people to use the same ideas then it’s just one time in the 
world and then it will never make a change. I believe these ideas should be 
spread. And patenting in this area should be forbidden. And we should find 
other business models around it. 
Spreading the word is at the heart of the company’s business. Fighting 
for the same goal and being constantly in contact with different initiators is a daily practice. This can also be seen in the other activities of 
circular.fashion: ‘Open Source Circular Economy days,’ for instance, is one 
forum where the company has been active in promoting CE to consumers and other stakeholders.
Openness is also part of the membership strategy. Even though the 
online tool is currently based on a yearly subscription, a long term aim 
is to provide all the knowledge for free as soon as enough fashion companies join the platform. In this vision, the company would charge only 
for circularfashion.IDs, meaning a price per product produced.
Future vision
Technology evolves at a pace that is sometimes hard to keep up with.
Budde (29.01.2018) shares some of her own future visions that could 
influence designers’ work crucially when aiming for textile circularity.
Obviously in the past blends of fibers were the most difficult. But I believe 
that in the near future we will be able to handle that as well. The main 
question will then be if we can handle both components of the blend and 
recycle both of them to virgin quality. We are aware that the separation of 
blends is currently possible, but I mean it’s not happening at scale yet. Also, 
often the recyclers can just filter out one part, for example cellulose or polyester, if they don’t know the exact composition of the blend. So what I think 
is that in the future we will be able to handle blends and additionals at scale 
if we declare the exact composition accurately.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
122
Designers will probably not have such a hard time in the future, Budde 
(29.01.2018) speculates. For instance, designers may not be obliged to 
make every closure part detachable when considering design for disassembly. Although, many of the problems within fiber separation could 
be solved, the information relating to full product content and the way 
garments are constructed will still be needed according to Budde (Ibid.):
Regardless if we can use it or not (blends), I think we need to be transparent about it and declare what the products contain. Because most recycling 
technologies simply work better if they know the content. And still I believe 
that some – let’s say closure parts or blends – should not be used. And so I 
think there will always be some guidelines for designers about which materials should be used.
Despite possible technological advancements easing designers’ work, 
fashion companies will need to create products according to many 
more purposes than selling garments, Budde states (23.01.2018): 
When companies implement Product-Service-Systems to unlock the growth 
from material throughput, it will be the challenge of the designer to create the 
garments that are durable, versatile and modular so that the brand can actually max out the business potential of many use cases of one product.
Moving from products to services will also expand the designer’s role.
Budde sees designers becoming interdisciplinary translators between 
consumer demands, product functions (defined by the respective service 
offer) and requirements for material circularity (ibid.).
Products responding to those parameters become an inter-connective element 
that flows in circular ways between people in various relations. This way of 
thinking breaks up the whole idea of seeing a product as one product and a 
material as one material. Because a product is only one product in a certain 
setting with certain people but becomes a different product in another setting.
| Design Strategies
123
Discussion
When visualising the challenges of chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling 
(Figure 1), it becomes evident that change has to take place simultaneously throughout the value chain. Technological developments in 
automated textile sorting and chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling is rapid, 
which should effect the practices of other stakeholders. If we want to 
see chemical fiber-to-fiber recycling running at scale in the near future, 
the practices of designers and other stakeholders must change fast.
In order to set up a functional system, open dialogue is required 
in terms of the critical aspects mentioned earlier. More specifically, 
how each stakeholder could take these aspects into account in their 
own operations. How they deal with the upcoming concerns and possibilities will vary based on companies’ own interests as long as the 
common guidelines are initiated and new legislation commences to 
oblige industry practitioners. Actors that could facilitate the discussion 
between stakeholder groups are needed. Circular.fashion is already one of 
the visionaries achieving this and may have the ability to accelerate the 
change with its examplary and committed activities.
This study has pictured the state-of-the-art situation at the turn 
of the year 2017–2018, and for this reason may only hold value for 
a limited period of time. Futher weakness in the study is the focus 
only on one specific case. The issues reported may only be relevant 
for the case in question. Circular.fashion is a relatively new consultancy 
and actor within the field of sustainable design. Hence, it remains to 
be seen how the Circular Fashion System will eventually work out.
However, the case brings forth many crucial aspects entailed in operating with all stakeholder groups within the circular textile value chain.
It provides valuable information for fashion companies on ways to 
reimagine the role of designers and the organisation of design practices.
As such, it provides an excellent reflection point for further studies on 
challenges and the latest innovations in circular fashion, but also a case 
by which to compare changes in practices and industry operations 
more generally.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
124
Based on this study, several future research directions are suggested. Regarding textile volumes and planning the reverse supply 
chains, research is needed concerning the estimated flows of the newly 
designed pieces that fit chemical recycling. A further difficulty remains 
as to how to share the newest information and developments between 
stakeholders in the circular textile value chain and how to facilitate 
dialogue between them. In addition, studies on different solutions and 
proof-of-concepts are constantly needed to spread the information on 
best practices to each stakeholder group.
Conclusions
This case study was conducted to research the evident changes in 
fashion design practice when moving from a linear to a circular 
economy. Because of its novel approach, circular.fashion consultancy was 
used as a descriptive case to illustrate how to design clothes that at the 
end-of-life could be circulated into new fibers. Challenges in the circular textile value chain, as identified in the previous literature, provided 
the basis for reflection when studying the practices of circular.fashion.
The description of the company’s activities revealed many practical 
solutions and strategies in accordance with each challenge. Solutions 
depict the changing landscape of fashion designers’ daily work, as summarised below: 
• Material choice, material combinations, product construction and 
surface treatments are the most important factors designers have to 
consider when designing for circularity.
• Online tools such as the Circular Fashion System hold potential in educating designers on the subject and easing their work under pressure 
of time and price.
• A change in attitude is required on many levels: 
– Innovation exists in the challenges, meaning that designers should 
expand their creativity beyond the contemporary practices.
| Design Strategies
125
– Being dependent on the existing materials (not suitable for recycling) can be overcome by partnering with suppliers.
• Due to rapid technological advances, fashion companies need to 
prepare themselves for constant exchange with textile sorters and 
fiber manufacturers.
• Economical viability of collecting and sorting textiles requires 
changes in design practices, which touch upon the choices of materials, structures and surface designs. These have to be aligned with the 
requirements of recyclers.
• A reliable identification system like Circularfashion.ID can ease the 
sorting process but requires volumes and multiple companies utilising 
the same coding system.
• In order to accelerate the change, more real life cases are needed.
• Best practices should be shared openly. Patenting may hinder the 
change and hence should be weighted thoroughly.
In the case of circular.fashion, the designer role extends from design 
to materials, and finally to recycling processes. Even though material 
knowledge is part of basic fashion design competence, in design for circularity, deeper understanding of material and fiber structures may be 
required – as well as knowledge of chemical processes or at least the 
basic idea of their possibilities in fiber-to-fiber recycling. This enables 
designers to expand their skill set from product design to innovative material development. In circular.fashion, the designer works also as 
a coordinator and translator between different fields. In individual 
company cases, the work requires matching between various aspects: 
user demands, product functionalities, requirements, strategies, materials, brand identity, etc. In this equation, a fashion designer becomes a 
matchmaker who plays the key role in textile circularity.
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
126
References
Bouzon, M. & Govindan, K. (2015). Reverse logistics as a sustainable supply 
chain practice for the fashion industry: An analysis of drivers and the 
Brazilian case. In: Choi, T. M. & Cheng, T. C. E. (eds.). Sustainable fashion 
supply chain management: From sourcing to retailing. Heidelberg. Springer,
pp. 85–104.
Braungart, M. & McDonough, W. (2002). Cradle to cradle: Remaking the way we 
make things. New York. North Point Press.
Circle Economy. Fibersort. [online] Available at: https://www.circle-economy.
com/case/fibersort/#.WsqXf61DyEI [Accessed 20 March 2018].
Council of the EU. (2018). EU ambassadors approve new rules on waste management 
and recycling, 76/18, 23/02/18. Brussels: Press office - General Secretariat of 
the Council. [pdf] Available at: http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/
press-releases/2018/02/23/eu-ambassadors-approve-new-rules-on-wastemanagement-and-recycling/pdf [Accessed 28 March 2018].
Creswell, J.W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five 
approaches, 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA. SAGE.
Cura, K. & Heikinheimo, L. (2017). Challenges and possibilities in textile 
recycling towards circular economy. In: Cura, K. (ed.). Lahti circular economy 
annual review 2017. The publication series of Lahti University of Applied Sciences, 
part 31. Lahti, Finland. Lahti University of Applied Sciences.
Elander, M. & Ljungkvist, H. (2016). Critical aspects in design for fiber-to-fiber 
recycling of textiles. [pdf] Available at: http://mistrafuturefashion.com/
wp-content/uploads/2016/06/MFF-report-2016-1-Critical-aspects.pdf 
[Accessed 28 Dec 2017].
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2015). Towards a circular economy: Business 
rationale for an accelerated transition. [pdf] Available at: https://www.
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/TCE_Ellen-MacArthurFoundation_9-Dec-2015.pdf [Accessed 29 Dec 2016].
Franco, M. (2017). Circular economy at the micro level: A dynamic view of 
incumbents’ struggles and challenges in the textile industry. Journal of cleaner 
production. Vol. 168, pp. 883–845.
Goldsworthy, K. (2014). Design for cyclability: Pro-active approaches for 
maximising material recovery. Making futures journal. Vol. 3.
Gulich, B. (2006). Designing textile products that are easy to recycle. In: Wang, 
Y. (eds.). Recycling in textiles, 1st ed. Boca Raton. Woodhead Publishing Ltd., 
pp. 25–37.
H&M & HKRITA. (2017). Technological breakthrough: Successful method found
for recycling blend textiles into new fibers. [pdf] Available at: http://www.hkrita.
| Design Strategies
127
com/marketing/PressRelease/20170911_HM_Foundation_x_HKRITA.pdf 
[Accessed 2 April 2018].
Kant Hvass, K. (2014). Post-retail responsibility of garments – a fashion 
industry perspective. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management. Vol. 18:4, 
pp. 413–430.
Kant Hvass, K. (2016). Weaving a path from waste to value: Exploring fashion 
industry business models and the circular economy. PhD. Copenhagen Business 
School. Available at: http://openarchive.cbs.dk/handle/10398/9282 
[Accessed 30 April 2017].
Lazar, J., Fen, J.H. & Hochheiser, H. (2010). Research methods in human-computer 
interaction. West Sussex. John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Mistra Future Fashion. (2017). Blend Re:wind, a new process that recycles both
cotton and polyester is now demonstrated in Sweden. [online] Available at: 
http://mistrafuturefashion.com/rewind-recycles-cotton-polyester/ 
[Accessed 15 Dec 2017].
Niinimäki, K. (2017). Fashion in a circular economy. In: Henninger, C.E., 
Alevizou, P., Goworek, H. & Ryding, D. (eds.). Sustainability in fashion:
A cradle to upcycle approach. Cham, Switzerland. Palgrave Macmillan,
pp. 151–169.
Palme, A., Peterson, A., de la Motte, H., Theliander, H. & Brelid, H. (2017).
Development of an efficient route for combined recycling of PET and 
cotton from mixed fabrics. Textiles and clothing sustainability. Vol. 3:1. [pdf] 
Available at: http://textclothsustain.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/
s40689-017-0026-9.
Payne, A. (2015). Open-and closed-loop recycling of textile and apparel 
products, In: Muthu, S. (ed.). Handbook of life cycle assessment (LCA) of 
textiles and clothing, 1st ed. Cambridge, UK: Elsevier Ltd., pp. 103–123.
Wedin, H., Gupta, C., Mzikian, P., Englund, F., Hornbuckle, R., Troppenz, V.,
Kobal, L., Krečič, M., Costi, M., Ellams, D. & Olsson, S. (2017). Can
automated NIR technology be a way to improve the sorting quality of textile
waste? [pdf] Available at: https://static1.squarespace.com/static/
5891ce37d2b857f0c58457c1/t/5a0dced7419202640c130f81/1510854363825/
report4.pdf [Accessed 3 Jan 2018].
5 | ...The Case of circular.fashion |
128
Ulla Ræbild, Karen Marie Hasling
Design Strategies
Sustainable Design Cards: 
A Learning Tool for 
Supporting Sustainable 06
Design Strategies
129
The Sustainable Design Cards is a practice-oriented tool 
for designers and design educators working with product 
longevity and circular thinking. This chapter describes how 
and the context in which the cards were developed. The 
chapter contains an introduction of the cards by describing 
the structure and content of the individual card as well as 
of the deck. Then the use of the cards is illustrated through 
two case studies, and finally there is a reflection on the 
observed uses of the deck.
Keywords: Strategic design tools, sustainable approaches, circular thinking,
product longevity, design education
130
Introduction
The Sustainable Design Cards have been developed as a learning tool 
to inspire designers and additional actors in and relating to design to 
work with strategic approaches to sustainable development focusing on 
product longevity. The cards consist of a physical deck of 28 cards and a 
supporting digital platform with additional instructions and cases.
The cards have been developed with a dual focus; an educational 
and a corporate focus in order to reach existing real life challenges and 
future potentials.
The concept of sustainability is both far-reaching and complex. The 
cards focus on clarifying different ways in which design can support 
sustainable development or sustainable thinking.
The cards can be used to:
• Guide, inspire and create awareness towards sustainability in design 
processes 
• Frame and concretize processes and strategies for sustainable thinking
• Communicate knowledge and values to external stakeholders
• Create shared understanding in cross-disciplinary teams
• Reflect on and re-examine existing processes or strategies to identify 
new opportunities.
Background
Design for longevity and ways to work
with sustainability in design practice
In order to achieve a proper theoretical basis for the topic of the cards, 
which is design for longevity, it seemed relevant to unfold the concept 
of product lifetime with inspiration in Mestre and Cooper’s (2017) A 
multiple lifecycle approach to circular design and Cooper’s previous 
work on product life spans, slowing down consumption and preventing 
obsolescence (2010; 2005; 2004) as well as Bakker et al.’s circular business 
| Design Strategies
131
perspective (2014). This links to publications on circular business models 
from the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2013; 2012), and how product 
lifetime relates to product service and systems thinking as discussed by 
e.g. Ceschin (2013) and Vezzoli et al. (2014). To further emphasize the 
relation to sustainable design, the work draws on a design for sustainability framework proposed by Ceschin and Gaziulusoy that offers a 
mapping of ways in which sustainability is perceived and approached 
(2016). These ways are characterized by an increased understanding of 
the many complex and interacting issues that must be taken into consideration, in order to obtain a real and lasting impact (ibid. 144) and 
is in line with former and present developments within this domain as 
discussed by e.g. Bhamra and Lofthouse (2007), Lilley (2009), Keitsch 
(2015) and Manzini (2015).
The relevance of the card format relies on knowledge on methods 
use in design practice and education as discussed by e.g. Badke-Schaub 
et al. (2011), Roozenburg and Eekels (1995) and van Boeijen et al.
(2013), and on the practice of using cards in the context of design processes in and with organisations (IDEO 2003) and in education (Friis 
2016). Furthermore, we have developed the cards as ‘game pieces’ (tangible learning material) that have been shown to speed up the process 
and create common ground when working in teams (Hornecker 2014).
Developing the cards
The Sustainable Design Cards have been developed and matured in two 
iterations.
The first iteration took its starting point in a research project conducted between raw fur supplier and auction house Kopenhagen Fur 
and Design School Kolding (DSKD) focusing on perspectives of sustainability within the company from a design perspective (Skjold et 
al. 2016). The project was completed between August 2014 and March 
2016 and comprised four different research perspectives on fur and sustainability: cultural heritage, material processes, design approaches and 
user practices.
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
132
133
The first prototype of the deck was developed in a consecutive 
development project with the company (August to November 2016), 
where two fashion designers were employed to develop designs from 
design briefs centred on product longevity. Here the deck of cards was 
developed to enhance understandings of sustainability through dialogues with and observations of the designers. Further reading on this 
process can be found in Hasling and Ræbild (2017).
The second iteration, from January to September 2017, looked into 
teaching approaches to sustainability at Design School Kolding in order 
to develop learning tools helping students to navigate in a future sustainable landscape. The project focused on ensuring coherence between 
design and sustainable business models and was funded by The Danish 
Foundation for Entrepreneurship. Here the cards were re-evaluated 
and reformulated to target all students within the institution covering 
fashion, textiles, industrial, accessories and communications design.
In addition to the physical deck of cards, a supplementary digital 
platform was developed (www.sustainabledesigncards.dk). Besides 
the information on the physical cards, the digital platform provides 
company examples that show how the cards have been used by various 
companies and design students. All of the cards are available for download in pdf format.
By having a dual focus on the design of the cards, one from a corporate and one from an educational perspective, the cards have shown 
to be applicable and helpful to a broad span of actors with varying 
experience, disciplinary backgrounds and competences.
Figure 1. Developing the deck of 
cards with feedback from designers 
(photo by Karen Marie Hasling).
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
134
The deck of cards
The final deck comprises 28 cards in A6 format. The cards provide information on various sustainable design approaches such as ‘Customisation’, 
‘Environmentally Friendly Materials’, ‘Labelling’, ‘Multi-Functionality’ 
and ‘User-Understanding’. The complete list of cards can be found at 
the end of the text.
One side of the cards communicates visually, through symbols, 
while the other side contains written information on the particular 
approach.
Figure 2. Final deck of cards (photo by Liv Johanne Eskholm).
| Design Strategies
135
Figure 3. The Design for Longevity Compass.
Left: Compass base, right: compass with all
approaches (figures by Karen Marie Hasling).
The visual side is dominated by a visual compass model, ‘the longevity compass’ (Figure 3) that divides longevity into three different 
approaches to the concept of ‘lifetime’ within design for longevity.
These are ‘technical lifetime’, ‘functional lifetime’ and ‘emotional lifetime’, where ‘lifetime’ refers to the extent of efficient or sufficient use 
in a product (Cooper 2005) and is often measured in length of time.
The fact side presents information on the specific approach, including descriptions of what the approach is about, why it is useful, particular challenges, real life case examples, links to other approaches 
and further reading. A card example is shown in Figure 4.
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
136 | Design Strategies
Figure 4. An example of a card for the approach ‘Design for Disassembly’ 
with a graphics side (left) and an information side (right) (figures by Ulla Ræbild 
& Karen Marie Hasling).
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... | 137
Description of lifetimes
• Technical lifetime refers to the length of time a product stays in 
use before it breaks or wears out and often relates to the materials 
the product is made of. This can for example be when a zipper breaks 
or a pocket gets a hole. The technical lifetime of textile materials is 
described in for example Hatch and Gohl and Vilensky’s works on 
textiles science (Gohl and Vilensky 1984; Hatch 1993).
• Functional lifetime refers to the length of time a product stays in 
use before its functionality no longer meets the user’s expectations or 
needs and often relates to the physical design of the product. This can 
for example be a dress that no longer fits due to changing body size 
or a jacket that becomes too warm or cold due changing seasons or 
geographical place of living. In fashion and textiles, functional lifetime has been discussed by Clark (2008), Gwilt (2015) and Niinimäki 
(2013), among others.
• Emotional lifetime refers to the length of time a product stays in 
use before the user stops having emotional attachments to it. This can 
for example be a jacket inherited from a grandparent or a garment 
bought on a holiday as a personal souvenir. In the context of fashion 
and textiles, emotional lifetime is discussed by, for example, Chapman 
(2005) and Fletcher (2016).
Each approach is positioned in the compass as a cloud space, as each 
can be approached in multiple ways depending on the intention. Furthermore, the cloud spaces have been colour-coded in accordance 
with their orientation in the compass. Consequently, approaches that 
are oriented towards ‘technical lifetime’ have a blue hue, approaches 
that are oriented towards ‘physical lifetime’ have a green hue, and 
approaches that are oriented towards ‘emotional lifetime’ have a red 
hue. Finally, the position of cloud spaces considers the degree of 
control in the concept development and design process; thus, cloud 
spaces close to the centre can be strongly controlled, while cloud 
spaces that are positioned in the periphery of the compass can be less 
controlled and are controlled by outside actors and factors.
138
In combination with the longevity compass, six categories that 
work across the product lifecycle can also be used as a way to navigate 
between the cards (see Figure 5). The categories are ‘Material, ‘Production’, ‘Transport and Retail’, ‘User and Practice, ‘Recovery’ and ‘Design 
and Concept’. Each card displays between one and four categories represented by visual icons under the longevity compass.
Material relates to aspects concerning raw materials procurement, such 
as mining minerals, extracting crude oil, breeding animals and growing 
crops, but also how to handle materials in the entire product lifecycle.
Examples of cards in the Material category are: 
• Environmentally Friendly Materials
• Mono-Material
• Technical Durability
Production concerns aspects within production and processes that 
add value to raw materials and apply them in components, part or end 
products. The category is related to ways in which products are produced and manufactured.
Examples of cards in the Production
category are: 
• Design for Disassembly
• Local Production
• Zero-Waste
| Design Strategies
139
Transport and Retail relate to aspects that concern logistics and handling in products’ journey from materials procurement, to production, 
to retail and sales and to recovery or recycling of materials or products.
Examples of cards in the Transport and Retail category are:
• E-Shop
• Ethical Supply Chain
• Production on Demand
User and Practice concern products’ use phase and thus how products 
are used and worn, and how, while in use, users can relate to products.
Examples of cards in the User and Practice category are:
• Co-Creation
• Re-Use
• Repair
Recovery relates to aspects that deal with what happens to materials and products after use or in-between lifecycles and how a product 
lifespan can be prolonged through this.
Examples of cards in the Recovery category are:
• Formal Alteration and Modification
• Mono-Material
• Rental Service
Design and Concept relate to aspects in which the designer can 
‘program’ prolonged lifetime through ways of working with concepts.
Examples of cards in the Design and Concept category are:
• Embedded Storytelling
• Modularity
• Multi-Functionality
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
Figure 5. The six Design for Longevity categories: Material, Production, 
Transport and Retail, User and Practice, Recovery, and Design and Concept 
in relation to a product lifecycle (figure by Karen Marie Hasling).
140
User experiences with
the deck of cards
During autumn 2017, the deck was distributed to designers and 
researchers internationally, mainly by word of mouth and by request.
Due to funding, it was possible to make the first batch free and also 
hand out cards to colleagues and students at DSKD, who in this period 
engaged in sustainability projects. Two of those DSKD projects have 
been included here as cases to further the understanding of how the 
cards might aid sustainable design development. Nine case participants 
within four user perspectives have been interviewed, as illustrated in 
Figure 6.
The first case was a six-week shoe design course developed with 
Danish shoe brand ECCO. The project was interdisciplinary, meaning 
the students worked in mixed groups of four to five people with backgrounds in fashion, textile, accessory and industrial design. Based on 
a design brief, each group developed a concept and three prototyped 
shoes. This year the brief included a demand for a sustainable strategy.
The case study includes two participants to represent the instructors a) the overall ECCO project leader and head of textiles, and b) 
the external Belgian shoe designer who took part in supervising the 
groups. Representing the learners are four first semester master students, who worked together in a group.
The second case was a one-day workshop organised by Sustainable Prosperity (SP). SP is an EU funded collaboration between the 
design cluster Design to innovate – D2i, Southern Denmark Region 
and DSKD. Within SP small to medium sized companies in the Danish 
fashion and textile sector work with sustainability and innovation in 
workshops facilitated by consultant designers. Here a total of 30 companies have worked for 5 months each on improving business models in 
order to strengthening their sustainability performance.
The case study includes a workshop facilitator from the project to 
represent the instructors. Representing the learners are a workshop 
participant, who has a company that develops baby equipment such as 
| Design Strategies
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... | 141
baby carrier sleeping bags. The workshop participants used the cards to 
map out current and future sustainability activities and strategies on a 
company timeline.
Semi-structured interviews (Kvale and Brinkman 2008) have been 
conducted of approximately 20–30 minutes each. The interview guide 
centred on when and how the cards were used, as well as possible 
strengths and weaknesses of the deck. None of the participants received 
any introduction to the cards prior to their use. All of the participants 
were interviewed after their experiences with the cards.
In the tables below, interview excerpts are organised in emerging themes. The tables are categorized in themes: collaboration, process, 
communication, understandings and challenges for the educational context 
(Table 1) and the industrial context (Table 2). The utterances have 
been condensed for readability purposes and are followed by reflections on the outcome below.
Figure 6. Overview of the natures of the four perspectives discussed 
through the cases; in relation to the context being ‘education’ versus 
‘industry’ and the role of the participants being ‘instructor’ or ‘learner’ 
(photo by Liv Johanne Eskholm).
Instructor Learner
Industry Education
142
INSTRUCTORS LEARNERS
COLLABORATION The cards have enabled the students
to negotiate and identify what they want 
to focus on in relation to sustainability.
Sustainability is complex, because all
categories in the lifecycle are interlinked. 
However, the students have used the 
cards to identify their take.
In the beginning, the students were 
thinking very differently and the cards 
have provided a common ground.
First the students identified relevant
cards individually and then used these
to negotiate project focus in the group.
PROCESS Instead of starting from a problem, the 
students started with the cards and used 
them to identify the most important idea 
that they wanted to apply to the project.
The cards helped the students to plan, 
strategize and investigate a sustainable 
take on the project. In the process, they 
gained new insights on the complete 
product lifecycle.
The cards helped the teachers, to keep 
the students focused on their chosen 
sustainable approach throughout the 
process.
Students have used the cards to
iteratively reflect on their idea in terms
of knowledge building, research strands
and design potentials.
Students have used the cards like a go 
to encyclopaedia i.e. an accessible and 
available source on sustainable strategies, 
where they did not have to read through 
extensive texts first.
COMMUNICATION The students used the cards before 
the final presentation to reflect on 
their process, core themes and main 
achievements in the project.
The cards where used in visual 
presentations for internal and external 
stakeholders.
Students found that the cards can be
useful for raising awareness on 
sustainability among people that are
not designers.
Table 1. Experiences of use of cards in the educational context.
| Design Strategies
143
UNDERSTANDING The teachers found that some groups 
chose several approaches that they
found to be important and made their 
own product life cycle using the cards.
It is an important part within an approach, 
that students consider and take care 
people.
Students express that they like the way 
the cards exemplify the approaches in
the information and the real design and 
brand examples.
Some of the students said, that they 
would like to use the cards outside
the context of the school, for example
if they work as freelancers, as a way of 
checking for sustainable strategies and 
potentials.
CHALLENGES When students chose an approach,
they had to be aware of what is needed 
in the design to achieve this approach. 
This could be difficult for the students 
because the overall subject, here shoe 
design, was new to them. In the future, 
the teacher will present the card lifecycle 
and categories next to a shoe specific 
product lifecycle, and look for similarities 
and differences, as a shoe life cycle is 
more complex.
Students did not use the compass much, 
but that might be because the cards
where new to the teacher too. Next
time, the teacher will try to work more 
with the cards and explain to students 
how to go more into depth with the 
information.
Teachers found that it might be relevant
to have a deck that is an extended version 
on materials, also for companies.
Students found that you have to be
used to using methods, to understand
that it is a tool and not a guideline. That 
you don’t HAVE to do it like it says on
the cards, but it is intended to help you
in whatever way it can, in relation to
your project or in a co-working situation.
For some students, there were too
many cards. They found the individual 
cards easy to work with, but all the
other cards could be a distraction.
Other students found that it was both 
positive and negative that there were 
many cards. It can be hard to choose, 
but it also provides choices and allow 
narrowing down number of approaches
in the process.
To begin with, students had to spend 
some time investigating the deck, to 
understand all the colours and symbols. 
They admittedly didn’t read the 
information folder.
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
144
INSTRUCTOR LEARNER
COLLABORATION Two small companies participated in the 
workshop. First, they worked individually 
with the cards and then they sparred with 
and presented their work to each other.
–
PROCESS The instructor highlighted that the cards 
were used to identify already existing 
initiatives within the companies.
The instructor noticed that learners lay 
out the card in relation to ‘how they
relate to each other’ and ‘how they relate 
to us’; thereafter they were grouped in 
‘this we do’ and ‘this we do not do’.
The instructor wants to continue to use 
the lifecycle model, but with addressing
the question ‘what might be?’
The learner related the cards to the 
persona they were asked to develop in 
the workshop by asking ‘how can we 
apply these cards to the persona and
to the things we imagine will happen to 
the future persona?’.
The learner elaborated on, what they as 
a company have resources to do. Here 
the cards were helpful to discuss different 
approaches, for example ‘how they could 
disassemble the product after use and 
re-cycle it?’
COMMUNICATION According to the instructor, it can be 
overwhelming for participants to get 
acquainted with all the cards. Therefore, 
the instructor made an index for all the
terms and approaches that was introduced in the beginning of the workshop.
For a next time, the instructor would
like to make a better introduction to the
cards including case examples. This would 
make it easier to understand that there 
are different levels of how well the cases 
perform in terms of sustainability.
The learner spent a lot of energy asking 
themselves what each individual card 
was about so it could be communicated 
with their Chinese supplier and Bulgarian 
manufacturer.
According to the learner, specifically one 
of the cards appealed to a more open
and communicative approach on how to 
share their message with the consumer. 
They acknowledge that they have to 
include the consumer more in the process.
UNDERSTANDING The instructor already uses a number 
of models and for this workshop it 
was found interesting to test the cards 
because they fitted into an existing model 
representing circular economy.
For the learner and her colleagues, the 
examples on the cards were used a lot to 
understand, how the cards can be used.
Table 2. Experiences of use of cards in industry context.
| Design Strategies
145
The instructor noticed that participants 
read the cards closely and took a long 
time doing so. They went through every 
card and talked about what it could mean. 
According to the instructor, companies 
find ‘Mono-Material’ hard to understand; 
especially within a textile context, because 
it requires to look at the fiber level and 
not only at the object itself.
If you, as a company wish to work with 
something sustainable and understand
how your company fits into these things, 
the cards were really relevant and helpful, 
as they provide a summary of thoughts 
and expressions in a holistic way.
For many aspects, the learner’s company 
would not be able to fit in with the cards, 
but there were also a lot of things, where 
the cards matched with their direction. 
The importance of these (in a sustainable 
context) was not something the learner 
was aware of before working with the 
cards.
To this she noticed, that one approach 
had been offered by the learner’s manufacturer for the last year and during the 
workshop she thought: ‘Why not catch 
the ball now?’
CHALLENGES The instructor emphasized that the cards 
should initiate own reflections among 
those using them, by means of what do
we know?, what have we heard?, what do
we find interesting? Or makes us wonder?
It was difficult for the learners, most likely 
because many terms were new to them. 
The instructor hoped to lift the participants’ knowledge on circular economy,
which didn’t happen in the given workshop. She argued, that the cards should be 
used as the frame for a complete line of 
workshops, with the value chain as a key.
The instructor commented on the fact 
that the names of the category icons 
only appear in the folder and not on the 
individual cards. However, this would help 
to remind the users to remember and 
recognise the categories.
The biggest challenge for the learner was 
the English terms. Even though she’s used 
to communicating with foreign suppliers, 
these terms were completely different.
It was hard to remember everything even 
after having been through all the cards
and during the workshop is was necessary 
to reassess the cards and discuss in which 
contexts they could be used.
The learner was not sure if she would’ve 
been able to figure out how to work
with the cards by herself. Nevertheless, 
she acknowledges that there is not real 
right or wrong way, but propose adding 
some explained examples of how the 
cards can be used.
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
146
Reflection on use practices
When looking at the experiences, similarities and differences in the 
users’ application and understanding of the deck emerge. The difference 
in length and set-up of the use contexts apart, it can overall be established that the four user types have found the cards helpful in addressing and working with sustainability. However, the way that they have 
worked with the cards, and the challenges they have encountered in 
doing so, seem to differ depending on the task. The reflections are summarized in the following sections.
Descriptive and prescriptive use modes
Firstly, the interviews show a divide between the two types of learning challenges: to develop a novel design concept in a design educational context versus to develop sustainable strategies in an existing 
company. The design students work from a clean slate, and use the cards 
within the group to identify and negotiate sustainability approaches 
that can suit their common interests and conceptual sub-theme. Then 
they develop a circular business model strategy, and use the cards again 
later in the project to evaluate the outcome. The company participants, on the other hand, use the cards firstly to evaluate and understand their existing practice, in terms of sustainable potentials, and then 
to plan future strategic developments. So, there seems to be two kinds 
of modes, depending on whether you are developing something from 
scratch, or you are in the process of transition. For both types of learners, a core exercise seems to have been to narrow down the number of 
cards applied through an iterative editing process. This has been done in 
order to focus the development and get a clear understanding of where 
in the product lifecycle the main effort is to be made and then build a 
circular strategy from this point.
| Design Strategies
147
Novel versus trained user
Another divide can be identified between novel and trained users in 
terms of working with design methods and design cards. Generally, it 
seems to have been more challenging for the external users, than for 
the DSKD users to apply and understand the cards as a tool. The same 
can be said about the sustainability terminology used on the cards, 
where especially the companies experience a rather steep learning 
curve, but then they also had a lot less time. The challenges show, that 
as an instructor it is worth considering the ‘baggage’ that both you and 
the learners bring in terms of level of prior experiences or education. It 
can also point towards further development of the associated webpage 
to provide novel users with guidelines.
Barriers versus creative constraints
Acknowledging the experiences obtained in the interviews, bearing 
in mind that it is a very small sample group, the instructors overall 
find that the deck raises the learners’ awareness of how to address 
sustainability through design. Moreover, that the deck forces a holistic and circular perspective, as any given choice in approach links to 
consequences. Instructors also depict a process whereby learners slowly 
embed the cards in practise – e.g. the up-cycling card was sunk into the 
up-cycling shoe concept and final design; the design for disassembly 
card was sunk into the company timeline and future strategy. Hence, 
sustainability, when addressed through the deck, becomes a creative 
constraint that inspires new thinking and doing. The feedback from 
ECCO, for example, was that the projects, in the course described in 
this study, represented the best outcome yet, in terms of creativity and 
research depths. This is an important insight, as sustainability is often 
perceived as a barrier by students – as something that will somehow 
limit their creativity rather than enhance it.
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
148
Teaching tool
Challenges expressed in terms of using the deck as a teaching tool relates 
to the many types of information on the cards, which takes a while to 
understand. It was also pointed out, that in order to use the deck, one 
needs to have a strong understanding of the subject that one is applying 
it to, or any development is jeopardised by superficiality. This might not 
always be possible in educational contexts as the cards are likely to be 
applied to subject areas that are new to students. The instructors further 
point to a challenge: When you work with design and sustainability, you 
encounter many different conceptual models and maybe you have even 
developed your own. So how does the models and information on the 
cards align with what you, as a teacher, wish to present? 
Accessibility
Learners generally express a positive impact. For example, that the cards 
provide overview and insights without having to read through masses 
of literature; that they raise awareness of what you already do and how 
this can be further developed. That they provide industry context, and 
enable internal and external communication. The fact that the deck was 
free, is stressed as a strong plus. The company participants suggest for 
the deck to be given to all start-ups, so that a circular strategy is considered from the beginning. All express that they would have liked an 
introduction to content and use up front. Nevertheless, all participants 
express new understandings of how to work with sustainability and 
product lifetime in a circular perspective.
Further developments
Based on this small-scale case study, the cards seem to show potential 
in terms of aiding sustainable development through circular strategies 
for practice and education. Some interviewees mentioned that perhaps 
more in-depth and specialised decks could be developed, e.g. on materials, or design for social sustainability. It is also suggested to include 
| Design Strategies
149
an index of the cards. Industry requested best case examples on the 
webpage that show how companies have made the transition in business strategy from linear to circular.
In closing, the authors of this chapter hope that the Sustainable 
Design Cards can nurture the belief, that diffusion of awareness is as relevant a strategy as the often mentioned up-scaling of production when 
the goal is to further sustainability and its impact on the world.
References
Badke-Schaub, P., Daalhuizen, J. & Roozenburg, N.F.M. (2011). Towards 
a designer-centered methodology: Descriptive considerations and 
prescriptive reflections, in: The future of design methodology. London.
Springer, pp. 181–197.
Bakker, C.A., den Hollander, M.C., van Hinte, E. & Zijlstra, Y. (2014). Products 
that last – Product design for circular business models. Delft. TU Delft.
Bhamra, T. & Lofthouse, V. (2007). Design for sustainability: A practical approach.
New York. Gower Publishing.
Ceschin, F. (2013). Sustainable product-service systems: Between strategic design and 
transition studies. Uxbridge. Springer.
Ceschin, F. & Gaziulusoy, I. (2016). Evolution of design for sustainability:
From product design to design for system nnovations and transitions.
Design studies. Vol. 47, pp. 118–163.
Chapman, J. (2005). Emotionally durable design: Objects, experiences and empathy.
New York. Earthscan.
Clark, H. (2008). SLOW + FASHION—an oxymoron—or a promise for the 
future …? Fashion theory. Vol. 12, 427–446.
Cooper, T. (Ed.) (2010). Longer lasting products: Alternatives to the throwaway society.
Farnham. Gower.
Cooper, T. (2005). Slower consumption – Reflections on product life spans
and the “throwaway society.” Journal of industrial ecology. Vol. 9, pp. 51–68.
Cooper, T. (2004). Inadequate life? Evidence of consumer attitudes to product 
obsolescence. Journal of consumer policy. Vol. 27, 421–449.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation EMF (2013). Towards the circular economy vol. 2.
Ellen McArthur Foundation.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation EMF (2012). Towards the circular economy vol. 1.
Ellen McArthur Foundation.
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... |
150
Fletcher, K. (2016). Craft of use: Post-growth fashion. New York. Routledge.
Friis, S.A.K. (2016). The 6C model. The international journal of design in society.
Vol. 10, pp. 13–30.
Gohl, E.P.G. & Vilensky, L. (1984). Textile science: An explanation of fibre properties.
Melbourne. Guilford Publications.
Gwilt, A. (2015). Fashion design for living. New York. Routledge.
Hasling, K.M. & Ræbild, U. (2017). Sustainability cards: Design for longevity. In: 
Proceedings of PLATE 2017 – Product Lifetimes and the Environment. Presented 
at the PLATE 2017 – Product Lifetimes and the Environment, Delft, the 
Netherlands.
Hatch, K. (1993). Textile science. St. Paul. West Publishing Company.
Hornecker, E. (2014). Creative idea exploration within the structure of a guiding 
framework: The card brainstorming game. Proceedings of TEI 2010. ACM.
IDEO (2003). IDEO method cards: 51 ways to inspire design. Palo Alto. William 
Stout Architectural Books.
Keitsch, M. (2015). Sustainable design – Concepts, methods and practices.
In: Redclift, M., Springett, D. (eds.). Routledge international handbook of 
sustainable design. New York. Routledge, pp. 164–178.
Kvale, S. & Brinkman, S. (2008). InterViews: Learning the craft of qualitative research 
interviewing. London. SAGE Publications.
Lilley, D. (2009). Design for sustainable behaviour: Strategies and perceptions.
Design studies. Vol. 30, pp. 704–720.
Manzini, E. (2015). Design, when everybody designs: An introduction to design for 
social innovation. Cambridge. MIT Press.
Mestre, A. & Cooper, T. (2017). Circular product Design. A multiple loops life 
cycle design approach for the circular economy. The design journal. Vol. 20, 
pp. 1620–1635.
Niinimäki, K. (Ed.) (2013). Sustainable fashion: New approaches. Helsinki. Aalto 
University
Roozenburg, N.F.M. & Eekels, J. (1995). Product design: fundamentals and methods.
Utrecht. Lemma.
Skjold, E., Hasling, K.M., Ræbild, U. & Tanderup, S. (2016). Fur and 
sustainability – A design perspective. Design School Kolding.
van Boeijen, A., Daalhuizen, J., Zijlstra, J. & van der Schoor, R. (2013).
Delft design guide. Delft. BIS Publishers.
Vezzoli, C., Kohtala, C., Srinivasan, A., Xin, L., Fusakul, M., Sateesh, D. & 
Diehl, J.C. (eds.) (2014). Product-service system design for sustainability.
New York. Greenleaf Publishing.
| Design Strategies
6 | Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool... | 151
Overview of cards
Aesthetic Lifetime
Co-Creation
Customisation
Design for 
Disassembly
E-Shop
Embedded
Storytelling
Environmentally
Friendly Materials
Ethical
Supply Chain
Formal Alteration
and Modification
Formal Sharing
and Heritage
Informal Alteration
and Modification
Informal Sharing
and Heritage
Information
Labelling
Local Production
Maintenance
Modularity
Mono-Material
Multi-Functionality
Product History
Production
on Demand
Re-Use
Rental Service
Repair
Technical
Durability
Up-Cycling
User
Understanding
Zero-Waste
152
Nancy M.P. Bocken, Karen Miller,
Ilka Weissbrod, Maria Holgado, Steve Evans
Business Thinking
Slowing Resource Loops 
in the Clothing Industry 
through Circular Business 07
Model Experimentation
153
The fashion industry is characterised by downward pressures 
on prices, fast consumption, and a high ‘disposability factor’, 
where textiles and clothing have become consumables rather 
than durables. Circular economy, focused on slowing, closing 
and narrowing resource loops provides a promising approach 
to tackle these issues. This chapter explores how a large retailer 
can incorporate the more challenging strategies of the circular 
economy, those focused on slowing resource loops, in their 
business model. The chapter provides an in-depth case study of 
a large international clothing retailer embarking on a journey 
of circular business model experimentation. An iterative process 
is presented as well as opportunities and barriers associated 
with slow consumption business models as part of the business 
model experimentation process. Based on this, suggestions for 
researchers, policy makers and practitioners are made to address 
slow consumption as part of business models.
Keywords: Slow consumption, circular economy, business model 
experiment, sustainable business model, circular business model,
clothing retailing
154
Background
Sustainability has become a major issue in the fashion industry. While 
there is downward pressure on prices and increasing competition, there 
is a growing concern about social and environmental issues (Miller 
2016; Bocken et al. 2018). Unsustainable levels of clothing consumption and associated disposal patterns are driving demand exacerbating the issues in the industry (Niinimäki & Hassi 2011). It is estimated 
that in the past 15 years clothing production has doubled, driven by a 
growing middle-class and increased per capita consumption in mature 
economies (EMF 2017). This is linked to the fast fashion phenomenon, 
characterised by quicker turnarounds of collections and styles per year, 
lower prices and a disposable nature of fashion: it has been estimated 
that half of fast fashion produced is disposed of within a year (EMF 
2017). If the current trajectory continues going forward, the clothing 
industry will account for using 300 million tonnes of non-renewable 
resources by 2050, triple the amount of the 98 million tonnes in 2015 
(EMF 2017).
The circular economy may be viewed as a potential paradigm to 
combat sustainability challenges (Blomsma & Brennan 2017; Geissdoerfer et al. 2017; Ghisselini et al. 2016). While the circular economy 
paradigm has been criticised for emphasizing the ‘easier’ corporate 
environmental strategies such as recycling (Allwood 2014), the discourse is shifting towards including strategies of slowing resource loops 
and tackling unsustainable consumption patterns (Bocken et al. 2016a).
However, in reality business practice is behind and the concept is still 
in its infancy (Blomsma & Brennan 2017). The ‘radical’ forms of circular business model innovation, such as those associated with slowing 
resource loops and consumption (e.g. sharing, Product-Service-Systems)
and remanufacturing models are still relatively low on the corporate 
agenda to date, based on a content analysis of corporate reports of S&P 
500 firms (Bocken et al. 2017).
The linear economy is characterised by taking (materials, energy), 
making (production) and disposing products after a limited number of 
| Business Thinking
Figure 1. From destroying value in a linear economy to retaining value 
in a circular economy (Achterberg et al. 2016). 
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
ADD VALUE
repair/maintain
RETAIN VALUE
reuse/redistribute
refurbish
remanufacture
recycle
PRE-USE USE POST-USE
DESTROY VALUE
retail
assembly
manufacturing
extraction
user
ADD VALUE
PRE-USE USE POST-USE
155
156
uses (Bocken et al. 2016a; EMF 2017). In contrast, the circular economy 
can be defined as a “regenerative system in which resource input and 
waste, emission, and energy leakage are minimised by slowing, closing, 
and narrowing material and energy loops. This can be achieved through 
long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, refurbishing, and recycling” (Geissdoerfer et al. 2017, 759). At the same time, 
other reviews of circular economy literature have highlighted the necessity of not neglecting the social dimension (Blomsma & Brennan 2017; 
Murray et al. 2015). It is argued that “what aids or inhibits socioinstitutional change in waste and resource management can be enriched by 
paying attention to how material flows are shaped by, and interact with, 
nonmaterial flows, that is, the different forms of social embeddedness.” 
(Blomsma & Brennan 2017, 611).
The current textiles system can be described as predominantly 
linear: non-renewable resources are extracted to produce that are often 
used just once or twice after which the materials are landfilled or incinerated (EMF 2017, 3). Clothing represents over 60% of the total textiles used (EMF 2017). The Ellen MacArthur Foundation estimates that 
USD 500bn of value is lost every year due to ‘clothing underutilisation 
and the lack of recycling’ (EMF 2017). In contrast, in a future circular 
economy, materials such as textiles should be maintained at the highest 
level as long as possible through strategies such as maintenance and 
repair, service and warrantees as well as reuse over time (Achterberg 
et al. 2016). Currently, material, environmental and economic value are 
destroyed rather than maintained (Figure 1). This linear take-makedispose model has numerous negative environmental and societal 
impacts related to greenhouse gases, water use, toxic emissions, and 
landfilling, and associated health, safety, and wellbeing impacts (EMF 
2017). Hence, new ways of doing business are urgently needed.
Circular business model innovation may be viewed as a systemic way 
to tackle the take-make-dispose paradigm. Business models include a 
value proposition (product-service offering to the customer and wider 
society), value creation and delivery (what value is created and how) 
and value captured (the way in which money and other forms of value 
| Business Thinking
157
are captured) (Richardson 2008; Teece 2010; Bocken & Short 2016).
Sustainable business models are about creating positive value for the 
environment and society, in addition to the customer; they integrate a 
multiple-stakeholder perspective in the way business is done, and specifically include environmental and societal parameters into the business purpose and metrics in addition to economic concerns (Stubbs & 
Cocklin 2008). As an example of a sustainable business model, circular business models emphasise environmental aspects and in particular 
how to shift away from a take-make-dispose paradigm to narrowing 
(efficiencies), closing (recycling) and slowing (reuse, slow consumption, 
remanufacturing) loops (Bocken et al. 2016a; Geissdoerfer et al. 2017).
To tackle the impending sustainability crisis, firms urgently need to 
innovate new business models. However to switch from a known model 
to an alternative one is risk laden (Chesbrough 2010; Teece 2010). As 
a result there is a need to trial new ways of doing business. Business 
experimentation is seen as a way to remain competitive in the longterm (Chesbrough 2010), while tackling key sustainability issues and the 
transition to a circular economy specifically (Kraaijenhagen et al. 2016; 
Weissbrod & Bocken 2017).
Business experimentation is a potential key avenue for accelerating 
change for sustainability by exploring diverse possibilities around how 
a business could create value, or understand what works in which particular situations in a real-life business context to address key sustainability challenges (Bocken et al. 2016b, Weissbrod & Bocken 2017). In 
contrast to pilots, experiments are fast, small scale and low cost (Ries 
2011; Osterwalder et al. 2014). While popular with startups, ‘large businesses can also find inspiration in business experimentation to develop 
sustainable business models and accelerate positive change for sustainability’ (Bocken et al. 2016b). Examples of experimentation practices 
include co-creation sessions, focus groups, Facebook A/ B tests (comparing the viability of two campaigns), and rapid service prototyping 
(e.g. digital prototyping through creating web landing pages or physical prototyping through creating low fidelity, e.g. simple paper versions) 
(Schuit et al. 2017).
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
158
This book chapter explores the case of a large international clothing retailer 
who has embarked on a journey of circular business model experimentation. It 
reports on the approach taken and overall findings obtained regarding 
slow consumption initiatives as an example.
Case study approach
The case study covers a 2.5-year collaborative research project (August 
2014–November 2016) part funded by Innovate UK, between the University of Cambridge and an established international clothing retailer.
The aim for the retailer was to eliminate clothing waste being disposed in landfill, using a circular business model approach. The project 
was about identifying pathways to transform the current linear business model to a more circular one, through business model and supply 
chain innovation facilitating recovery and reuse of clothing, using 
experiments.
Slowing resource loops – a focus on waste prevention in the first 
place by encouraging clothing reuse – was the emphasis of the project.
A secondary objective was to learn from this new approach and develop 
a circular business model experimentation capability. In the project, 
Figure 2. Iterative process of circular business model experimentation. 
Developed from Osterwalder et al. (2014) and Bocken et al. (2018).
| Business Thinking
Piloting
Rolling out
Ideating and clustering
Experimenting
Refining
159
experimentation was undertaken, building on Lean Startup techniques 
(Ries 2011; Blank 2013), characterised by rapid learning iterations in a 
low cost and resource manner (Ries 2011; 2017). While developed for 
startups, the Lean Startup approach could also apply to large businesses 
(Ries 2017; Weissbrod & Bocken 2017).
Figure 2 includes the process taking in the project. In this case study, 
we focus on the experiments that focused on slowing resource loops.
The authors were all involved in the research project. Insight from the 
case study was acquired through workshops and meetings attended 
(observations and recordings), documents and templates used during 
workshops, materials prepared in advance of meetings and workshops, 
notes taken during and after meetings and meetings and discussions and 
interviews with project members.
We split up the findings according to outcomes from the experimentation process and outcomes from the sewing club experiment 
focused on slowing resource loops. We also discuss additional experiments emerging from the sewing club experiment.
Experimentation
process findings
The project largely followed the steps in Figure 2 and during the 
project the focus was on ideating, experimenting and refining, and repeating this process multiple times. The process was effectual; the project 
team was building on emerging opportunities inside and outside 
the business, and continually engaging with key stakeholders (e.g.
senior management) and bringing in new stakeholders (e.g. NGOs, 
other societal actors) that could support the project (Sarasvathy 2001; 
Bocken et al. 2018). This emergent approach is also similar to the Lean 
Startup approach (Ries 2011). However, some broad recurring activities emerged throughout the project: prepare market, customer and 
environmental data; conduct stakeholder ideation workshop; generate new solutions for further analysis; run experiment to gather more 
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
160
insight (Bocken et al., 2018). In the ‘prepare market, customer and 
environmental data stage’, supporting data were collected to gain a 
better understanding of the market potential and business traction (e.g.
searching for growing startups, market reports and trends and investigating how it would fit the business). Also, the potential environmental 
impact of options was assessed using secondary data (e.g. Allwood et al.
2006; WRAP 2012; 2017) and rules of thumb, e.g. whether the innovation would contribute to slowing, closing or narrowing resource lops 
(Bocken et a., 2016a). This data collection process occurred throughout 
the project to support arguments and gain a better understanding of the 
new business models’ potential.
During the first ideation and clustering phases taking place during 
a 2-day workshop at the beginning of the project, over 200 ideas 
emerged. These ideas were clustered into themes: four themes focused 
on extending the useful life and retaining the value of clothes, and 
one theme was about improving circularity by recycling used clothing (Bocken et al. 2018). This case study reports on one of the themes, 
focused on retaining the value of clothes.
The easiest way to retain the value of clothes is to make them last 
longer. One key strategy to do this is to maintain and repair clothes 
and reuse them over time (WRAP 2012; 2017). During the brainstorm 
the idea of a ‘sewing club’ in shops emerged to create greater awareness 
about making clothes last longer, build skills, and create social interactions (in the shop, amongst young and old etc.) in addition to contributing to the environmental theme of making clothes last longer. The 
additional social benefits envisaged made this strategy fundamental for 
the large retailer and the experimentation process.
Based on this, as part of a larger sustainability event, an initial experiment was set up in a retail shop. The authors attended as participants 
and observers. In line with the Lean Startup approach and ideas on 
business experimentation (Ries 2011; Osterwalder et al. 2013), some 
hypotheses were formulated to test traction and interest with customers. Experiment cards were developed to start mapping the experiments 
taking place (Appendix A for an example).
| Business Thinking
161
Sewing club
experiment findings
Multiple lessons could be extracted from the ‘sewing club’ experiment 
in the clothing retail shop:
1. While initial hypotheses were formulated, there was a felt need to 
track all types of learning. The focus moved away from testing just 
the hypotheses and to understanding the broader context and business benefits of doing a sewing experience in a large retail shop.
This became critically important to the business as from observations and interviews made during the in-store experiment, even 
onlookers (i.e. people passing the sewing experiment location) 
became engaged with the concept linking the sewing, repairing and 
generally looking after clothes and the environment.
2. The focus of the experiment was on identifying the traction of the 
sewing concept with customers and specific hypotheses were formulated around this. However, the initial experiment retail shop 
manager (who was not part of the project team running the experiments) became highly enthusiastic about the event as it created a lot 
of customer traction and positive responses from the public, which 
resulted in the retail shop running more such events. In addition, 
this had a spill-over effect extending the trial events to other parts 
of the country. Potentially, in contrast to applying Lean Startup 
techniques in startups, the environment in large business is so 
complex and unpredictable (Miller 2016), and decision-making dispersed, the potential actions following an experiment become rather 
unpredictable. In some cases, this may be positive, for example when 
an experiment has failed the hypotheses test, but gets embedded 
because of other reasons (e.g. community spirit; building the brand; 
footfall in shop).
3. It remains hard to derive environmental impact improvement from 
snapshot experiments. For instance, the impact of business models 
focused on retaining the value of materials and clothes thus slowing 
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
162
resource loops will only be evident over time, in comparison to 
efficiency gains in manufacturing and design (narrowing resource 
loops) of which benefits are more instantly observable (Bocken et 
al. 2016a). It is recommended to test environmental impact or the 
‘environmental value proposition’ while designing the business 
model (Weissbrod & Bocken 2017; Manninen et al. 2018).
The experiments in the shop were seen as highly successful from a 
business and social perspective and as such activities were absorbed in 
current business practices. The experiment was subsequently repeated 
in nine other UK store locations. However, as noted above, the environmental impact improvement and understanding of changes in consumer behaviour were not immediately evident.
Additional experiments
To generate more learning, additional experiments were set up. These 
included a large scale survey to test consumer behaviour. A large online 
survey was developed, which yielded 1009 useable responses to test 
people’s sewing skills, interests and knowledge and how these elements 
extended garment lifespans. Findings from the online survey strongly 
supported the link between people sewing and repairing clothing and 
their attachment to the garments, extending their lifespan and reducing the volumes being disposed of. Furthermore, data were gathered 
in desk research and in customer interviews on the benefits of making 
clothes last longer. The secondary data confirmed that the single most 
important factor to reduce the impact associated with clothes would be 
to keep clothing for longer – while not buying more – thus reducing 
total production and consumption of fibers (e.g. Allwood et al. 2006; 
WRAP 2012).
The findings show that even within one ‘theme’ multiple types of 
experiments took place, ranging from desk research type of activity to 
online surveys and a set up in the store. This resonates with Ries (2011) 
| Business Thinking
163
and Schuit et al. (2017) who recommend multiple types of experimentation activities depending on the specific need.
Finally, in addition to the enthusiasm at the company itself for the 
concept, other large clothing retailers started to set up similar activities (or experiments) in their flagship stores, indicating that this concept 
provides an attractive value proposition indeed.
Discussion and conclusions
The current business models in the fashion industry are largely linear 
(EMF 2017). Circular business model innovation could potentially serve 
as a solution. However, there is a lack of frameworks supporting business model innovation within the context of the circular economy 
(Antikainen & Valkokari 2016). Addressing this gap, this chapter presents 
an overview of a method for circular business model innovation based 
on an experimentation approach. Experimentation with new business 
models is needed for long-term competitiveness (Chesbrough 2010) 
and addressing pressing sustainability challenges to change the way 
business is done (Weissbrod & Bocken 2017).
This chapter reports the case of a large retailer as an example of 
‘slowing loops business model experiments’ to retain the value of 
clothes and thus slow the use of resources over time. Slowing loops is 
a possible resource strategy for achieving more circular business models 
but initiatives currently co-exist with existing linear business models.
For instance, the sewing club initiative co-exists with existing sales 
models. Within the snapshot of an experiment, it is difficult to find 
evidence for environmental impact improvement as well as sales cannibalisation. These aspects would be more evident over time once the 
initiatives are put in practice. Hence, when implementing new business models sustainability concerns would need to be built in (e.g. an 
environmental value proposition) and progress needs to be tracked over 
time (Manninen et al. 2018; Weissbrod & Bocken 2017).
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
164
It was found that the social dimensions of the circular economy 
provide great potential for gaining traction in a business context (see 
also, Blomsma & Brennan 2017; Murray et al. 2015). The positive social 
aspects and community feel generated through the sewing experiments 
did create a strong case for the company to pursue these types of initiatives further. This gave the project leeway to investigate the potential 
environmental benefits (and how to improve the environmental value 
proposition) in more detail.
It should be noted that degrowth and absolute decoupling (Wells 
2016), focused on absolute reductions in consumption and environmental impact, remain a challenge in particular in a single business context 
under increasing market pressures. Moreover, frontrunners have failed in 
their degrowth experiments in the past. Patagonia for instance experimented with a zero-growth model, but struggled to keep up employee 
motivation in a zero-growth environment (Chouinard 2006; Bocken & 
Short 2016) 
Business model experimentation for sustainability and circularity 
can reveal the challenges and opportunities for a business to address sustainability and business challenges in parallel. It prompted a different 
way of thinking and capability within the case study retailer (as is also 
recommended in Ries 2017). Business model experimentation has the 
potential to set in motion change in an organisation (Chesbrough 2010; 
Ries 2017). However, to create true transformations, failure needs to be 
responded to with more experimentation and pivoting rather than stagnation in order to move beyond the status quo.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the EPSRC Centre for Innovative Manufacturing in Industrial Sustainability (Reference EP/I033351/1); the 
Innovate UK competition ‘Supply Chain Innovation towards a Circular Economy’ (IUK Ref 101902); and Climate-KIC, the public-private 
partnership created by the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (Regulation (EU) No 1292/2013).
| Business Thinking
165
References 
Achterberg, E., Hinfelaar, J. & Bocken, N.M.P. (2016). Master circular business 
models with the Value Hill. White paper, September 2016.
Allwood, J.M. (2014). Squaring the circular economy: The role of recycling 
within a hierarchy of material management strategies. In: Handbook of 
Recycling (Chapter 30), pp. 445–477. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
396459-5.00030-1
Allwood, J. M., & Laursen, S. E. Maldivo de Rodriguez, C. & Bocken, NMP 
(2006). Well dressed. The present and future sustainability of clothing and textiles 
in the United Kingdom. Cambridge, UK. University of Cambridge.
Antikainen, M., & Valkokari, K. (2016). Framework for sustainable circular 
business model innovation. Technology innovation management review. Vol.6:7, 
pp. 5–12.
Blank, S. (2013). The four steps to the epiphany. Pescadero. K&S Ranch Publishing.
Blomsma, F. & Brennan, G. (2017). The emergence of circular economy: A new 
framing around prolonging resource productivity. Journal of industrial ecology.
Vol. 21, 603–614. doi:10.1111/jiec.12603
Bocken, N.M.P., Ritala, P. & Huotari, P. (2017). The circular economy: 
Exploring the introduction of the concept among S&P 500 firms. Journal
of industrial ecology. (Commentary).
Bocken, N.M.P., Weissbrod, I., Miller, K., Holgado, M. & Evans, S. (2018).
Business model experimentation for circularity: Driving sustainability 
in a large international clothing retailer. Economics and policy of energy and 
environment (EPEE). Special issue on circular economy (accepted). 
Bocken, N.M.P., de Pauw, I., van der Grinten, B. & Bakker, C. (2016a). Product 
design and business model strategies for a circular economy. Journal of 
industrial and production engineering. Vol 32:1, pp. 67–81.
Bocken, N.M.P., Weissbrod, I. &Tennant, M. (2016b). Business model 
experimentation for sustainability. Sustainable design & manufacturing 
conference, Crete, Greece, 4–6 April 2016.
Bocken, N., & Short, S. (2016). Towards a sufficiency-driven business model: 
Experiences and opportunities. Environmental innovation and societal 
transitions. Vol. 18, pp. 41–61.
Chesbrough, H. (2010). Business model innovation: opportunities and barriers.
Long range planning. Vol. 43: 2, pp. 354–363.
Chouinard. Y. (2006). Let my people go surfing: The education of a reluctant 
businessman. New York, USA. Penguin Books.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF). (2017). A new textiles economy: Redesigning 
fashion’s future. Available at: http://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/
publications [Accessed 9 Jan 2018].
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
166
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. & Hultink, E. (2017). The circular 
economy – a new sustainability paradigm? Journal of cleaner production. Vol.
143, pp. 757–768.
Ghisellini, P., Cialani, C. & Ulgiati, S. (2016). A review on circular economy: 
the expected transition to a balanced interplay of environmental and 
economic systems. Journal of cleaner production. Vol. 114, pp. 11–32.
Kraaijenhagen, C., Van Oppen, C. & Bocken. N. (2016). Circular business. 
Collaborate & circulate. Amersfoort, Netherlands. Circular Collaboration.
Available at circularcollaboration.com
Manninen, K., Koskela, S., Antikainen, R., Bocken, N., Dahlbo, H. &
Aminoff, A. (2018). Do circular economy business models capture intended 
environmental value propositions? Journal of cleaner production. Vol. 171,
pp. 413–422.
Miller, K. (2016). Visionary leadership: learning from exemplary organizations.
In: A. Vecchi, & Buckley, C. (eds.), Handbook of research on global fashion 
management and merchandising. Hershey, USA. IGI Global, pp. 1–32.
Murray, A., Skene, K. & Haynes, K. (2015). The circular economy: An 
interdisciplinary exploration of the concept and application in a global context.
Journal of business ethics. Vol. 140, pp. 369–380.
Niinimäki, K., & Hassi, L. (2011). Emerging design strategies in sustainable 
production and consumption of textiles and clothing. Journal of cleaner 
production. Vol. 19:16, pp. 1876–1883.
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., Bernarda, G. & Smith, A. (2014). Value proposition 
design. Strategyzer series. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
Richardson, J. (2008). The business model: an integrative framework for 
strategy, Strategic change. Vo. 17:5–6, pp. 133–144.
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today’s entrepreneurs use continuous innovation 
to create radically successful businesses. London, UK. Penguin Books.
Ries, E. (2017). The startup way: How entrepreneurial management transforms culture 
and drives growth. Milton Keynes, UK. Penguin Random House.
Sarasvathy, S. (2001). Causation and effectuation: Toward a theoretical shift from 
economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency. The academy
of management review. Vol. 26:2, pp. 243–263.
Schuit, C, Baldassare, B. & Bocken, N. (2017). Sustainable business model 
experimentation practices: evidence from four start-ups. Product lifetimes
and the environment (PLATE), 8–10 November 2017.
Stubbs, W. & Cocklin, C. (2008). Conceptualizing a “sustainability business 
model”, Organization & environment. Vol. 21:2, pp. 103–127.
Teece, D. (2010). Business models, business strategy and innovation. Long range 
planning. Vol. 43: 2–3, pp. 172–194.
| Business Thinking
167
Weissbrod, I. & Bocken, N. (2017). Developing sustainable business 
experimentation capability – a case study. Journal of cleaner production.
Vol. 142, Part 4, pp. 2663–2676.
Wells, P. (2016). Degrowth and techno-business model innovation: the case
of Riversimple. Journal of cleaner production. (in press)
WRAP. (2012). Valuing our clothes. Available at: http://www.wrap.org.uk/
sites/files/wrap/VoC%20FINAL%20online%202012%2007%2011.pdf 
[Accessed 23 Jan 2018].
WRAP. (2017). Valuing our clothes. Available at: http://www.wrap.org.uk/
sites/files/wrap/valuing-our-clothes-the-cost-of-uk-fashion_WRAP.pdf 
[Accessed 22 Jan 2018].
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
168
EXTENDING CLOTHES LIFE
(a) A clothes repair service in store + (b) Sewing lessons in cafes to provide customers with basic skills
to repair clothes themselves – possibility to repair clothes leads to extending the use and retaining
the value of their clothes.
Primary learning: Secondary learning:
Will people come to the store
(a) to have clothes repaired
(for a charge, only minor repairs) or
(b) to acquire basic skills for 
repairing clothes?
Will people purchase less clothes or throw away less clothes as a result
of being able to repair them (themselves or with the repair service)?
Extended service: Will people come to the stores for clothes alterations 
and refurbishment? Will they come for a “refashion” workshop where
their old clothes are transformed into new ones or other items?
Social dimension: Will people come to store cafes for social activities 
(organised & linked to sewing)?
Experiment description:
Investigate whether people use their clothes longer if they learn how to repair them or there is an easily available 
service to have them repaired/minor alterations.
Additionally, would people be willing to bring other clothes for refashioning and will this change their behaviours 
towards unworn clothes/clothes that would be thrown away?
Thirdly, would a social dimension (e.g. meet-ups in store café) increase any of the above behaviours?
DRAFT EXPERIMENT 1: DRAFT EXPERIMENT 2: DRAFT EXPERIMENT 3:
Demand test: Advertise a repair 
service on the store website, where 
customers can search by inputting 
their post code. This would gauge 
demand as well as geographical 
spread. They can be surveyed on 
what type of repair would they 
require. 
Behaviour change test: Recruit 
xxx customers to participate in one 
or a set of repair classes in cafes 
or community rooms (recruitment 
could be done during sewingrelated events to get access to early 
adopters and by other means to get 
two control groups). Opportunity 
to test during a sustainability event.
Behaviour change: Organise 
workshops for transforming old 
clothes into new ones or other 
items (bags, phone cases etc.). 
Customers bring their old clothes 
and their ideas to modify/remake 
them and the company help them 
to realise it. A first test could be 
done during a sustainability event, 
but will need to repeat in other 
locations to for the completion
of the experiment.
Appendix A. Experiment cards used in the project (building on Osterwalder et al., 2014). 
| Business Thinking
169
Additional qualitative questionnaire (online or in person
surveys): would people be interested in such a service? Would it
make a difference to have the service offered by a trusted brand in 
a convenient location? Would they 
buy less clothes/throw away less 
clothes/wear their clothes more as 
a result of having them altered?
Key learning: is there demand for 
such a service; what are the best 
locations to place a physical shop? 
Extension: Based on results, 
set-up a physical location to place 
a pop-up alteration shop in a store. 
Analyse activity and interview customers: are they satisfied with the 
service? Do they buy less clothes/
wear the repaired clothes more as 
a result of having them fixed?
Key learning: do they find it 
useful? Do people go back home 
and repair their own clothes? Do 
people buy less clothes? Do people 
use their own clothes more?
Key learning: Do people perceive 
a value increase to their clothes? 
Do they use them afterwards? 
Does this reduce the number of 
clothes they buy? 
Additional details
What are the issues we are 
trying to address with this 
solution:
Disposal of clothes with minor 
damage, e.g. missing button/s.
Lack of knowledge on repair and 
alterations, even in local shops.
Additional questions we might 
need to understand better:
If people are willing to come to 
store cafes for social activities, is 
there an opportunity to organise 
other events such as swapping 
events?
Ride on the maker-movement 
wave.
Desktop research:
Analyse data from store repair 
service regarding the most frequent 
alterations we perform at the 
moment.
Work with other established alterations shops to understand the
types of alterations they perform.
Any other research available on 
why people throw away clothes 
(from secondary sources)
Repair guides online: if repair 
advice/guides are available online, 
would people be interested on 
them? Would they use them?
7 | Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing Industry... |
170
Kerli Kant Hvass
A Consumer-centered 
Approach for Managing
Post-consumer Textile 
Flows
Textile Waste
08
171
Post-consumer textile waste is an increasing problem 
throughout the world. To a great extent, post-consumer 
textile waste is a consumer affair as consumers decide if a 
garment ends up in a waste bin or elsewhere. With adjusted 
user behaviour and awareness of textile reuse and recycling 
possibilities, products can be used for a maximum length of 
time and further recycled into other products and materials.
This chapter argues for the need for a more consumer 
centered approach to post-consumer textile waste and 
proposes a multicomponent and integrated solution for 
collecting consumers’ unwanted clothes.
Keywords: Circular economy, post-consumer textile waste, reuse and 
recycling, consumer engagement 
172 | Textile Waste
Circular economy of fashion
Circular economy has over the recent years become a buzzword for the 
fashion industry and an increasing number of initiatives and business 
models have been introduced to the market that focus on resource efficiency and product end-of-life issues with the aim of transforming the 
industry from linear to circular (Kant Hvass 2016). The concept of the 
circular economy has many variants and a rich set of historical antecedents. One of the first conceptualizations is from Stahel (1994) who 
links circular economy to resource cycling where two circles are highlighted: product-specific loop that focuses on reuse and product-life 
extension practices and material-specific loop, that focuses on material 
recycling. Circular economy aims to design products and optimize production to eliminate waste by enabling efficient reuse of products and 
recycling of materials. In the context of the fashion industry, circular 
economy means minimizing waste through a product’s entire life cycle 
by designing products that are durable and recyclable, applying more 
resource-efficient and sustainable practices within production, prolonging the life of garments by repair and reuse and finally integrating recycled fibers in new products, thus minimizing the use of virgin materials 
(Kant Hvass 2016).
The majority of the current fashion industry is still dominated by 
a linear “take, make, dispose” economic model, which relies on large 
quantities of cheap, easily accessible materials and energy. The rise of 
fast fashion over the past two decades has accelerated the throughput 
of products and with it resource demand. The fashion industry’s work 
addressing sustainability has primarily been focused on minimizing 
social and environmental impacts in the supply chain, and circular or 
full life cycle perspectives for garments is a relatively new phenomenon. The industry’s focus has changed over the last few years and there 
is increasing attention on circular economy within fashion and textile 
industries globally. This is well explained as global clothing production and sales of clothing have doubled over the last 15 years (EMF 
2017), the production of which has brought along an increased use of 
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... | 173
natural resources and the growing volume of garments that needs to 
be disposed of. At the same time, worldwide, clothing utilization, i.e.
the average number of times a garment is worn before it ceases to be 
used, has fallen 36% compared to 15 years ago (ibid.). In addition, while 
textiles are considered nearly 100% recyclable (Hawley 2009), recent 
statistics show that around 73% of the world’s used textiles end up in 
landfills or incinerators (EMF 2017). This presents a huge loss in material, as well as, economic value.
Transition towards circularity in the fashion industry requires 
changes throughout many components of economy and society. The 
market needs products that are designed for long life and for end-oflife recyclability, well-functioning and convenient garment collection 
systems, sorting procedures that can efficiently serve both the reuse and 
recycling markets, recycling technologies that can recycle textiles into 
high quality fabrics and other products, consumer readiness to buy used 
and recycled products, and brand commitment to uptake recycled fibers 
in new collections (Kant Hvass 2016). This needs to be supported by 
legislation in order to turn textile waste into valuable material that can 
compete with the price of virgin materials and substitute the use of 
virgin materials.
The problem of
post-consumer textile waste
One of the biggest challenges of circular economy within fashion 
is the increasing volume of post-consumer textiles that ends up in 
global landfills or being incinerated (Hawley 2009; 2015; Bartlett 2012; 
Fletcher 2008; EMF 2017, Birtwistle & Moore 2007). For example, in 
Finland approximately 72 million kilograms of textile waste is formed 
annually, from which only 20% is collected separately (Fontell & 
Heikkilä 2017). Worldwide, 73% of material that enters the clothing 
system is lost after final garment use, being either sent to landfill or 
incinerated (EMF 2017). To capture the value of these lost garments is 
174 | Textile Waste
challenging since consumers do not have any obligations to send their 
clothes for reuse and recycling and there are currently no direct governmental initiatives to ask consumers to do that (except from France 
with their EcoTLC system). However, several authorities in European 
cities have directly or indirectly increased their engagement with used 
textiles, driven by their circular economy or waste prevention agendas 
(Watson et al. 2018). For example, to increase transparency in clothes 
collection, city authorities in Copenhagen, Gothenburg, Antwerp 
and Albano Laziale in Rome have developed accreditation processes 
for collectors, including qualification criteria, codes of conduct, and 
reporting responsibilities (ibid.).
New-clothing consumption is closely linked to the used-clothing 
industries, and the rapidly increasing volumes of new clothes entering 
the market has a direct negative impact on secondary markets. While 
clothing production and consumption of new products has almost 
doubled over the last 15 years (EMF 2017), the secondary and end-oflife markets of used garments and textiles have difficulties in keeping up 
with the output speed. This applies both to collecting, sorting, reselling, and recycling. The supply of used garments within global markets 
exceeds demand and many of the secondhand markets are saturated. For 
example, several African countries are planning to establish import taxes 
for used garments to protect their own industries (Katende 2017). The 
biggest challenges are the increasing volumes of low quality fast-fashion 
goods, which have limited resell value on global markets and low prices 
for recyclable textiles (Watson 2018). In the end, far from being recycled, most fabrics today are “downcycled,” thus getting transformed, for 
instance, into carpet underlay or rags (Franco 2017).
The first step in diverting clothes from waste streams is their separate collection. The current collection system of post-consumer clothes 
and textiles is fragmented and consists of different actors such as charities, municipal recycling centers, social enterprises and several for-profit 
businesses. Recent years have also added fashion brands with in-store 
garment collection services (Kant Hvass 2014; Fontell & Heikkilä 2017).
The dominant actor in many countries is still the non-profit charity 
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... | 175
organization (Hawley 2006; 2015; Palm et al. 2014). For example, in 
Sweden charity organizations which collect and handle (i.e. sort and 
resell for reuse and recycling) used garments represent an estimated 
90% of the market and the remainder is handled by private actors (Palm 
et al. 2014).
Fontell & Heikkilä (2017) have modelled the future circular business ecosystem for textiles across the whole value chain. The ecosystem model describes the main material flows from one actor to another 
along the value chains and illustrates the needed actors, their roles and 
their interdependencies in used textile flows. It illustrates how fragmented the system is with different actors that often span from local 
community to global reuse and recycling markets and how prolonging the life of a garment through reuse and recycling requires many 
independent actors to collaborate and commit to building the circular 
textile ecosystem.
Previous mappings of the post-consumer textile waste system 
(Hawley 2006; 2015) provide a good overview of the myriad of organizations which have a role in the collecting, sorting, reselling, and recycling of textiles. They fail to highlight, however, the role of the consumer/user at the centre of the circular fashion eco-system (Fontell & 
Heikkilä 2017). At the same time, there is a lack of garment collection 
solutions that provide easy, convenient and economically motivating 
solutions for consumers’ unwanted clothes. There is a degree of hassle 
related to today’s services, for example charities often want reuse garments of quality – which can be difficult to define and is subjectively 
understood – while consignment stores are only interested in high 
quality branded garments, and therefore consumers lack a one-stop 
solution for their unwanted clothes.
176 | Textile Waste
Consumers as gatekeepers
in post-consumer textile
circularity
Fashion and textiles are one of the largest consumer goods categories in 
the world and therefore the transition from a linear economy to a circular economy requires strong consumer commitment. Clothes are worn 
by everyone and for many people clothes are an important expression of individuality. Consumers have responded to the falling prices 
of clothes by purchasing higher volumes of clothes while using them 
less and getting rid of them more frequently than compared to 15 years 
ago (EMF 2017). It is assumed that as fashion consumption increases the 
volume of unwanted garments (Weber et al. 2017) and the rate of textile 
disposal increases (Lang et al. 2013). Research additionally argues that 
up to 70% of garments in peoples’ closets are inactive (Fletcher 2008).
Often these inactive clothes in the closets lose their aura of newness and 
they become unfashionable or worn out in the eyes of the owner. To 
make space in closets, people are constantly seeking ways to get rid of 
these inactive clothes.
From the perspective of linear economy, a garment accrues value 
through a number of steps, such as design, production, retail, marketing, and branding, and reaches its maximum value when it is sold to an 
end customer. From the circular economy perspective, the consumer 
is not the endpoint of a product’s value as the product continues to 
retain value in the end-of-life phases for different actors in the fashion 
and textile eco-system. When the consumer is finished with a product, 
the value of that product is at its lowest for that consumer; however, 
the value starts increasing again once the consumer decides not to 
discard the product in the trash bin but to forward the product for 
reuse and recycling. Hence the circular economy perspective introduces 
new values associated with a garment and the end consumers or users, 
with their values, attitudes, and behaviour are the key enablers of this 
value-creation process. This is supported by Stahel (1986) who argues 
that a product’s lifecycle is primarily determined by the user and not 
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... | 177
Figure 1. Post-consumer value of garments (Kant Hvass 2016; adapted from 
Brodin & Anderson 2008).
the manufacturer. Therefore, it is very important to collect used clothes 
from the end consumer and to transfer the ownership of the garment to 
different actors in reuse and recycling industries who can then develop 
and capture varying amounts of value from these garments.
Figure 1 illustrates the consumers’ gatekeeper role in the post-consumer
textile value system. It commences with a consumer’s purchase of a 
product where the product’s value (i.e. monetary, extrinsic and intrinsic) is at its peak. During the use phase the value decreases and reaches 
its lowest when the consumer is ready to dispose the product. The 
disposal moment is when the consumer stops using the product and 
makes a decision to reuse it in his/her household, discard or send it 
further in the system for reuse and recycling purposes; it is at this point 
that the product’s value transformation commences. The future value of 
the product is therefore strongly affected by a consumer’s disposal decision and the chosen disposal channel.
Product’s value
Peak
Zero
Actors
Disposal
Consumer
Collectors
Sorters
Second hand retailers
Redesigners
Recyclers
Brands
Time
Landll
Repair
Resell
Reuse
Redesign
Upcycling
Downcycling
Purchase
178
Hanson (1980) has described disposal as a process where a series of 
decisions are made. There are two decisions that are the most critical 
– to stop using a still-usable product and to choose among the various 
disposal options. Various factors may instigate the decision to stop 
using a product, such as the physical and psychological changes of the 
Figure 2. Post-consumer textile waste value system (Kant Hvass 2016).
| Textile Waste
Discard
Landll
Incineration
Resell in charity stores
Resell to international
reuse and recycling markets
Recycling of own brand
(closed/open loop)
Resell or redesign of
own brand
Flea markets
Consignment
Internet
International reuse
and recycling markets
Swap or pass on to
friends and family
Private resell
(physical store/online)
Retailers’ take-back
schemes
Charity donations/
municipal collections
Consumer
First value cycle
Second value cycle
179
consumer, his/her search for variety, changes in fashion, obsolescence of 
the product and the appearance of small defects in the product (Jacoby 
et al. 1977; Koch & Domina 1999; Morgan & Birtwistle 2009). The 
other important decision in the disposal process is the disposal selection method. People select various disposal channels for their unwanted 
clothes. The Figure 2 illustrates five main channels for consumers to 
manage their unwanted clothes: swapping/passing on to family or 
friends, reselling, in-store take-back schemes by retailers, donating, and 
disposal. The options are similar in that they involve consumers who 
voluntarily relinquish control of their garments, however they differ in 
terms of consumer compensation, the convenience of using the option 
and the amount of time involved with each channel (Weber et al. 2017).
Currently, the main method for consumers to dispose of their 
unwanted clothes is via donations to charity (Domina & Koch 1999; 
Birtwistle & Moore 2009; Ha-Brookshire & Hodges 2009; Weber et 
al. 2017), thus the garment reuse and recycling system relies greatly 
on consumers’ altruistic behavior (Brodin & Anderson 2008). Historically this has been sufficient to keep the system operational and help to 
keep millions of garments out of landfills, but with the rapidly increasing volumes of unwanted clothes and the decreasing natural resources 
worldwide, this solution is not sufficient.
Past studies have demonstrated that the preferred disposal method 
for consumers is based on convenience and accessibility. This means that 
the proximity of textile collection services (e.g. recycling stations, donation sites, resell businesses) plays a deciding factor whether garments get 
reused, recycled or discarded into the waste stream (Shim 1995; Domina 
& Koch 1999; Ha-Brookshire & Hodges 2009; Morgan & Birtwistle 
2009; Fortuna & Diyamandogly 2017). Additionally, consumers perception of the reuse and recycling value of the product plays an important 
role (Fortuna & Diyamandogly 2017). Nonetheless, consumers are often 
not able to adequately distinguish between reusable and nonreusable 
textiles (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017) or whether the garment has recycling value, and therefore they discard their used clothes into the waste 
stream because of stains, damage, or signs of wear and tear (Laitala 2014).
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
180
Weber et al. (2017) compared fashion (i.e. consumers with a strong 
interest in fashion) and non-fashion consumers (i.e. low interest in 
fashion) in their disposal habits and found out that fashion consumers 
show a stronger interest in what to do with their unwanted clothes 
than non-fashion consumers, and therefore alternative strategies for 
their engagement are recommended. Jena and Sarmah’s (2015) study on 
consumer behavior with regard to returning used products in the electronics industry shows that besides a financial compensation, awareness 
and education associated with product return-related issues and benefits 
are important. This supports the argument for a collection system that 
strongly involves customer relationship management, where consumer 
engagement, education and motivation are in focus since the whole circular fashion system is strongly dependent on consumer behavior.
Need for innovating
collection infrastructure
Access to the necessary amounts of used products is argued to be one 
of the key challenges of circular systems (Geyer & Jackson 2004; Guide 
& van Wassenhove 2009). Despite the myriad of players on the collection market, research shows that there is a need to increase the volume 
of textiles collected because a significant volume of used textiles ends 
up in municipal waste that is then landfilled or incinerated (Palm et al.
2014; Bartlett et al. 2012; Allwood et al. 2006; EMF 2017). Transitioning 
the fashion industry towards circularity and increasing the reuse and 
recycling of textiles calls for more comprehensive collection networks 
from the current operators or the entry of new operators into the field 
(Dahlbo et al. 2017). Alternative options for collection have been suggested such as: door-to-door household collection, cash-for-clothes, 
collection from businesses, curbside collection or in-store collection 
by retailers (Bartlett et al. 2012). Krikke et al. (2013) argue that multichannel collection may be needed for customer convenience and 
increased return rates, which is further supported by Watson et al. (2014) 
| Textile Waste
181
who argue that a partnership with local charities, brands and local 
municipalities, or a mandatory industry-wide approach might be needed 
for the collection of critical volumes. From a consumer perspective it 
requires infrastructure that is easy to use and incorporates consideration 
of cultural differences.
A recent report by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF 2017) 
supports the above and highlights that convenience, awareness, trust, 
and incentives are the main factors that should be considered when 
creating or scaling garment collection solutions. To create awareness and 
trust, a clear communication message is necessary, which explains that 
both reusable and non-reusable textiles are accepted and that these will 
be reused and recycled to the extent possible (Watson et al. 2018). Furthermore, Watson et al. (2018) suggest a common brand for all types of 
collection activities, containers, and actors to reduce confusion among 
consumers and to strengthen communication in relation to where to 
put used textiles. For example, in Rotterdam it was found that contamination by non-textile waste was reduced by giving all containers 
the same single color, placing them above ground and away from waste 
containers (ibid.). Weber et al. (2017) furthermore argue that fashion 
consumers are more likely to participate in alternative disposal methods 
such as resell, swap, and take-back when discarding their unwanted 
clothes, which identifies a need to design collection strategies accordingly (ibid.).
Finally, earlier research suggests that a financial incentive is often 
needed in order to increase the collection of used products from 
end-consumers (Geyer & Jackson 2004; Guide & van Wassenhove 
2009), which still rings true today. When looking at current disposal 
solutions the emerging trends are various resell platforms (i.e. both 
online and physical) and in-store take-back schemes, which offer consumers economic incentives for their products. One of the companies 
that has built their business model around the argument of consumer 
convenience and incentivized product collection is Swedish start-up, 
Sellpy. They offer consumers a service where their unwanted goods (i.e.
garments and other products) are picked up for free and after evaluation 
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
182
and sorting they are resold in a webstore. Consumers can influence 
the price of the product and earn money on their goods. Their business model is focusing on reuse-value products, and the items that they 
cannot sell in their online store are further donated to charities for 
reuse and recycling.
These incentivised solutions are in competition with the charity 
market which has seen a decrease in donation quality in recent years.
At the same time, high quality garments entering sorting facilities are 
an important element in subsidizing sending non-reusable, low quality 
garments for recycling, as the market price for reusable clothes is typically far higher than the price for recycled clothing; currently, the resell 
markets cross-subsidize the recycling markets (Morley 2013; Palm et al.
2014; Zamani et al. 2014), which makes the recycling of clothes currently less attractive than reuse.
The author argues for a need for a more systemic and collaborative 
approach to address post-consumer textile waste that evaluates and adds 
value locally to used garments and compensates customers with a share 
of the remaining value when possible. In the next section, a holistic 
consumer-centered circular supply chain framework is proposed: a onestop site for all clothes with value recognition and capture.
A consumer-centered
post-consumer textile
collection approach
As discussed previously, there is a need for consumer-centered garment 
collection solutions that take into consideration user convenience, clear 
communication, and include an opportunity for compensation. The 
next section proposes a conceptual model for post-consumer textile 
collection that puts consumer interest in the center with the aim to 
make reuse and recycling of textiles a norm.
| Textile Waste
183
The model presented in Figure 3 offers end-consumers a one-stop 
service for all their unwanted clothes. The service is segmented according to product quality and consumer need. This includes both physical 
drop-off sites and mail/pick-up service. The consumer does not have to 
evaluate the quality of the garments at home (e.g. product reuse value 
or material recycling value) and the consumer is offered four options 
for their clothes:
Figure 3. A consumer-centered post-consumer textile collection approach.
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
COMMON BRAND
Fiber and product
supply chain
Consumer
• Consign
• Trade
• Sell
• Donate
Single collection
and evaluation site
Physical/E-collection
Value adding activities
Sorting, Cleaning, Mending
Resell
Online/Physical store
Local reuse:
• Charity
• Single brand
 2nd hand
Global reuse:
• Resell
• Charity
• Single brand
 2nd hand
Local recycling/
material use
• Upcycling
• Downcycling
• Fiber-to-bre
 recycling
Global recycling/
material use
• Upcycling
• Downcycling
• Fiber-to-bre
 recycling
Common brand for
collection, sorting and resell
Material recycling stream
Product reuse stream
184
1. Consignment: This is dedicated to high quality and high-end 
items where the consumer is compensated with a share of the 
revenue once the product has been sold.
2. Trade: The collector evaluates the items and the consumer receives 
a credit that can be used in the resell store (online or physical) or a 
share of the revenue once the product has been sold (often lower 
than a consignment share).
3. Sell: The collector evaluates the items and pays out cash immediately based on the lowest value of the products (often lower than 
both consignment and trade).
4. Donate: This option applies to low quality items that have no local 
resell value and are primarily destined for reuse and material recycling in other markets.
The service is organized by one common brand that collects, sorts, 
evaluates, and resells products in multi-brand resale stores. The surplus 
garments that are not utilized through the multi-brand resell stores are 
further donated/sold to other actors in the textile waste eco-system.
The downstream activities are local and global reuse (e.g. donation 
to charities, resell to brands or other for-profit resell businesses) and 
local and global recycling (e.g. local and global upcycling designers 
and companies, local and global downcycling and fiber-to-fiber recycling initiatives). To achieve the convenience and transparency of the 
service, digital technology is required that facilitates the evaluation and 
pricing of the products, tracking of products and material flows and 
managing customer accounts for value compensations and customer 
relationships.
The key activity in this approach, besides collecting, is the sorting 
and evaluation of garments that serves the needs of both reuse and recycling markets. Circular economy aims for local value creation as much 
as possible. In after-use markets, sorting is the key activity that enables 
the adding of value to garments. In order to capture the recycling value 
of low quality garments destined for recycling, post-consumer materials 
need to be accurately sorted according to their exact fiber composition.
| Textile Waste
185
This is often challenging when done manually and therefore the potential recycling value can be lost. For textile recycling purposes there is a 
need for an advanced technology that can identify the exact material 
content, deal with the complexity of the mixed materials used in garments and be able to process large volumes efficiently. Charities, whose 
mission is primarily centered on social issues, will most likely not have 
the financial resources to invest in these technologies.
Consumer benefits
The greatest consumer benefits are the combined attributes of convenience, flexibility, economic incentive, transparency, and sustainable 
solutions for unwanted clothes. A consumer does not need to return 
home with unwanted items, which is often the case with consignment 
stores. Concurrently, the consumer can earn money on the more valuable items, which is often not the case with charities. It is the combined 
service of several consumer options that is unique and valuable in this 
concept. Furthermore, with the help of clear branding and communication, it reduces consumer confusion with regard to finding a solution for their unwanted clothes and avoids textiles being sent through 
the wrong channel. Many charities today only accept products that are 
clean and in good order as they lack facilities and resources to process 
the rest. However, this is very subjective and can be difficult for consumers to evaluate. When the aim is to engage consumers and get them 
to deliver products for reuse and recycling, the service needs to be 
simple, attractive and flexible.
Benefits for the post-consumer
textile eco-system
The consumer-centered collection approach offers the industry a collaboration platform for strategic textile collection with the aim to facilitate the transition towards a circular textile system. Collaboration needs 
to be secured with logistics companies, local and international reuse 
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
186
organizations and businesses, textile recyclers both locally and globally, 
and innovators to find sustainable solutions that allow the utilization 
of all excess materials in a sustainable way and keep them in the production and consumption loops. In addition, the concept provides an 
opportunity for collaboration with brands who are interested in reselling or recycling their own brand (i.e. integration of recycled fibers 
in their new collections). Instead of investing into their own reuse/
resell solution they can outsource the collection and sorting and can 
buy their used products back. Further downstream it provides brands 
and manufacturers with recycled fibers, thus enabling the creation of 
a circular system of textiles. From the holistic perspective the oneentry solution for consumers also provides good opportunities for 
awareness raising and engagement with the help of marketing campaigns and other consumer-engagement tools.
Discussion
It is argued that the transition to a circular economy is a systems-level 
change and requires a new kind of value-creation mindset (Fontell & 
Heikkilä 2017; Bocken et al. 2016). Making a circular economy of textiles in reality requires therefore significant effort. This chapter focuses 
on one of the key aspects, which is collection of unwanted textiles.
Maintaining the highest possible value of products and materials for 
a maximum period requires close collaboration among the whole value 
network (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017). Having a convenient and attractive 
infrastructure for textile collection is crucial, as without the diversion 
of textiles from waste streams it is not possible and thus product and 
material circularity cannot be achieved. When developing the textile 
chain with a more consumer friendly collection solution, it should 
be taken into account that other parts of the chain need to be developed simultaneously in order to optimize operational costs and minimize environmental impacts (Dahlbo et al. 2017). Currently, textile 
reuse is subsidizing textile recycling and when higher quality items, 
| Textile Waste
187
often referred to as cream, have been sorted out for resell purposes, 
the economics of recycling is challenged. In general, textile recycling 
is facing several barriers that are associated with cost, time, technology, 
and quality (Lu & Homouda 2014; Peterson 2015; Morley 2013; Palm et 
al. 2014). Therefore, transitioning towards circularity is a collective effort 
where many textile eco-system actors, including collectors, resellers, 
recyclers, as well as policy makers and regulators, need to collaborate.
While material recycling is one of two sides of the circular economy 
coin, the reuse of products as long as possible should be prioritized to 
avoid the use of natural resource for new productions. The reselling of 
textiles is a big business worldwide, however, when compared to overall 
consumption it is still a niche with a significant uncaptured potential.
There is a lack of business models that take into consideration the needs 
of today’s urban consumers who seek convenient, simple, transparent 
and ethical solutions for their consumption. A business concept that has 
successfully developed and integrated these principles into collection 
with sorting and a reverse logistics system with solutions for reusable 
and low-quality garments can be replicated and scaled.
Conclusion
Overall, a circular economy of fashion can only become a reality when 
there are well-functioning garment collection systems, sorting procedures that can efficiently serve both the reuse and recycling markets, 
recycling technologies that can recycle textiles (including mixed fiber 
fabrics) into high quality fibers and fabrics that meet market needs, and 
also consumer readiness to reuse, recycle, and buy second-hand products or products with recycled fiber content. None of these aspects 
can work in isolation, requiring different stakeholders to work in 
tandem. The collection of unwanted garments from consumers is one 
of the key steps in this transition. This chapter has argued that consumers should be regarded as an important part of the circular textile 
eco-system. There is a need for an infrastructure in place supported by 
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
188
communication that provides clear information on consumers’ roles in 
making circular economy a reality, what they need to do, and the transparency about the fate of their clothes. By prioritizing the customer 
experience and making collection and resale models convenient, accessible, and economically attractive, the resale and recycling of textiles can 
become a norm.
The proposed consumer-centered collection approach is conceptual 
in its nature and does not discuss implementation-related details. Furthermore, it does not evaluate how this model interplays with the existing textile eco-system actors and their business models, such as charities, 
municipal waste-collection services, resell organizations and recyclers.
Finally, the author has delimited the discussion from addressing other 
external enablers of such a concept, such as legislation. More research 
is needed in order to understand the applicability of the concept in real 
life settings.
| Textile Waste
189
References
Anderson, H. & Brodin, H. M. (2005). The consumer’s changing role: The case 
of recycling. Management of environmental quality: An international journal.
Vol. 16:1, pp. 77–86.
Allwood, J.M., Laursen, S.E., De Rodriguez, C.M & Bocken, N.M.P. (2006).
Well dressed. The present and future sustainability of clothing and textiles in 
the United Kingdom. Cambridge. University of Cambridge Institute for 
Manufacturing.
Bartlett, C., McGill, I. & Willis, P. (2012). Textile flow and market development 
opportunities in the UK. WRAP.
Birtwistle, G. & Moore, C. (2007). Fashion clothing–where does it all end up? 
International journal of retail & distribution management. Vol. 35: 3, pp. 210–216.
Bocken, N.M.P., de Pauw, I., Bakker, C. & van der Grinten, B. (2016). Product 
design and business model strategies for a circular economy. Journal of 
industrial and production engineering. Vol. 33: 5, pp. 308–320.
Brodin, H.M. & Anderson, H. (2008). Recycling calls for revaluation. Supply 
chain management: An international journal. Vol. 13:1, pp. 9–15.
Dahlbo, H., Aalto, K., Eskelinen, H. & Salmenperä, H. (2017). Increasing textile 
circulation – Consequences and requirements. Sustainable production and 
consumption. Vol. 9, pp.44–57.
Domina, T. & Koch, K. (1999). Consumer reuse and recycling of post 
consumer textile waste. Journal of fashion marketing and management. Vol. 3:4, 
pp. 346–359.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation, (2017). A new textiles economy: Redesigning 
fashion’s future. Ellen MacArthur Foundation. United Kingdom.
Fletcher, K. (2008). Sustainable fashion and textiles: design journeys. London.
Earthscan.
Fontell, P. & Heikkilä, P. (2017). Model of circular business ecosystem for textiles.
Tampere. VTT.
Fortuna, L.M. & Diyamandoglu, V. (2017). Optimization of greenhouse gas 
emissions in second-hand consumer product recovery through reuse 
platforms. Waste management. Vol. 66, pp.178–189.
Franco, M.A. (2017). Circular economy at the micro level: A dynamic view of 
incumbents’ struggles and challenges in the textile industry. Journal of cleaner 
production. Vol. 168, pp.833–845.
Geyer, R. & Jackson, T. (2004). Supply loops and their constraints: The 
industrial ecology of recycling and reuse. California management review.
Vol. 46: 2, pp. 55–73.
Guide, V.D.R & van Wassenhove, L.N. (2009). The evolution of closed loop 
supply chain research. Operations research. Vol. 57:1, pp.10–18.
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
190
Ha-Brookshire, J.E. & Hodges, N.N. (2009). Socially responsible consumer 
behavior? Exploring used clothing donation behavior. Clothing and textiles 
research journal. Vol. 27: 3, pp. 179–196.
Hanson, J. W. (1980). A proposed paradigm for consumer product disposition 
processes. Journal of consumer affairs. Vol. 14:1, pp. 49–67.
Hawley, J. M. (2006). Digging for diamonds: A conceptual framework for 
understanding reclaimed textile products. Clothing and textiles research 
journal. Vol. 24:3, pp. 262–275.
Hawley, J. M. (2009). Understanding and improving textile recycling: A systems 
perspective. In: Blackburn, E.S. (ed.), Sustainable textiles: Life cycle and 
environmental impact. New York. Woodhead.
Hawley, J. (2015). Economic impact of textile and clothing recycling.
In: J. Hethorn & C. Ulasewicz, (eds.). Sustainable fashion: what’s next?:
a conversation about issues, practices and possibilities. 2nd ed. London, UK.
Bloomsbury, pp. 204–230.
Jacoby, J., Berning, C. K., & Dietvorst, T. F. (1977). What about disposition? 
Journal of marketing. Vol. 41:2, pp. 22–28.
Jena, S.K. & Sarmah, S. (2015). Measurement of consumers’ return intention 
index towards returning the used products. Journal of cleaner production.
Vol. 108, pp. 818–829.
Kant Hvass, K. (2016). Weaving a path from waste to value: Exploring fashion 
industry business models and the circular economy. PhD dissertation, 
Copenhagen Business School.
Kant Hvass, K. (2014). Post-retail responsibility of garments – a fashion industry 
perspective. Journal of fashion marketing and management. Vol. 18:4,
pp. 413–430.
Katende-Magezi, E. (2017). The impact of second hand clothes and shoes in 
East Africa. Geneva. CUTS International.
Krikke, H., Hofenk, D. & Wang, Y. (2013). Revealing an invisible giant:
A comprehensive survey into return practices within original (closed-loop) 
supply chains. Resources, conservation and recycling. Vol. 73, pp. 239–250.
Laitala, K. (2014). Consumers’ clothing disposal behaviour – a synthesis of 
research results. International journal of consumer studies. Vol. 38:5, pp. 444–457.
Lang, C., Armstrong, C.M. & Brannon, L.A. (2013). Drivers of clothing disposal 
in the US: an exploration of the role of personal attributes and behaviours 
in frequent disposal. International journal of consumer studies. Vol. 37,
pp. 706–714.
Morgan, L.R. & Birtwistle, G. (2009). An investigation of young fashion 
consumers’ disposal habits. International journal of consumer studies. Vol. 33:2, 
pp. 190–198.
| Textile Waste
191
Morley, N. (2013). Closing the loop for clothing. Closed loop fibre recycling – current 
status and future challenges. Aylesbury, UK. Oakdane Hollins.
Palm, D., Elander, M., Watson, D., Kiørboe, N., Salmenperä, H., Dahlbo, H., 
Moliis, K., Lyng, K., Valente, C. & Gislason, S. (2014). Towards a Nordic textile 
strategy: Collection, sorting, reuse and recycling of textiles. Nordic Council of 
Ministers.
Peterson, A. (2015). Towards recycling of textile fibers. Separation and characterization 
of textile fibers and blends. Department of Chemistry and Chemical 
Engineering. Chalmers University of Technology.
Shim, S. (1995). Environmentalism and consumers’ clothing disposal patterns: 
an exploratory study. Clothing and textiles research journal. Vol. 13:1, pp. 38–48.
Stahel, W.R. (1986). Product life as a variable: the notion of utilization. Science 
and public policy. Vol. 13:4, pp. 185–193.
Stahel, W.R. (1994). The utilization focused service economy: Resource 
efficiency. In: Allenby B. R. and Richards D. J. (eds.). The Greening of 
industrial ecosystems. Washington DC. National Academy Press, pp. 178–190.
Stahel, W.R. (2010). The performance economy. Hampshire, UK. Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Stahel, W.R. (2013). The business angle of a circular economy e higher 
competitiveness, higher resource security and material efficiency.
In: A new dynamic effective business in a circular economy. United Kingdom.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation.
Watson, D., Kiørboe, N., Palm, D., Tekie, H., Harris, S., Ekvall, T., Lindhqvist, T.
& Lyng, K. (2014). EPR systems and new business models: Reuse and recycling
of textiles in the Nordic region. Nordic Council of Ministries.
Watson, D., Aare, A.K., Trzepacz, S. & Petersen, C. D. (2018). Used textile 
collection in European cities. Study commissioned by Rijkswaterstaat under 
the European Clothing Action Plan.
Weber, S., Lynes, J. & Young, S.B. (2017). Fashion interest as a driver for 
consumer textile waste management: reuse, recycle or disposal. International 
journal of consumer studies. Vol. 41:2, pp.207–215.
Zamani, B., Svanström, M., Peters, G. & Rydberg, T. (2014). A carbon footprint 
of textile recycling. Journal of industrial ecology. Vol. 19:4, pp. 676–687.
8 | A Consumer-centered Approach... |
192
Pirjo Heikkilä, Paula Fontell, 
Marjo Määttänen, Ali Harlin
Textile Waste
Review of Textile
Recycling Ecosystem 09 and a Case of Cotton
193
The demand for textile fibers is increasing and therefore the 
production of natural fibers is no longer sufficient to cover 
the increasing fiber demand. This chapter reviews selected 
aspects of the circular economy of textiles. Especially the 
focus is on the industrial scale recycling of textiles. For this 
the collecting and sorting of textile waste, new technologies 
as well as totally new business ecosystems are needed. Since 
such an operational circular ecosystem is not yet a reality, 
modelling work related to the circular ecosystem of textiles 
as well as related work carried out in The Relooping Fashion 
Initiative project is used as a basis for this text. One emerging 
technology, cellulose carbamate, for enabling the future 
textile ecosystem is presented more in detail in this chapter.
Keywors: Textile recycling, recycling ecosystem, carbamate technology
194 | Textile Waste
Introduction
The demand for textile fibers is increasing along with a rising population and living standards, and the annual use of textile fibers has 
recently exceeded 100 million tons per year globally (The Fiber Year 
2017). The production of natural fibers is no longer sufficient to cover 
the increasing demand, with, for example, cotton production stagnating to around 120 million bales (21,6 million tons) annually since 2005 
(Statista 2018). After the invention of plastics the amount of synthetic 
fibers has been increasing steadily, and the share of cotton and other 
natural fibers is currently around one third.
Cultivation of cotton requires typically large amounts of irrigation water, fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides. It can be considered 
non-sustainable from both an environmental as well as a social point 
of view since the land and water needed for cotton cultivation may 
also be needed for the cultivation of food (Haemmerle 2011). Synthetic materials, on the other hand, originate from non-renewable raw 
materials dependent on oil resources and, furthermore, synthetic textile 
fibers are a big source of microplastics (Henry et al. 2018; DeFalco et 
al. 2018), which are causing problems for the environment and living 
organisms. Simultaneously, the amount of textile waste is increasing, and 
vast amounts of un-sold products will end up as waste directly from 
the retailers (Redress 2016; Patton 2018). The use of recycled textiles as 
raw material for new textiles seems an attractive option to resolve both 
of these problems; to find a new source of raw materials for increasing 
fiber demand as well as reducing the amount of textile waste.
A better original quality of textiles could extend their life span 
and improve the re-usability of textile products and raw materials.
The amount of discarded textiles in the Western world with direct 
second-hand retail markets is typically 10–20% (e.g. Watson et al.
2016). Of the remainder, some can be used locally for other purposes 
(Hawley 2006; SOEX 2017), but in many cases at least some of that 
amount finds its way to markets in third world countries at a very 
affordable price. Some of these developing countries, however, have 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... | 195
started to react and have banned the import of post-consumer textiles 
because there exists little use for low-quality textiles due to affordable 
new textiles, and thus second-hand, imported textiles remain as waste.
There is, then, an urgent need to find high-volume processing solutions and markets accordingly for this remainder.
Over the life span of textile products, the most sustainable solution is to use them for as long as possible in the form of the original 
textile. However, when worn textiles are no longer suitable for reuse 
they should be recycled. If post-consumer textile waste is to be recycled 
on a large scale, properly organized collecting and sorting systems are 
needed (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017). Currently, however, such systems are 
very rare or non-existent and need to be developed. While such systems 
are largely missing, many of the textile waste materials are not suitable 
to be used for materials-recovery but end up in incineration and the 
production of energy.
Furthermore, many factors affect the possibilities for recycling textiles (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017). This is based on the original textile 
fiber composition and quality, but also the use-history of the product.
Pre-consumer textiles are relatively easy to utilize due to their known 
composition and a quality almost as good as that of virgin fibers, but 
post-consumer textile waste is more challenging due to inhomogeneity, 
wear and tear, and possible contamination. There are several methods 
and processes available for textile raw material recycling, and these set 
some requirements for the raw materials. The Ellen MacArthur foundation (2017) divides recycling methods into mechanical, polymer and 
monomer level recycling. Another point of view is to divide recycling 
methods based on process types, i.e. mechanical, thermal and chemical 
recycling (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017).
Here we review selected aspects of the circular economy of textiles.
The reuse of textiles is discussed shortly, but this review is focused more 
on the industrial scale recycling of textiles for which collecting and 
sorting of textile waste, new technologies as well as totally new business ecosystems are needed (sector 2). Since such an operational circular ecosystem is not yet a reality, modelling work related to the circular 
196 | Textile Waste
ecosystem of textiles (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017) as well as related work 
carried out in The Relooping Fashion Initiative project (Heikkilä et al.
2018) is used as a basis for this part of the review. Those recycling technologies already available, as well as those in developmental stages, will 
be reviewed later (sector 3), and one emerging technology for enabling 
the future textile ecosystem presented more in detail. This cellulose carbamate technology (Heikkilä et al. 2018) introduced in sector 4 is one 
option for recycling used cotton materials into new regenerated (or 
reproduced) cellulose fibers for textile applications.
Circular business
ecosystem for textiles
Currently, a large volume of used textiles is ending up as waste. In 
Europe, most waste textiles end up for energy recovery due to the 
banning of dumping organic waste into landfills in 2016 by the European Commission. However, in many other parts of the world textile 
waste will still end up as landfill. In a circular economy, raw materials are to be cycled within a looped system (EMF 2017). The circular business ecosystem for textiles is based on the principles of circular 
economy. This represents a model where discarded textile materials are 
kept within reuse and recycling loops, with the goal of maintaining the 
value of the material as high and for as long as possible. Within this 
looped system model, illustrated in Figure 1 (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017), 
the user – who might be either a consumer or an institutional user – 
has a central role.
Consumer attitudes are thus important in the circular economy 
of textiles (Niinimäki 2011; Fontell & Heikkilä 2017; Vehmas et al.
2018; Heikkilä et al. 2018). Consumers make choices while purchasing 
textile and clothing. Their values and attitudes may (or may not) lead 
them to select high quality and circular designs. Habits of use, maintenance and repair of textile products are also aspects of user responsibility. Thus, consumer values and attitudes, as well as skills, affect the 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... | 197
life-span of the textile. User’s behaviour affects the quality of material 
when in one’s possession, and at least partly determines what happens 
to these products once discarded (Vehmas et al. 2018). In the future, 
when textile collection is more established, the user will have to make 
a conscious decision. They will have to evaluate whether to re-use the 
product or offer it up for recycling. Furthermore, they have to be able 
to deliver the discarded textile to the correct collection point.
One principle of the circular economy is to return the materials 
into cycles that best restore or regenerate their value. This means that 
textile products are kept within reuse cycles for as long as possible, and 
recycling is thus the last option after all other measures (inner value 
cycles) have been taken to restore and regenerate value. Reuse of textile 
Figure 1. Model of a circular business ecosystem for textiles
(Fontell & Heikkilä 2017).
198 | Textile Waste
products is also the preferred choice according to waste hierarchy (see 
Figure 2), and it has been evaluated as the best choice also from the 
environmental point of view, based on life-cycle assessment (LCA) 
(Schmidt et al. 2016).
Reusing clean and undamaged clothes and home textiles is not a 
new concept. In former times, especially before the industrialization 
of textile production when clothes were difficult to produce and thus 
valuable, people were forced to be resource efficient. Clothes remained 
in use for as long as they were good enough. Damaged clothes found 
new life after repair and retailoring for the altered needs of the user.
If a product was partially damaged, undamaged pieces of fabric were 
recovered and used for other purposes. When the textile product was no 
longer relevant for its owner, but still in good shape, it was forwarded to 
be re-used by other family members. Nowadays, when this is no longer 
a necessity, the sewing skills needed for the repair and remodelling of 
textile items are no longer very common. Due to increased wealth, 
re-use has no longer been considered a necessity as new textiles and 
clothes are affordable and abundantly available.
Textile markets have reached a certain maturity, and we own 
more textiles than we can realistically consume. People own increasing numbers of textile products, and the number of times the garments 
are actually worn has declined drastically (EMF 2017). The original 
quality of cheap, fast fashion products may be reducing use-time, and 
Figure 2. Waste management hierarchy
(Fontell & Heikkilä 2017).
Prevention
Preparing for re-use
Recycling
(Energy)
recovery
Disposal
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... | 199
fast-changing design trends may reduce the attraction of a product or 
material on its second round.
Within the circular economy of textiles this needs to change; reuse 
has to increase, and large-scale recycling needs to be established (Fontell 
& Heikkilä 2017). Sustainable and circular product design strategies 
(WRAP 2015; TUDelft 2017; Watson et al. 2017) may help to lengthen a 
product’s life span. Children’s clothes in particular become small quickly 
as the child grows, and are passed further within families or to friends 
or, alternatively, are donated to strangers via charities. Also, second 
hand trading is a common practice for all kinds of consumer textiles 
via flea markets, second hand and charity shops, and recycling centres.
With their rising popularity over previous decades, resale markets have 
reached a certain maturity.
Digitization and the internet have provided more tools for individual consumers to sell, swap and buy textile products themselves.
Service-based business models within circular business ecosystem 
could develop the rental and leasing of garments towards every day 
and leisure clothing, not just festive and/or work clothing. When the 
owner is not the user but the service provider, there exists a motivation 
for the use of durable, high-quality materials and lasting designs.
Collecting and sorting
Charities and recycling centres have traditionally been the main actors 
in collecting textiles for reuse purposes (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017).
Consumers are already able to donate clothes, for example within 
charity shops, charity collections in street boxes, and campaigns. The 
sale of the best items typically covers the costs of collecting and sorting, 
while a marked number of charity items are of inferior quality. The 
number of items actually sold, however, has not followed the amount of 
second hand textiles on offer. As a result, the amount of waste generated from second hand charity activities has increased.
Social organizations and those managed by municipalities, also take 
care of the collecting and sorting of used textiles. In this field, working 
200 | Textile Waste
opportunities within the third sector (Rreuse 2016) are as valuable an outcome as the recycling and reduction of waste. Operations 
are well-organized and these social companies are able to handle large 
amounts of materials. They can source materials for playschools, smallscale artisanship, and for home and professional “trashionists.” Nonetheless, the same overflow of low quality materials is evident.
Buying back used textiles by brands and stores is an effective way 
to increase textile circulation. The concept of offering a discount on 
the next sold item has, however, an in-built risk of catalysing consumption. It may activate consumption decisions without proper consideration and actual need. Therefore only resalable items could become 
back-purchased objects end low quality items need alternative routes 
for recycling.
When aiming for industrial recycling processes, the key to the 
production of profitable recycled material is the efficient collecting and 
logistics of textile waste materials. If the post-consumer textile waste 
appears a mix with energy or other general waste fraction, the recovery of value-added textile fraction is seriously compromised. Value collecting from known material lots is markedly easier. For example, hotel 
towels and bed linen constitute a very attractive fraction compared to 
discarded, mixed textile waste generated as a left over from a charity 
collection.
Systematically arranged separate collecting and sorting of textile 
waste can be organized by either commercial or municipal means.
These systems are thus far rare but are expected to become rapidly 
more common, especially in Europe. The European Commission has set 
a target for establishing a separate collection system for textiles within 
its member states by 2025 (EC 2018). Furthermore, issues for which 
there still exists no proper solution include the costs of logistics and 
handling and the best possible value-creation thereof.
The main motivation behind existing collecting has been the small 
portion of products that are both still valuable and sellable, which typically covers roughly 10–20% of all achieved materials (Watson et al.
2016). If separate collecting systems for large volumes of non-reusable 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... | 201
items are voluntary based, the selling of valuable items might be a way 
to cover at least some part of the collecting and sorting costs. If not 
subsidized, the sorting process needs to be not only accurate, but also 
economically viable in order to run operations in a sustainable manner.
The simple picking of a few valuables may lead to dumping the less 
valuable materials elsewhere. To increase the overall value of waste 
material streams, it is vitally important to find as many high-value destinations for the recovered textile materials as possible. For example, in 
the future, waste management companies will have many new business 
opportunities for recovering the textile materials and supplying them as 
circular materials for different sectors. Currently, the so-called gate fee 
consists of objects collected from the waste handled, and yet this is not 
sufficient to cover the costs of resource recovery. This emphasizes combustion and energy recovery as an earning potential.
The easiest fraction from a recycling point of view is pre-consumer 
waste (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017). This includes, for example, cutting 
waste and surplus materials from textile factories and unsold clothes 
from retailers. In the case of pre-consumer materials, well known fiber 
composition reduces the need for identification and reduces sorting 
efforts. Material quality is still good both on a macroscopic and microscopic level, since the material has not undergone wearing and washing 
cycles. Materials are also usually clean and larger batches of homogeneous materials are available. Materials need a collecting system, but 
sorting can be quite easily organized at the point of origin, i.e., a textile 
factory or store.
Post-consumer textiles are more challenging because large-scale collecting and sorting systems are very limited. In many countries, the collecting of post-consumer textiles for reuse purposes is a contemporary 
activity within many different systems organized by charities, retailers, 
waste management companies, communities and many others previously mentioned. Lately, many actors have also started to accept nonreusable textiles. However, regulation might be hindering this owing to 
the fact that if products are not suitable for reuse they are considered as 
waste that only authorized organizations may be allowed to handle.
202 | Textile Waste
Furthermore, since fiber composition determines the possible 
recycling processes (Leonas 2017; Fontell & Heikkilä 2017), sorting of 
mixed textile waste is essential for industrial scale recycling. The most 
common sorting method is manual. Its benefits include the high resolution of textile quality and an understanding of its value, as well as a 
low threshold for arranging and initiating manual sorting. The disadvantage of requiring labour is typical of the high cost of manual work.
Third sector work is often currently used when aiming for the reuse 
of textile products, but this does not provide a solution for the sorting 
of large amounts of textile waste materials for industrial recycling processes. In reality, manual sorting also requires skill and practice. Both of 
these properties develop only through experience on the job. Furthermore, even skilled sorters cannot make an accurate recognition of fiber 
types, especially in the case of fiber blends, and so advanced technology 
is necessary in addition to manual labour.
Automated sorting lines are available (e.g. Valvan 2018) and lightanalyzing devices such as IR-spectrometers take care of material recognition (Zitting 2017). The advantage here is that the spectral analysis 
of materials is more recurrently precise than that achieved by human 
labour. The machines are typically also faster and repeat the same classification each time. The devices, however, are of low artificial intelligence and may cause major false classifications in sorting. Only recently 
have the first artificial intelligence devices entered the markets. These 
machines, however, may not be capable of identifying textiles with a 
high re-sale value, when, for example they belong to a known brand.
After sorting, the textile waste materials need to be pre-processed 
for recycling. The better the knowledge of the material’s origin and 
history the simpler it is to decide how to handle it. All manipulation 
of the material increases the production cost. If unnecessary operations are eradicated, the whole process becomes both less resourcebinding and more profitable. It is also possible that efficient operations 
are more environmentally sustainable. As a result, however, the entire 
material handling and logistics chain needs to be information-based, 
which requires digitalization to provide better transparency.
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... | 203
Recycling technologies
Recycling methods set certain requirements for the processing of raw 
materials, and thus processing options vary depending on fiber type 
(Leonas 2017; Fontell & Heikkilä 2017). Mechanical recycling methods 
are less sensitive to fiber type or even blends. Nonetheless, an equal 
material base improves the end quality. Chemical and thermal recycling 
processes, on the other hand, are more sensitive to the chemical composition of fibers. Typically, only one type of polymer applies in the 
production of new fibers, and if blends are used the process needs to 
consist of various stages in order to remove impurities either by filtering or by degrading. This is valid for dirt and other impurities which 
need to be removed.
In addition to homogeneity and cleanliness, wear and tear affects 
the recyclability of textile raw materials (Fontell & Heikkilä 2017).
Wear and tear can occur on different levels: as macroscopic damage 
to clothes or on a microscopic level as reduced strength and length 
in fiber level. Macroscopic damages affect mainly the re-usability of 
textile products, while fiber-level wear and tear effects the possibility of recycling fiber raw materials. Since mechanical recycling does 
not include chemical and/or thermal processing steps, safety issues 
need to be considered more carefully. If recycled raw materials contain 
any harmful substances, they will easily be transferred into the new 
product. The main requirements for the different process types shown 
in Figure 3 and recycling processes are discussed in more detail in the 
following sectors.
Fiber recycling via mechanical converting
Refining textile fibers mechanically is a well-known technology.
Carding has been a solution for recycling various kinds of garments for 
at least two centuries (IWTO 2018); wool recycling for army cloth, for 
example, started industrially in the nineteenth century. The recycling of 
cotton cutting-edges is just as viable for the denim industry.
204
To a certain extent, pre-consumer textile residuals are already 
mechanically recycled on an industrial scale. The typical end use of 
mechanically recycled fibers is in nonwovens, because mechanical disintegration is a harsh treatment during which the length of fibers is 
reduced (Wanassi et al. 2016). Cutting waste and similar materials are 
processed into yarns, typically via carding and open-end spinning in 
which slightly shortened fibers are also useful. In many cases, recycled 
fibers are completed by blending 10–30% with virgin textile fibers, but 
also 100% recycled fiber yarns are commercially available, for example, 
by Pure Waste Textiles (Watson et al. 2017).
| Textile Waste
Figure 3. Main raw material requirements for different recycling processes.
FIBRE
LEVEL
RECYCLING
P O LYMER
LEVEL
RECYCLING
MONOMER
LEVEL
RECYCLING
Length and
strength of
bres
Dierent
process for
each polymer
Dierent
process for
each polymer
Mechanical
recycling to
yarns
Mechanical
recycling to
nonwovens
Thermal
recycling for
thermoplastic
synthetics
Chemical
recycling for
cellulosic bres
Chemical
recycling for
synthetic bres
Better quality if not bre blends.
Hygiene important.
Blends suitable and some
impurities may be acceptable
if application allows.
Hygiene might be an issue.
Polymer properties (chain length
and its distribution) critical.
Chemical process:
• May be used to separate blends.
• Removes contaminants (hygiene
 not a big issue).
• Might be aected by some
 contaminants (e.g. metals).
205
The manual removing of buttons, zippers and other mechanical 
components is laborious and time-consuming. Fortunately, it is not 
necessary if applying special carding machinery, for example, similar in 
use to the Frankenhuis B.V. Modern machinery is able to separate the 
components simultaneously. Cutting the textile with a guillotine into 
strips, however, is preferable. Designers should consider the possible 
mechanical dismantling of the garments. For example, membrane structures and wadding may block cards easily. Removable film-prints and 
laminated structures may totally disable the carding process.
Mechanically refined carded fibers are suitable for typical textile 
processes, including yarn spinning, bleaching, and colouring. If fiber 
length and strength are insufficient for making yarns, an option is 
to produce nonwovens. Even textile dust can be recycled. Carding 
damages fibers and some 10–20% of material is lost as dust. The dust 
consists of micro polymer particles, but dust filters recover the fraction, 
which, for example, is suitable for the application of speciality paper.
The dust is most suited for dissolving because of its fine particle size.
Raw materials recycling
via thermal and chemical routes
Textile usage and maintenance weakens the fibermechanical quality of 
fiber. Reduced strength and length can make fibers too weak or too 
short for mechanical converting processes like carding or yarn spinning. When fibers are worn out on a macroscopic level but the chain 
length of polymers is still sufficient, raw materials can be recycled on 
a polymer level. In the case of applying thermoplastics, this is possible 
via a simple extrusion process back to fibers or to plastic or composite 
products.
Chemical fractionation is feasible for fibers that are worn-out on 
a microscopic level. Cellulosic fibers like cotton can be recycled via 
chemical dissolving processes. There are two alternatives for synthetic 
fiber materials: either re-extrusion or depolymerisation to monomer 
level (repeating units in polymers). Furthermore, a robust solution 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |
206
is the gasification of all textile material to so-called synthetic gas, by 
which it is possible to synthetize materials back to different synthetic 
molecules like monomers and polymerize back to fiber raw materials. The molecules are alternatively converted into lower-value chemicals including fuels. Typically, these chemical fractionation methods are 
heavy and require large-scale production.
Synthetics. The raw material of synthetic fibers is plastic, produced 
by combining small, typically petroleum-derived monomer molecules 
in a polymerization process to form long chain polymers. Most of the 
common synthetic textile fibers are thermoplastics, meaning that they 
are objects from which new products can be formed. Fibers are producible from recycled polymers with the same spinning processes used for 
preparing fibers in general. When these are melt-spun into textile fibers, 
the process class is thermal recycling. Through this process, the fiberlength and strength of fibers can be restored, thus leaving fibers suitable 
for all kinds of textile processing. Thermal polymer-level recycling for 
PES technology is made available, for example, by Dutch aWEARness 
(Watson et al. 2017). Such a process means that work-clothing materials 
can be recycled up to eight times.
If synthetic polymers are severely damaged they can be chemically 
broken down to monomers, which are objects of re-polymerization, 
thereby restoring their polymer properties. Chemical monomer-level 
recycling is available on an industrial scale for synthetics such as PES 
by Teijin (Paszun et al. 1997) and polyamide (PA) by Econyl (Aquafil 
2018). In order to produce new textile fibers from these materials, the 
melt-spinning process follows re-polymerization. Even though commercial processes are still rare, there is a huge potential in this field 
when processes develop more economically.
Natural fibers. Cotton is actually cellulose, and, moreover, a very 
form of pure cellulose compared to that of typical, wood-based dissolving pulp. Dissolving pulp is a highly fractionated cellulose, which 
is especially useful for manufacturing man-made fibers like viscose and 
lyocell. When recycling cotton molecules, dissolving pulp is actually 
produced from them first. The polymer length of cellulose obtained 
| Textile Waste
207
from cotton is longer than that obtained from wood pulp and therefore used and worn cotton materials can, in theory, be recycled multiple 
times.
The requirements of the pulp are of a very high purity in respect 
to metal residuals, mechanical impurities and polymers not dissolving.
The purification of cotton-based dissolving pulp is possible by means 
of preselecting and sorting the applied textile waste, washing and preextraction of the textiles, bleaching and filtration after dissolving. The 
combination of applied purification methods depends markedly on 
both the raw material and the spinning process. For example, it is not 
necessary to remove fixed colorants but they will copy onto the formed 
fibers (Heikkilä et al. 2018).
The dissolving pulp from cotton raw materials applies for all known 
cellulose-spinning processes. The main difference between the processes is the strategy for making a solution from cellulose for the fiber 
spinning process. Alkaline processes, i.e. a water-sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH)-based solvent system, include a commercial viscose process as 
well as a development stage cellulose carbamate (Valta & Sivonen 2002; 
Sivonen & Valta 2005; Cai 2007; Fu et al. 2014; Guo 2011) and Biocelsol processes (Vehviläinen 2015). Viscose and carbamate processes rely 
on a better soluble cellulose derivate (chemical modificate) while in 
Biocelsol, enzymatic treatment improves cellulose solubility in alkaline.
These water-based technologies can be applied to existing viscose wetspinning facilities.
In lyocell-type process, on the other hand, cellulose solution is 
made by changing the solvent. Fibers can be produced by Lenzing’s 
industrial process, based on N-Methylmorpholine N-oxide (NMMO) 
(White 2001; Perepelkin 2007), or by utilizing ionic liquids like Aalto 
University’s Ioncell-F process (Sixta et al. 2015; Michud et al. 2015).
When solvent systems have been changed, the production methods, for 
example the spinning and recycling of the solvent, are different to those 
viscose-type processes.
In principle, all the above methods are useful for the chemical recycling of cotton, but these technologies are in the developmental stage 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |
208
(Evrnu 2016; Lenzing 2016; Palme 2017; Fontell & Heikkilä 2017). The 
properties of the reborn fibers should be the same as the respective 
virgin raw materials in both processing and use. The purity of the dissolving pulp, however, has a major influence on mechanical properties 
as well as the colour of the fibers. In practise, chemical pre-processing is 
essential for adjusting the properties of cotton-originated cellulose for 
fiber spinning. (Heikkilä et al. 2018.)
Blends. The fractionation of different fiber materials from one 
another is the most complicated and technically demanding operation. Garment properties are optimized by optimal fiber mixtures on 
the yarn level, which makes their mechanical separation impossible.
The only option is fractionation on a molecular level, a method known 
as chemical fractionation. After this, there are two alternatives, namely 
selectively dissolving the polymer of certain fibers or breaking down 
the polymers into even smaller molecules.
Polymers dissolve selectively in specific solvents, enabling fractionation through the dissolving of one component after another. For 
example, CO/PES fractionation can start from either polyester or 
cotton (e.g. Serad 1994; De Silva 2014; Palme 2016). The second component is filtered out of the solution of the first. This second component needs dissolving only if its purity is not sufficient due to the third 
component, such as elastane, or other impurities.
Cellulose carbamate route
for recycling of cotton 
Technology
Even though cotton has favourable properties for clothing applications, 
the amount of cotton in the global market cannot increase sustainably.
Similar pleasant properties may occur in regenerated (or reproduced) 
cellulose fibers, and these fibers can be made of recycled cotton. Cellulose carbamate is preferred for cotton recycling for several reasons.
Cellulose carbamate technology (Valta & Sivonen 2002; 2005; Cai 2007; 
| Textile Waste
209
Fu et al. 2014; Guo 2011) is an alternative to the viscose process because 
it is actually a similar alkaline spinning process and produces markedly 
the same kind of fiber. In other words, it is suitable as a fiber material 
for textile production as well that for different textile applications. The 
main difference between cellulose carbamate and viscose processes is 
that in the CCA process urea applied in cellulose solubility improves 
environmental impact instead of using poisonous and harmful carbon 
disulphide. The carbamate process can also be fully sulphur free.
Carbamate production can take place in small units distributed close 
to where the textile waste forms. The carbamate is a safe intermediate 
product, the storage times of which are long, even years, and its transportation regulations are light. This means that it also requires a simple 
conversion to existing viscose factories with lower environmental and 
working environment risk.
The overall life cycle assessment LCA for carbamate technology 
seems to be better than that of the existing viscose technology (Katajainen 2016). The evaluation of environmental impacts by means of life 
cycle inventory (LCI), and the global warming potential (GWP) of the 
manufacturing process of cellulose carbamate fiber, indicated 35% lower 
GWP value and 98% lower water consumption than the reference 
cotton. Compared with the same normal Asian viscose production, cellulose carbamate fiber has 66% lower GWP and 90% lower water consumption. Process integration to a pulp mill improves figures markedly 
because of a decreased amount of processing chemicals through efficient recovery and circulation.
Carbamate fiber and textiles
Carbamate fiber’s original development target was to renew viscose 
production and to reduce environmental impact. In practice, carbamate 
fiber’s production runs via the same process device as viscose with the 
only exception being that dissolving a cellulose derivate is significantly 
less harmful. This is why it has similar mechanical properties to viscose, 
but is softer and markedly less shiny. The appearance of carbamate fiber 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |
210
can be comparable with cotton as well linen. The haptic properties of 
carbamate are more desirable than those of viscose.
The colour up-take of carbamate is markedly better than most 
other manmade fibers, meaning richer colour with a lower consumption of colorants. Beyond that, the chemical composition of the fiber 
provides slight anti-bacterial behaviour and reduces the flammability 
of the material.
Carbamate applies to all garment types, from weaved and knitted 
textiles to nonwoven materials. The drapage of the carbamate cloth is 
elegant due to the gravity of the fiber. In use, carbamate textiles are 
comfortable, providing an impression of a cotton-like touch. The 
material is breathable in warm conditions and comfortable in a cool 
environment.
Linting of carbamate cloths is not a specific concern, because the 
fibers are oriented less, for example, than lyocell fibers. The pure carbamate cloth, however, has similar wet properties to viscose: the wet carbamate cloth will elongate under mechanical stress more than cotton.
The features can be improved with certain chemical treatments which 
crosslink the cellulose molecules. A more environmentally sustainable 
alternative is applying carbamate fibers in mixed fiber compositions.
In cloth, carbamate fibers mix well at the yarn level with both 
cotton and polyester fibers. Applying different portions of mechanically 
recovered fibers and recycled carbamate fibers results in fully recycled 
cloths with optimized properties.
Prototyping and key learnings
The world’s first customer-to-customer recycling piloting took place in 
a joint-funded industry group project, The Relooping Fashion Initiative 
in Finland (TEKI 2015). The textile materials for the pilot were those 
collected by a social company as part of their everyday materials collection and by a commercial retailer via a special buy-back campaign.
Sorting the materials was done manually. Converting the cotton to cellulose carbamate and the further spinning took place in pilot facilities.
| Textile Waste
211
These pilot facilities were small industrial processing environments, 
which enabled us to indicate scaling-up problems and provide information on full-scale production. Furthermore, a benefit of the pilot was to 
produce materials for evaluation (Heikkilä et al. 2018).
The pilot runs were successful and several material demos were 
completed. Most valuable were the demos, which produced readymade 
knitted products as a result. The demo products included, for example, 
gloves, t-shirts and a gala dress (see Figure 4). The carbamate fibers 
demonstrated also in other viscose fiber applications. Results suggest 
that they are also useful, for example, as stable fibers for nonwovens in 
hygienic textiles.
Well-defined material sources are important for successful textile 
recycling. Unfortunately, post-consumer textiles contain practically 
Figure 4. Carbamate fibers made from textile waste and products made from this 
material (photos by VTT).
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |
212
every possible textile material and thus a wide variety of contamination. Because of this, one should consider the real potential of discarded 
rental textiles as a source for more uniform quality fractions of material.
Manual sorting is not precise, but sufficient for industrial processes.
High cotton content and discarding undesired components is a part 
of economics. The volume of impurities affects profitability because 
it increases the use of chemicals in pre-treatment stages. In order to 
be industrially viable, then, the quality of recycled fractions and 
related measurements needs to be commonly agreed upon and openly 
communicated.
Carbamate converting is a widely known and widely available technology, and the actual spinning stage is not markedly different to viscose 
processing. Industrially feasible spinning fiber is currently in the piloting phase. Because of these advances, the scalability of the technology 
and the business model both seem fully possible and achievable. The 
quality of the demo products also indicates that the carbamate technology is closest to solving the complex textile fractionation through 
an industrial process. IFC, The Infinited Fiber Company Oy, Finland, 
began in 2018 to pilot production on post-consumer cotton by applying the carbamate technology developed by VTT Technical Research 
Centre of Finland, Ltd.
Summary, conclusions
and future aspects 
A circular economy of textiles would provide sustainable solutions 
for two major challenges related to textiles: increasing demand of sustainable raw materials and reduction of textile waste. Since one of the 
principles of circular economy is to utilize materials in a way that best 
restores or generates value, lengthening the life span of textiles through 
good maintenance and re-use should be a primary goal. This is enabled 
by good quality and circular design. Recycling as raw materials should 
be an option for only those textiles that are no longer suitable for reuse.
| Textile Waste
213
Lengthening the life span as well as increased reuse requires changes 
in attitudes from both consumers and companies, but in principle 
this aspect of circularity is easier to achieve than material recycling.
However, new business models require collaboration, communication, 
and coordination within complex networks of interdependent but 
independent actors/stakeholders. The challenge of re-designing business 
ecosystems is to find a win-win-win setting where there is a balance 
between the actors involved.
Although re-use is the preferred alternative prior to recycling, there 
are already a huge extant amount of textiles no longer suitable for 
re-use, and eventually all textile products will come to the end of their 
use-cycles. That is why textile recycling as raw material deserves all 
current attention within the circular economy of textiles. Many textile 
recycling technologies are already available, but not yet widely used 
commercially. In general, one of the biggest issues to solve for a circular 
business ecosystem of textiles is the collecting and sorting of textiles in 
a way that meets the quantitative and qualitative requirements of raw 
materials for industrial recycling processes.
As legislation is getting stricter every day, and while waste formation is not decreasing, textile recycling is the next big step necessary 
for the entire clothing industry. The CCA process is one of the very 
few viable solutions in handling and recycling cotton textile waste. The 
CCA process would simultaneously decrease the amount of textile 
waste and produce new staple fibers with a significantly developed 
eco-friendly process.
Currently world-wide there are some dozen projects and demonstrations of textile recycling via chemical methods. Brand owners, 
designers and consumers are ready for recycled products. Nonetheless, 
even if the time is ready, the large-scale system integrators and industrial manufactures are still missing. The reasons for this lie in the initial 
investment risk related to the complex structure of the entire ecosystem.
Successful business models for textile recycling are dependent on 
a large network of several industries and actors. The value chain from 
waste management to mechanical recycling exists and the whole 
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |
214
production chain from fiber spinning to final garment products is also 
in place. Most elements of the business ecosystem do exist but there is 
an urgent need for investment in the areas that are lacking, such as collecting, sorting, and pre-processing. Common standards and procedures 
could lower the investment risks, and temporary financial incentives 
aimed at co-creating the new recycling-based value chains would have 
a pivotal role in paving the way for new and more sustainable business 
models within the textile industry.
References
Aquafil (2018). The ECONYL® regeneration system. Available http://www.
econyl.com/regeneration-system/ [Accessed April 17 2018].
Cai, J., Zhang, L., Zhou, J., Qi, H., Chen, H., Kondo, T., Chen, X. & Chu, B.
(2017). Multifilament fibers based on dissolution of cellulose in NaOH/
urea aqueous solution: Structure and properties. Advanced materials. Vol. 19, 
pp. 821–825.
De Falco, F., Gullo, M. P., Gentile, G., Di Pace, E., Cocca, M., Gelabert, L., 
Brouta-Agnésa, M., Rovira, A., Escudero, R., Villalba, R., Mossotti, R., 
Montarsolo, A., Gavignano, S., Tonin, C. & Avella, M. (2018). Evaluation of 
microplastic release caused by textile washing processes of synthetic fabrics.
Journal of environmental pollution. Vol. 236, pp. 916–925.
De Silva, R., Wanga, X. & Byrne, N. (2014). Recycling textiles: the use of ionic 
liquids in the separation of cotton polyester blends. RSC advances.
Vol. 4:55, pp. 29094–29098.
EMF Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2017). A new textiles economy: Redesigning 
fashion’s future. Available https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/
downloads/publications/A-New-Textiles-Economy_Full-Report.pdf 
European Commission (2018). New waste rules will reinforce EU's position 
as the global front-runner in waste management and recycling. Available 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/pdf/27_02_2018_news_en.pdf [Accessed 
29 March 2018].
Evrnu (2016). The Evrnu technology. Available http://www.evrnu.com/
technology/ [Accessed March 27 2018].
Fontell, P. & Heikkilä, P. (2017). Model of circular business ecosystem for textiles.
Espoo. VTT Technology 313. Available at: http://www.vtt.fi/inf/pdf/
technology/2017/T313.pdf 
| Textile Waste
215
Fu, F., Yang, Q., Zhou, J., Hu, H. & Jia, B. (2014). Structure and properties of 
regenerated cellulose filaments prepared from cellulose carbamate–NaOH/
ZnO aqueous solution. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng. Vol. 2, pp. 2604–2016.
Guo, Y., Zhou, J. & Zhang, L. (2011). Dynamic viscoelastic properties of 
cellulose carbamate dissolved in NaOH aqueous solution. Biomacromolecules.
Vol. 12, pp. 1927–1934.
Haemmerle, F.M. (2011). The cellulose gap: The future of cellulose fibers. Available 
http://www.fmhaemmerle.com/documents/Presentation_Sept_2011.pdf 
[Accessed 29 March 2018].
Hawley, J.M. (2006). Digging for diamonds: A conceptual framework for 
understanding reclaimed textile products. Clothing and textiles research 
journal. Vol. 24:3, pp. 262–275.
Heikkilä, P., Määttänen, M., Vehviläinen, M., Fontell, P., Mensonen, A., 
Raudaskoski, A., Kamppuri, T., Pitkänen, M. & Harlin, A. (2018). The 
Relooping Fashion initiative. VTT Research Report, VTT-R-01703-18.
Henry, B., Laitala K. & Klepp I.G. (2018). Microplastic pollution from textiles:
A literature review. Consumption Research Norway – SIFO, Project report 
no 1–2018.
ITWO (2018). Reuse and recycling. Available http://www.iwto.org/re-use-andrecycling [Accessed 29 March 2018].
Katajainen, L. (2016). Puuvillapohjaisen selluloosakarbamaatin elinkaaritase. Master 
Thesis. Jyväskylä, Finland. University of Jyväskylä.
Lenzing. (2016). TENCEL® – enabling ‘circular economy’ in the textile world & 
next-generation ecological fiber. Available http://www.lenzing-fibers.com/
presseinformationen/presseinformationen-detail/tencelR-enablingcircular-economy-in-the-textile-world-next-generation-ecological-fiber/ 
[Accessed 10 October 2016].
Leonas, K.K. (2017). The use of recycled fibers in fashion and home products.
In: S.S. Muthu (ed.). Textiles and clothing sustainability, Textile science and 
clothing technology. Singapore. Springer, pp. 55–77.
Michud, A., Tanttu, M., Asaadi, S., Ma, Y., Netti, E., Kääriäinen, P., Persson A., 
Berntsson A., Hummel, M. & Sixta, H. (2015). Ioncell-F: ionic liquid-based 
cellulosic textile fibers as an alternative to viscose and Lyocell. Textile 
research Journal. Vol. 86:55, pp. 543–552.
Niinimäki, K. (2011). From disposable to sustainable. Doctoral dissertation.
Helsinki. Aalto University, School of Art and Design.
Palme, A. (2017). Recycling of cotton textiles: Characterization, pretreatment, and 
purification. Doctoral dissertation. Chalmers, Sweden. Chalmers University 
of Technology.
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |
216
Paszun, D. & Spychaj, T. (1997). Chemical Recycling of Poly(ethylene 
terephthalate). Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. Vol. 36:4, pp. 1373–1383.
Patton, E. (2018). H&M, a fashion giant, has a problem: $4.3 billion in unsold 
clothes. New York Times. Available https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/27/
business/hm-clothes-stock-sales.html [Accessed 4 April 2018].
Perepelkin, K.E. (2007). Lyocell fibers based on direct dissolution of cellulose 
in N-methylmorpholine N-oxide: Development and prospects. Fiber 
chemistry. Vol. 39, p.163.
Pure Waste (2018). The Pure Waste Philosophy. Available https://www.purewaste.
org/company/about-us.html [Accessed 29 March 2018].
Redress. (2017). What happens to clothing that goes unsold. Available https://www.
redress.com.hk/updates/2017/10/20/what-happens-to-clothing-that-goesunsold [Accessed 4 April 2018].
Rreuse. (2016). Ethical principles for the clothing re-use sector. Available http://
www.rreuse.org/ethical-principles-for-the-clothing-re-use-sector/ 
[Accessed 4 April 2018].
Schmidt, A., Watson, D., Roos, S., Askham, C. & Brunn, Poulsen, P. (2016).
Gaining benefits from discarded textiles, LCA of different treatment 
pathways. TemaNord. 2016:537. https://norden.diva-portal.org/smash/get/
diva2:957517/FULLTEXT02.pdf 
Serad, S.L. (1994). Polyester dissolution for polyester/cotton blend recycle.
US patent US5342854A.
Sivonen, E. & Valta, K. (2005). Method for preparing a cellulose carbamate 
solution. FI 20055619, US2009283717 (A1).
Sixta, H., Michud, A., Hauru, L., Asaadi, S., Ma, Y., King, A.W.T., Kilpeläinen, I.
& Hummel, M. (2015). Ioncell-F: A High-strength regenerated cellulose 
fiber. Nordic pulp & paper research journal. Vol 30:1.
SOEX (2017). Wie weit ist die entwicklung von hochwertigen verwertungsverfahren? 
Available http://textile-zukunft.de/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/3-
GFTZ-SOEX-Nov2017.pdf [Accessed 4 April 2018].
Statista (2018). Global cotton production volume from 1990 to 2017 (in 1,000 bales).
Available https://www.statista.com/statistics/259392/cotton-productionworldwide-since-1990/ [Accessed 27 March 2018].
Teijin (2017). Ecocircle fibers. Available: http://www2.teijin-frontier.com/
english/sozai/specifics/ecopet-plus.html [Accessed 24 July 2017].
TEKI (2015). The Relooping Fashion initiative -project, funded by Tekes 2015–2017.
Available http://reloopingfashion.org/readmore/ [Accessed 28 March 2018].
The Fiber Year (2017). The fiber year 2017 world survey on textiles & nonwovens.
Available https://www.thefiberyear.com/fileadmin/pdf/TFY2017_TOC.
pdf [Accessed 29 March 2018]
| Textile Waste
217
TUDelft. (2017). The products that last. Available http://productsthatlast.nl/site/
app/index2.html#/page/0/6, [Accessed 23 February 2017].
Valvan. (2018). Sorting equipment. http://www.valvan.com/products/equipmentfor-used-clothing-wipers/sorting-equipment/ [Accessed 17 April 2018].
Valta, K. & Sivonen, E. (2002). Manufacture of cellulose carbamate used 
as alkaline solution in, e.g. manufacture of fibers and films, by reacting 
cellulose and urea in mixture containing cellulose, liquid, auxiliary agent 
and urea, and having specified liquid content. FI20020163 (A).
Vehmas, K., Raudaskoski, A., Heikkilä, P., Harlin, A. & Mensonen, A. (2018).
Journal of fashion marketing and management, in press.
Vehviläinen, M. (2015). Wet-spinning of cellulosic fibers from water-based solution 
prepared from enzyme-treated pulp. Doctoral dissertation, 1312. Tampere, 
Finland. Tampere University of Technology.
Wanassi, B, Azzouza, B, Hassena, MB. (2016). Value-added waste cotton yarn: 
Optimization of recycling process and spinning of reclaimed fibers.
Industrial crops and products. Vol. 87, pp. 27–32.
Watson, D., Pal, D., Syversen F., Skogesal O. & Pedersen J. (2016). Fate and 
impact of used textile exports. Nordic Council of Ministers, NA2016-905.
White, P. (2001) Lyocell: the production process and market development.
In: C. Woodings (ed.) Regenerated cellulose fibers. Cambridge, England.
Woodhead Publishing Limited, pp. 62–87.
WRAP. (2015). Sustainable clothing, A practical guide to enhancing clothing durability 
and performance. Available http://www.wrap.org.uk/sites/files/wrap/
WRAP%20Sustainable%20Clothing%20Guide.pdf [Accessed 4 April 2018].
Zitting, J. (2017). Optical sorting technology for textile waste. Development of an 
identification method with NIR spectroscopy. Thesis. Lahti Finland. Lahti 
University of Applied Sciences.
9 | Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem... |

Business
Examples
220 | Business Examples
Workwear made from polyester material can be recycled even eight times 
extending its lifetime even to 40 years (photo by TouchPoint).
221
We design and produce work wear that is 
ecological, bold and represents a new era.
We think that with vision and an eye for creativity, almost anything can be turned into something 
new and functional: more stylish than old, smarter 
than brand new. We are dedicated to helping 
companies become more sustainable through 
outstanding design and providing sustainable and 
ecological solutions. Our aim is to challenge our 
business partners in the push to sustainability, 
and we assist by providing concrete solutions to 
achieving it. We make returnity clothing and take it 
back at the end of its useful life time. For example, 
using Infinity material made from polyester which 
can be recycled eight times, extending its lifetime 
to as long as 40 years. Our statement is to rethink 
and to revolutionize a prevailing disposable 
culture by promoting a strongly circular economy.
We aim to reduce, reuse, and recycle and our aim 
is to use 100% ecological materials by 2020.
Collaboration 
and Creativity 
in B2B Sector: 
TouchPoint
Collaboration and Creativity in B2B Sector: TouchPoint |
222
Landfill waste does not disappear, and burning waste produces 
carbon dioxide and destroys all valuable materials. This is why we have 
to challenge the traditional cradle-to-grave model in the clothing sector.
Our design strategy for cradle-to-cradle thinking means the following:
• designing durable and long-lasting workwear
• enabling old, but still useful garments to be reused 
• directing old garments, no longer useful as clothing, to other uses
(e.g. redesigned into new products)
• recycling garments at the end of their life into new fibers, textiles
and clothing with the help of new technologies
Easy to care, Easy to wear
TouchPoint’s collaboration with the company Hesburger provides a 
good example of creative thinking and the reuse of old materials. Hesburger has agreed to a firm and long-term collaboration with TouchPoint in workwear and recycled products. Hesburger’s new workwear 
collection has been made from durable, high-quality materials from start 
to finish, making their lifecycle considerably longer than the majority of work clothes. Shirts are made from recycled polyester (RePET), 
meaning that each shirt is made from seven plastic bottles.
New life for old workwear as outdoor furniture
In 2016 we started a pilot project with Dutch Awearness, which is the 
forerunner in circular economy thinking in the Netherlands. In this 
project, textile waste was transformed into composite material which is 
strong and weather lasting and therefore can be used in outdoor furniture. We collected from our clients (Hesburger, Meyer Shipyard, Viking 
Line, Hospitals) around 15 000kg of textile waste. The plastics for this 
composite production we obtained from Meyer Shipyard (plastics came 
from aluminum rolls). From this material, Dutch Awearness then produced outdoor furniture and flower boxes in return for our clients. For 
example, 50 outdoor table-and-chair groups were produced for Hesburger. Dutch Awearness has assured these products a 50-year guarantee, 
and even a recyclable life after that.
| Business Examples
223
Giving new purpose through design
Can we recover and repurpose old uniforms through high quality design 
and thereby add value to textile waste? Using waste is a new design challenge which requires creativity and open minds. Eco-designers Anniina 
Nurmi and Outi Pyy designed a collection of sellable items from Viking 
Line’s old uniforms and table cloths. The end results were a limited 
edition type collection of accessories which could be brought back to 
Viking Line on-board shops for consumers to purchase. In this way, 
through creative design, waste material was turned into a sales success.
10 000 scarfs for a scout event from left-over materials
In 2016 we made 18 000 scout scarfs from left-over textile materials.
Because the dyeing of textile material uses a lot of water, we wanted 
to use the colors already existing in these left-over materials. We 
searched for textiles with certain colors from various left-over stocks 
and managed to collect around 4 km of textiles. From this material we 
produced 18 000 scarfs for a scout event. This exercise was especially 
valued by the scout organization, as it accorded with its concern to 
raise young people to respect the environment. This event represents 
a good example of how we can make valuable everyday choices in 
improving our environmental impact.
http://www.touchpoint.fi/
Collaboration and Creativity in B2B Sector: TouchPoint |
Outdoor furnitures made from 
textile waste transformed into 
composite material (photo by 
TouchPoint).
224 | Business Examples
Collected and processed pre-consumer textile waste (photos by Pure Waste).
225
At Pure Waste Textiles, we are on a mission 
to change the global textile industry. We 
make 100% recycled, ecologically sustainable 
yarns, fabrics and garments, and we save a whole 
lot of water by doing it our way.
Cotton is a natural fiber, yet it causes severe 
stress to the environment. The crop uses a lot of 
water, but many growers are in areas where there 
is little rainfall. It takes around 11,000 litres of 
unpolluted water to grow 1 kilogram of cotton.
That means a single t-shirt requires as much as 
2700 litres of water. Of all the different materials, 
cotton is the least reused – by far.
Responsibility
in Business
through Textile
Recycling:
Pure Waste
Responsibility in Business through Textile Recycling... |
226
We don’t make our products from virgin material. Pure Waste recycles the offcuts and spinning waste from clothing and textile industries. The raw material is collected, sorted by colour and quality, and 
mechanically opened back into the fiber. Then we mix it with recycled 
polyester or viscose and spin it into new yarns. After that, the process 
is the same as with virgin materials except that our yarns and fabrics 
don’t need to be dyed as their colour comes from the textile waste.
Pure Waste Textiles is our statement and means to affect the 
ever-growing waste problem. By using cutting waste as a raw material, 
we can reduce the amount of textile waste that ends up in incinerators 
or even landfills. The pre-consumer textile waste that we mainly use 
at the moment is just the beginning. We are also currently researching the possibility of using post-consumer textile waste as raw material.
In Finland there are on-going projects related to the circular economy 
and the recycling of post-consumer textile waste, and we are actively 
involved in a couple of them. We strongly believe that in the future 
textile fibers can have several lifecycles. Our mission is to be at the 
| Business Examples
227
forefront of that development, proving that recycling can and should be 
done and that the textile industry can change for better.
Currently, we are mainly working with pre-consumer textile waste.
When we started the business there were no guarantees that what we 
were aiming for would work; we just had to roll up our sleeves and 
start working. Trial after trial, one mistake after another, we discovered 
a working pattern. In our opinion the most important thing is to begin 
the process, even if every stage ahead is unclear or uncertain. Sometimes slow-but-steady processes genuinely move things forward, and 
suddenly you notice how far things have come. Thinking that a solution to a problem can only be executed once it has been perfected can 
lead to abandoning a really good idea.
Our values and beliefs firmly guide our everyday operations. We 
believe that we have a huge responsibility not only to the environment 
but also to the people working for us. We are happy to discuss and talk 
about our production and the processes involved. We believe that transparency is the key: certificates are important, but one should not rely 
on them alone. We have, therefore, adopted the policy of sharing photos 
and videos from our production facilities every time we visit them. We 
have decided to talk about the things that we are succeeding with, but 
also the things we are struggling with.
We have come far, but at the same time we realise that we are only 
at the beginning of our journey. There are many things to be changed, 
problems to be solved and victories to be celebrated. We believe there is 
still a lot that we can achieve – we just need to stay true to our values.
https://www.purewaste.org/
Responsibility in Business through Textile Recycling... |
228
Giving New Life
to Waste:
Recycled Jeans
as Terry Towels 
Finlayson
| Business Examples
Old jeans can be used as a raw material
for terry towels (photos by Finlayson).
229
Collection
Finlayson collects jeans in their shops in Finland 
around the year, a practice that began back in 
spring 2017. In addition to collecting material in 
shops, Finlayson included an option for returning jeans by mail in a RePack reusable package, 
which made the return process easy and accessible 
for customers not living close to Finlayson shops.
The jeans campaign was a huge success and Finlayson collected over 12,000 kg of jeans material 
in 2017 alone, which is estimated to be around 
8,000 pairs of jeans. Finlayson takes back all kinds 
of jeans material: pants, jackets, overalls etc., and 
offers its customers a voucher that can be used for 
shopping in Finlayson stores and webshop.
Process
Jeans are sent from Finlayson’s logistics center 
in Finland to Belgium, to the European Spinning Group (ESG) that uses different partners 
for sorting the material. In Finlayson’s case, the 
sorting is done by Altex in Germany. All material 
is used but whether it can be used in the towel 
Giving New Life to Waste: Recycled Jeans... |
230
making process or not depends on the quality of the material. It is estimated that 80 % of the jeans material can be used for towels. The material is sorted based on cleanliness and fiber content. Only jeans that 
are clean and do not contain elastane can be used in the towel-making 
process, as elastane is a flexible fiber and thus problematic when material is being mechanically opened back into fiber. The product labels, 
zippers and buttons are also removed at this stage. Metal parts are recycled, and labels burned. The jeans material is mechanically opened back 
into fibers and the excess material that cannot be used in the process is 
sent to the car manufacturing industry to be used as interior and sound 
proofing material in cars.
Clean jeans fiber is sent back to ESG, which has done extensive 
research to find the best possible composition for the thread, as recycled 
fibers are not as strong as virgin cotton. ESG spins the fiber into thread 
adding viscose to make durable and suitable thread for towels. After 
that, Finlayson’s production partner NV Weverij J. Clarysse in Belgium 
takes over and weaves the thread into towels according to the normal 
towel-making process, except the towels are not dyed at any point.
Products
The products are designed by Liisa Suurla and are called Old Jeans 
Towels. They contain 40 % recycled cotton (=jeans), 40 % viscose and 20 
% virgin cotton (warp). There are two sizes: hand towel and bath towel.
It is calculated that the jeans towels save hundreds of litres of water 
compared to towels made from virgin cotton. More preciously, 1 kg of 
jeans towels saves 5999 liters of water, as calculated by Modint, a Dutch 
umbrella organization of producers, importers, agents, grossists in clothes, 
accessories, rugs and (home)textiles. The hand towel saves 850 liters and 
the bath towel over 2500 liters. With this information, it was calculated 
that the towels produced for Finlayson in 2017 saved over 10 million 
liters of water, which is the same as over four Olympic size pools.
https://www.finlayson.fi
| Business Examples
Giving New Life to Waste: Recycled Jeans... | 231
232
Arela
Knitwear Care 
Service
| Business Examples
The maintenance service lengthens
the life of knitwear (photos by Arela).
233
“Have you replaced my knit with a new one? This looks and 
feels like new!” is a common response when a customer comes to 
collect their knitwear from the care service at an Arela store. The maintenance service provided by the clothing company Arela is designed to 
lengthen the life of knitwear as part of company’s ethos of sustainability.
Arela Knitwear Care Service |
234
Founded in 2007 by textile designer Maija Arela, Arela is known for 
making modern, minimalist cashmere knits for the contemporary consumer. During Arela’s early years, cashmere was a relatively unknown 
material in Finland, and cashmere knits in the Finnish market were 
few. Educating consumers about the precious material, its qualities and 
care became a significant part of Arela’s work. Because many customers worry they will ruin their delicate knits by washing, are unable to 
mend holes, or are too busy for maintenance, Arela developed an care 
service to complete their customer experience.
To benefit from this care service, customers bring their used knits 
to an Arela store. Arela staff de-pill, wash and steam the knits and mend 
holes and seams if needed. Additional services include elbow patch 
sewing and alterations. The in-house care staff all have degrees in textile 
| Business Examples
235
or clothing and can execute skillful repairs. As a material, cashmere 
takes lends itself well to care – pilling is easily removed with a cashmere 
comb, holes can be mended almost invisibly, and washing, when done 
correctly, only improves cashmere’s warming and breathable qualities.
The care service helps to lengthen the life of knits and keeps them in 
use as long as possible, in line with company’s philosophy. When using 
precious natural material, it is of utmost importance that the garments 
do not end up in a landfill. If a knit is beyond repair, perhaps after a 
meeting with an enthusiastic puppy, Arela takes the garment back and 
recycles the material, making sleep masks, elbow patches or hot-water 
bottle covers from it.
After introducing merino knits to their collections, Arela extended 
its care service to cover merino knits. But the only knits now accepted 
by this service are of Arela’s own brand. Because there are so many different qualities of cashmere and merino on the market nowadays, Arela 
can only take responsibility for the knits they know the composition of; 
what kind of yarn has been used has a great effect on how the knit will 
respond to care.
From a business point of view, the service lowers the customer’s 
threshold to invest in a high-quality knit, gains trust and works as a 
warranty. A win-win situation for both the brand and the customer, the 
latter experiences a pleasure not unlike purchasing a new garment, but 
without the guilt of consuming more.
https://www.arelastudio.com/
Arela Knitwear Care Service |
236 | Business Examples
Figure by Anniina Nurmi.
237
For the past ten years I have been working in the field of sustainable fashion. I have wanted to do as much as I can to enable the 
change from disposable to sustainable: by sharing information through 
the Vihreät vaatteet [Green Garments] website, teaching design students, 
managing a webstore that sells ecological clothes, and running a sustainable clothing label, Nurmi.
For years I thought I was able to do the most by running a clothing label: I used sustainable materials, produced ethically, and designed 
long-lasting styles. But then I realized that by bringing more clothes into 
this world I could not achieve a big enough change. I was still operating 
within the same fashion system whose core purpose is to produce more, 
faster and cheaper. No individual action towards sustainability within 
this system is sufficient when the system itself is the problem.
This is why I took time-out from the clothing label and concentrated on looking at the bigger picture. Already when I was still running 
the Nurmi label, I had gained an interest in the idea of clothing rental.
I had donated Nurmi clothes to the few clothing libraries already 
existing in Finland, and in spring 2015 I managed a small-scale Nurmi 
clothing library located at our store in Lahti. Since then I have made 
several different clothing rental tests which have helped me learn that 
through renting we can build a fashion system which will truly disrupt 
the existing one.
Anniina Nurmi: 
‘Clothing as a Service’
Will Disrupt
the Fashion System
Anniina Nurmi: ‘Clothing as a Service’... |
238
Alternative revenue model
The production of long-lasting, high-quality clothes has to become 
more profitable than fast fashion. This change is possible with the model 
of ‘clothing as a service.’ A piece of clothing is turned into a service: 
we do not pay for a product itself but for the use of a product. The 
same way that, for example, in transportation we already have ‘mobility-as-a-service.’ The current revenue model is based on making a 
profit when a piece of clothing is sold. The sales profit is received once, 
and after that the garment doesn’t generate any further profit for the 
company. But in the ‘clothing as a service’ model the longer the piece 
of clothing stays in circulation, the bigger the profit. In other words, the 
higher the quality, the better the profit.
Renting makes fashion circular
Clothes can be rented out by clothing stores, labels, and yet also consumers. The renting process can happen through an app, and the piece 
of clothing is delivered to your doorstep or collected from a swap-point.
The service can also be offered at a physical location, for example at a 
department store or a clothing library. To make the renting process efficient, easy and scalable, there should be a digital platform which enables 
tracking, transparency and communication between the owner and 
renter, but also between other service providers such as a laundry service 
and logistics partner.
After the piece of clothing is rented numerous times – hopefully 
for years and years – and is no longer wearable, it is returned back to 
its producer, because in this model the ownership of and responsibility 
for a piece of clothing remains with the producer. When the piece of 
clothing is returned, it is reused as raw material for new clothes. This 
way we can close the loop in an efficient way and make fashion circular.
Almost any piece of clothing can be rented, some for shorter 
periods of time, some for longer. For example, it would make sense to 
rent an evening gown just for a few days as it is meant to be worn only 
once. On the other hand, a winter jacket can be rented for the whole 
season, jeans for an even longer period of time, for years.
| Business Examples
239
A win-win for consumers, companies – and the environment
Rental services offer retailers and clothing labels new ways to gain 
income. By renting, they can generate an even higher profit than by 
selling an item, because a high-quality piece of clothing can be kept 
in circulation for a long period of time. In addition, they are able to 
develop a much closer customer relationship and attract returning customers. Through the rental platform, a retailer or a label has access to a 
huge amount of data: about customer behavior but also about product 
lifecycles. This way the retailers and clothing labels are able to offer customized services, enhance the circulation of clothing and learn more 
about their customers.
By renting a piece of clothing to someone else, a consumer can 
make a profit from her own wardrobe: when you’re not wearing a piece 
of clothing yourself, it generates income through renting. As soon as 
you consider buying a new piece of clothing, you can think of it as an 
investment: “If I now invest in this high-quality, sustainable and a bit 
more expensive product, I can pay for it in part – or even entirely – 
through renting it to others.”
A consumer has access to a limitless selection of clothing without 
the burden of ownership. By renting, you can use the kinds of quality 
designer items which you otherwise perhaps couldn’t afford or wouldn’t 
dare to buy.
Last but not least, renting has huge benefits for the environment. It 
enables us to concentrate on the quality and sustainability of clothing 
production, as the low price and fast cycles are not the only desirable 
features of our clothes. Also, because the high-quality items are kept 
in circulation for longer periods of time, we can produce less, which 
significantly reduces the environmental impact of clothing production.
We urgently need to move towards a truly sustainable and circular 
fashion industry. I firmly believe that the ‘clothing as a service’ model 
can make it a reality.
https://anniinanurmi.com/
Anniina Nurmi: ‘Clothing as a Service’... |
240 | Business Examples
Emmy makes selling and buying secondhand brand garments easy 
(photo by Emmy).
241
Emmy is a pioneering service for consumers to effortlessly recirculate brand apparel 
that they no longer need. With 20% monthly 
sales growth in 2017–2018, Emmy is one of the 
fastest growing apparel recirculation operators in 
the Nordics and Europe.
Emmy’s business idea was born three years 
ago, arising from an anxiety most of us have: 
what to do with the brand clothes that are in 
good condition but that we no longer need ourselves? Selling these items at the local flea market 
is time-consuming and often poorly productive, 
and various online fleas, auctions and social media 
groups generally fail to make a difference in terms 
of the effort required.
Heaven for
Pre-owned
Brands:
Emmy.fi
Heaven for Pre-Owned Brands: Emmy.fi |
242 | Business Examples
Emmy's collection points can be found in several malls in Finland (photo by Emmy).
243
“As long as effortless ways to recirculation are not available, people 
too easily choose the worst alternative: throwing items away,” notes Juha 
Mattsson, CEO of Emmy. He continues: “Recently we’ve also read in 
the papers how different charity donation batches may have ended up 
in Africa or elsewhere to distort the local clothing market and industry.
The best scenario would be for people to only buy products that are 
long-lasting and sustainable, and then to recirculate unnecessary items 
locally. We harness the market forces to achieve this.”
Emmy’s concept builds on making, selling and buying secondhand 
easier than in any other way. Anyone who wants to sell can leave their 
quality brand clothes, shoes, bags, and accessories to Emmy’s collection 
points. Emmy takes care of everything else: manually inspecting, sorting, 
photographing and selling the items at the Emmy online store. Emmy 
also adds size standardization, checks originality, and handles all shipments, returns and customer service. The two week return policy guarantees safe and easy shopping, and the sellers get up to 80% of all that 
gets sold. At the moment (Q2/2018) the company has around 40 collection points located typically at malls and covering all major demographic areas in Finland.
The online store’s selection currently holds approx. 60,000 unique 
items. During the three-year history of the business, over 250,000 items 
have already exchanged hands. According to calculations by the Finnish 
Environment Institute, Emmy has so far helped to reduce 150+ tons of 
CO2 emissions and to save 300+ million liters of water. Emmy has also 
donated approx. 35,000 items to local charities.
“The most important thing is that the environment benefits. Emmy’s 
mission is to guide consumption towards sustainable and durable brands.
Thanks to a well-functioning aftermarket, buying clothes becomes an 
investment, and the resale price of brands will begin affecting people’s 
choices when buying new items. At the end of the day, the amount of 
textile going to waste will be reduced significantly,” Mattsson says.
https://store.emmy.fi/
Heaven for Pre-Owned Brands: Emmy.fi |
244 | Business Examples
Do you really have to own all your clothes? How about using 
fashion leasing service? (photos by Maru Lemmetty).
245
Fashion leasing services offer engaging 
solution for women’s clothing problems. We 
have all experienced how different kinds of garments pile up in our wardrobes, even though we 
have used them only once or twice. This occurs 
for various reasons: because of fashion experiments, sale craziness, last minute party-dresses, 
a desperate need for change, dresses bought for 
occasions where the dress code requires us to 
buy things we wouldn’t normally wear, etc. Some 
fashion brands make garments to last a very 
short time, and it seems that the whole principle 
behind the business is based on the disposability 
of fashion.
Vaatepuu fashion leasing service was established 
by Soile-Maria Linnemäki in 2014, in Järvenpää.
Leasing Fashion
Can Be Fun!
Vaatepuu
Leasing Fashion Can Be Fun! Vaatepuu |
246
Linnemäki had previous experience of using a Fashion Library in Helsinki and wanted to start a similar service. Now the service functions 
also in Turku, Tampere and Helsinki. While based in several towns, it is 
possible to circulate garments between different locations, and in this 
way refresh what’s on offer. The leasing service also collaborates with 
Finnish fashion designers, which enables it to offer the lease of a unique 
evening wear collection. The service is based on a membership fee, and 
lending time is 1–2 weeks, with the principle of 2 items every 2 weeks.
Vaatepuu is also trying out a points system whereby more expensive 
garments can be leased by acquiring more points.
The mission behind Vaatepuu is to get consumers to give more 
thought to the number of garments they are buying, and to consider 
the factor of quality over quantity. We are also concerned with increasing accessibility to the experience of how high-quality materials feel on 
your skin, how it feels to wear well-designed garments, and, in general 
to show how it is possible to be well dressed everyday of your life. The 
service helps people to discover their own style and offers clothing to 
suit every situation in life. Support is provided to gain a better understanding of what is worth owning and what it’s better to rent. It makes 
sense to invest in certain base garments of your own, which will be 
of long-term use, and yet to lease more exclusive garments for special 
occasions. Vaatepuu shows that it is better to rent items you will use 
only once or twice.
Vaatepuu also provides guidance about how to take care of your 
garments, and offers a repair services when required. Through such 
innovation, the fashion leasing system breaks down exclusivity barriers 
through a more reasonable and more responsible use of clothing. It also 
shows the way to democratizing fashion: the service is used by leading 
politicians as well as artists living on a small grant or stay-at-home 
mums on maternity leave. We can honestly say that this service is for 
everyone. Vaatepuu also wants to show how a sustainable use of fashion 
can be fun and can create a supportive community. As Soile-Maria puts 
it “the best party is always around the shared fitting room.” Even a bad 
day can be saved by borrowed fashion.
| Business Examples
247
Membership offers
• The use of fashion in a more sustainable way. Do you really have to 
own all your clothes?
• The possibility to develop your own style. You can try out garments 
you wouldn’t normally buy.
• The possibility to get to know Finnish fashion. How many Finnish 
brands are you familiar with?
• The transformation of your wardrobe in an economical and 
space-saving way.
• The chance to minimize wrong purchases. If you really like the 
garment you have leased, you can purchase it for yourself.
• The chance to have fun! Our shared fitting room is visited by 
incredible women who give positive feedback to one other.
https://vaatepuu.wordpress.com/
Leasing Fashion Can Be Fun! Vaatepuu |
248 | Writers in this publication
Writers in this publication | 249
Writers in this publication
Sustainable Fashion in a Circular Economy
Kirsi Niinimäki, PhD (Doctor of Arts in Aalto University), is Associate 
Professor in Design, especially in Fashion research in the Department of 
Design at Aalto University, Finland. Her research has focused on holistic 
understanding of sustainable fashion and textile fields and connections 
between design, manufacturing, business models and consumption. Her 
research group the Fashion/Textile Futures, http://ftfutures.aalto.fi, is 
involved in several significant research projects, which integrate closed 
loop, bio-economy and circular economy approaches in fashion and textile 
systems and extends the understanding of strategic sustainable design.
The Clothing Style Confidence Mindset
in the Circular Economy 
Cosette M.J. Armstrong, PhD, is Associate Professor in the Department of 
Design, Housing, and Merchandising at Oklahoma State University, USA, 
where she teaches courses related to sustainable design and visual communications. Her research has focused on sustainability education and sustainable design. She has explored pedagogical strategies, curriculum design 
and engagement tools for the integration of sustainability into textiles and 
clothing education.
Chunmin Lang, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the Department of Textiles, 
Apparel Design, and Merchandising at Louisiana State University, USA, 
where she teaches courses related to fashion merchandise buying, apparel 
economics, and fashion entrepreneurship. Her research and publications has 
focused on sustainable consumption, green retailing models and fashion 
entrepreneurship.
Collaborative Consumption and
the Fashion Industry
Claudia E. Henninger, PhD, is Lecturer in the School of Materials, at University of Manchester, UK, where she teaches courses related to strategic 
management and sustainability. Her research has focused on issue of sustainability in the fashion industry from a marketing management perspective.
She is also involved with the Academy of Marketing SIG Sustainability.
250
Celina Jones, PhD, is Lecturer in Fashion Technology at University of 
Manchester, UK. Jones teaches at undergraduate and postgraduate level 
along with developing research in fashion product development and textile 
science and technology including fiber sourcing, fabric construction and 
finishing, and fabric performance analysis.
Dr Rosy Boardman is Lecturer in Fashion Business at University of 
Manchester, UK. Her research has focused on digital strategy and innovation in the retail industry. In particular, her research has specialised in 
e-commerce, digital marketing, multichannel/omnichannel retailing, 
m-commerce and consumer behaviour utilising eye tracking technology 
and qualitative research methods. Boardman has also worked in industry as 
a fashion buyer and a marketing assistant.
Dr Helen McCormick is Senior Lecturer in Online Fashion Retailing 
and Multichannel Strategy at University of Manchester, UK. She is a 
specialist in retail marketing and conducts research in the area of social 
media marketing, consumer behaviour, m-commerce, e-commerce and scommerce, retail design, and also areas that include new technologies and 
their use particularly to support sustainability, e.g. augmented reality, virtual 
reality and innovative technologies used in retail. McCormick is passionate 
about researching the changing retail environment in the UK and globally 
focusing on how technology can support sustainable processes in retail.
Designing for a Circular Economy: 
Make, Use and Recover Products
Dr Ruud Balkenende is Professor in Circular Product Design at Delft 
University of Technology, Netherlands. In 2015 Prof Balkenende started at 
the TU Delft after 25 years of experience at Philips. He has been active in 
several EU-funded projects and was the coordinator of GreenElec, a project 
that successfully implemented design for recycling. His research, projects 
and teaching concentrate on the connection between product design and 
circular economy with a focus on the engineering aspects of implementation. His research interest is in improving the resource efficiency of products through design for recycling and design for circular economy.
Dr Conny Bakker is Professor in Design Methodology for Sustainability and 
Circular Economy at Delft University of Technology, Netherlands. Bakker is 
recognized as an expert on design for circular economy. She has been active 
| Writers in this publication
251
in numerous EU-funded projects on the circular economy and eco-design, 
such as ResCOM, LCA-to-Go, ProSUM and GreenElec. Her research, 
projects and teaching focus on the connection between product design 
and circular economy. She has set up a MOOC on Circular Economy and 
Product Design that already has reached over 10,000 participants.
Design for Circularity: The Case of circular.fashion
Essi Karell, MA, is Doctoral Candidate in the Department of Design, at Aalto 
University, Finland, where she works in Fashion/Textile Futures research 
group. Her research focuses on fashion design in a circular economy, more 
precisely on design, which enables textile waste recycling. Previously she has 
worked in projects related to emerging technologies in sustainable fashion.
Sustainable Design Cards: A Learning Tool
for Supporting Sustainable Design Strategies
Ulla Ræbild, PhD, is Assistant Professor and Head of MA Programme Planet – 
Design for Sustainable Futures at Design School Kolding, Denmark, where 
she teaches, supervises and conducts research within the fields of fashion 
design, design methods and sustainability. Furthermore, she has developed 
curriculum and explored pedagogical approaches in the context of design 
education.
Karen Marie Hasling, PhD, is Assistant Professor at Design School Kolding, 
Denmark, where she teaches courses on materials’ different roles in sustainable design. With a cross-disciplinary approach, her research focuses on 
the interface between learning, materials and product design within the 
context of sustainable transition.
Slowing Resource Loops in the Clothing
Industry through Circular Business Model
Experimentation
Nancy M.P. Bocken, PhD, is Professor in Sustainable Business Management 
and Practice at Lund University, IIIEE, Sweden. Her interest is in finding 
solutions to close the “idea-action gap” in sustainable innovation. Bocken is 
also Associate Professor at TU Delft and Fellow at the Cambridge Institute 
for Sustainability Leadership. She co-founded HOMIE whose ‘pay per use 
business model’ aims to drive sustainable consumption and ‘circularity’.
Writers in this publication |
252
Karen Miller, PhD (Cantab), is Researcher in the Centre for Industrial 
Sustainability at the University of Cambridge, UK. She also teaches design 
and innovation management for sustainability in businesses. Her research 
focuses on sustainability and business model innovation, with a particular 
focus on the fashion and textile industries.
Ilka Weissbrod, PhD, is freelance researcher active in the UK and Germany.
Her research focuses on sustainability management in businesses, in 
particular during innovation processes. She is keen to apply theory in practice, she has hands-on experience in social enterprise, technology start-ups 
and as sustainability advisor to multinational corporations.
Maria Holgado, PhD, is Lecturer (Assistant Professor) in the Department of 
Management at University of Sussex, UK, where she teaches operations 
management, sustainability and corporate social responsibility. Her research 
focuses on sustainability-oriented innovations in operations and business models and on developing solutions for more sustainable and better 
performing production and service processes and networks.
Steve Evans, PhD, is Director of Research in Industrial Sustainability in the 
Department of Engineering at Cambridge University, UK, where he tries 
to find ways to help industry become sustainable, and is particularly interested in inexpensive solutions – expensive solutions are too easy. His team 
comes from across the globe, solving problems in Africa and Asia as well as 
the advanced economies.
A Consumer-centered Approach for
Managing Post-consumer Textile Flows
Kerli Kant Hvass, PhD, is Research Affiliate in the Department of Management, Society and Communication at Copenhagen Business School (CBS), 
Denmark and a freelance advisor in circular economy and sustainability.
Her research approach is engaged scholarship in collaboration with practitioners and focuses on organizational aspects of business model innovation 
for sustainability and circular economy, circular fashion and management of 
post-consumer textile waste issues. She advises companies, NGO’s, start-ups 
and other initiatives on circular economy, business model innovation and 
sustainability.
| Writers in this publication
253
Review of Textile Recycling Ecosystem
and a Case of Cotton
Pirjo Heikkilä, Dr. Sc. (Tech.), is Senior Scientist at VTT Technical Research 
Centre of Finland Ltd in research area of fibers and bio-based materials.
She has 19 years’ experience in textile research ranging from fiber materials 
to technical applications, and during the last years Heikkilä has focused on 
textile recycling topics.
Paula Fontell is co-founder and CEO of Ethica Ltd, a consultancy focused 
on circular economy. Ethica is specialized in circular business ecosystem 
modelling and development across different industries, as well as coaching 
businesses in circular business model development. Ethica partnered with 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd in the Relooping Fashion 
initiative and has coached several textile companies in building new circular 
service concepts and circular narratives.
Marjo Määttänen M.Sc. (Tech.), is Senior Scientist at VTT Technical 
Research Centre of Finland Ltd, where she develops technologies to utilize 
cellulose based waste materials, such as textiles and cardboard waste, as raw 
materials for sustainable man-made cellulose textile fibers. She is responsible for wet-spinning facilities at VTT Bioruukki piloting centre in Espoo, 
where novel sustainable man-made cellulose processes can be developed 
from laboratory to pilot scale.
Ali Harlin, D.Sc., is Research Professor of new biomaterials and bio economy 
at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd. He is former Professor 
in Technical Textiles at Technical University Tampere, Finland. He is also 
active as an industrial innovator and lecturer.
Writers in this publication |

Aalto ARTS Books
Aalto University
School of Arts, Design and Architecture
Department of Design
Espoo, Finland
shop.aalto.fi
© Kirsi Niinimäki and the authors
Thank you for the reviewers in this publication:
Maarit Aakko, Visiting Postdoctoral researcher,
Aalto University, Finland 
Christine Cole, Research Fellow, Nottingham
Trent University, UK
Claudia Henninger, Lecturer in Fashion Marketing
and Management, University of Manchester, UK
Anthony Kent, Professor of Fashion Marketing,
Nottingham Trent University, UK
Riikka Räisänen, Docent, University of Helsinki,
Finland
Artworks on cover, p. 11 and p. 219:
Hannamari Matikainen
Graphic design: Tiina Ripatti
Typefaces: Bembo, Gill Sans MT
Materials: Scandia 2000 Smooth
Printed by Aldus Oy, Lahti 2018
Binding by Finnreklama/GL-Sitomo
ISBN 978-952-60-0089-3 
ISBN 978-952-60-0090-9 (pdf)

The promotion of sustainable fashion within a circular economy 
is a vital contemporary topic. This publication presents up-to-date 
research about the various levels of circularity at work in the fashion 
industry. Experts of design, consumption, business and industry explain 
how circularity in the production and consumption of fashion can be 
approached in manifold ways. This collection of texts highlights the fresh, 
critical thinking that is currently influencing the fashion industry to adopt 
the practice of sustainable transformation within a circular economy.
The publication addresses the following themes: 
• How to include consumers within the changing process of fashion 
consumption?
• New design and business strategies for the circular transformation
of fashion.
• Developing a systems approach to circularity, which includes the
recycling and recovering of materials at an industrial level.
Kirsi Niinimäki works as an Associate Professor in Aalto University, 
Helsinki, and is one of the most prominent researchers in the field of 
sustainable fashion. The contributors to this book are leading researchers 
in the field of sustainable fashion and circular economy. Their passion 
is to challenge a linear way of thinking and to promote innovative and 
progressive practices of circularity in the fashion industry.