Virgin Voyages launches new adults-only cruise ship
Francesca Street , CNN • Published 11th March 2022
Facebook
Twitter
Email
Virgin Voyages is launches its second cruise ship March 11 , 2022 .  
( CNN ) — Virgin Voyages aimed to disrupt the cruise industry when it launched Scarlet Lady , its first adults-only cruise ship , last year . 
Now Richard Branson ' s cruise line is premiering its next offering : Valiant Lady . 
This 278-meter long vessel can accommodate 2 , 770 passengers , and holds the usual cruise amenities -- like a pool deck -- over its 17 decks , along with slightly less usual offerings -- like a tattoo parlor . 
Nirmal Saverimuttu , Virgin Voyages ' president , tells CNN Travel the cruise line hopes Valiant Lady will be part of a summer cruising boom as pandemic restrictions ease .  
 " There ' s a lot of pent-up demand for travel ,  " he says , adding that the positive response to Scarlet Lady has Virgin confident its sister ship will be a success . 
On the morning of March 11 , Valiant Lady set sail from Essex in the southeast of England to London , where she ' s docked at the London International Cruise Terminal for launch celebrations . Later , she ' ll embark on a UK sailing before heading off to Barcelona . A stint in Australia is also on the cards . 
Swanky design
The Pink Agave restaurant is on board Scarlet Lady and Valiant Lady . 
The Pink Agave restaurant is on board Scarlet Lady and Valiant Lady . 
Courtesy Virgin Voyages
Scarlet Lady and Valiant Lady are pretty much identical , with their glitzy interior , boutique-hotel vibe and multiple restaurants . The only real difference is their respective itineraries . 
Virgin Voyages ' want their ships to feel noticeably different from traditional vessels . For Captain Marco Carsjens , that was part of the appeal of joining the cruise line . 
Helming Valiant Lady is a " joy ,  " says the captain , who has been in the industry for over 25 years .  
 " I came from more traditionally designed ships , but Virgin Voyages is very different and actually quite out there from the exterior to the interior in comparison ,  " Carsjens tells CNN Travel .  " I ' m passionate about design , so the brand using people who have never worked in ship design before was fascinating and it has worked out great .  " 
Besides his headquarters on the ship ' s bridge , which Carsjens calls the " best view in the house ,  " the captain says his favorite on board spot is The Dock , an indoor / outdoor restaurant with sun loungers and sea views .  
 " The way the area merges from inside to outside and has a superyacht feel , I love it ,  " he says . 
Related content
What it ' s like on Virgin ' s adults-only cruise ship
Much was made about the cruise line appealing to people who ' ve never cruised before when Virgin Voyages first launched . 
Tom McAlpin , CEO of Virgin Voyages told CNN Travel in September 2021 that Virgin Voyages wasn ' t " your grandma ' s cruise .  " 
There ' s no requirement to dress up for dinner . There ' s the aforementioned tattoo parlor . There are pop-up entertainment events . There are multiple restaurants rather than one large dining hall with a buffet . 
Still , Saverimuttu is keen to stress that Virgin Voyages aims to appeal to the veteran cruiser as much as the newbie . He adds that the cruise line is looking to cater to people of all ages . 
British cruise blogger Emma Le Teace , who runs the blog Emma Cruises , voyaged on Scarlet Lady last summer .  
 " Prior to my Virgin Voyages cruise , I had heard a lot about how different the cruise line was . Virgin were targeting a new cruise market and this left me wondering if existing cruisers would like the product ,  " she tells CNN Travel .  
 " Virgin definitely do have some things that set them apart from other cruise lines such as the included WiFi and soft drinks but I found the entertainment and ship to be fairly similar to that which I ' d find on other cruise lines .  " 
Le Teace says that , as with all cruise lines , there were aspects she liked , and aspects she didn ' t . In her blog review , she praised the fact that crew were allowed to dress casually , and the great food options , while noting she was less convinced by the small pool . 
Overall Le Teace tells CNN Travel she was impressed by how Virgin seemed to listen to customer feedback . 
She ' d been unsure about the converting bed which doubles up as a couch , but upon boarding was pleased to learn the bed only converted to couch on request . It was also " very comfortable .  "  
 " I feel as though Virgin listened well to the feedback that their customers have given them and I expect them to do well in the future ,  " she says . 
Related content
What it ' s like to cruise during Omicron
Looking to the future
Virgin Voyages ' interiors are designed to evoke a boutique hotel . 
Virgin Voyages ' interiors are designed to evoke a boutique hotel . 
Virgin Voyages / Sang An
Launching a cruise line in the middle of a pandemic is no mean feat .  
 " It ' s no secret that Omicron had a big impact on the travel industry in December and for January , people were pulling back on near-term travel plans -- and we did see that in our bookings as well ,  " says Saverimuttu . 
But as Omicron wanes in Europe and the US , Saverimuttu is confident a corner has been turned . There ' s been an uptick in bookings , he says , suggesting travelers are confident to cruise again . 
Virgin Voyages says it will continue to implement Covid safety protocol -- everyone on board Scarlet Lady and Valiant Lady is required to be vaccinated , and the cruise line says it also tests guests before boarding . 
Saverimuttu stresses that the cruise line hasn ' t hasn ' t had any major issues in terms of Covid-19 related illnesses on board . He said Virgin ' s vaccination requirements will minimize the impact of any outbreak on board . 
As for the future , Saverimuttu says Virgin Voyages is excited about opening up its travel schedule as Covid restrictions ease -- Valiant Lady is set to sail from Australia later this year . 
The cruise line ' s third as-yet-to-be-launched ship , Resilient Lady , will launch later this year , while Virgin has a fourth vessel scheduled for 2023 . 