Chapter 1
Introduction
It is evident that fashion design has become increasingly diversified and democratized . 
One can choose between a myriad of styles , such as hip-hop , hipster or punk , to reflect their 
personal preference and fashion trends . 
Contemporary fashions are also now available to consumers at all price levels . The most 
appealing clothing type may be “ fast fashion ”  , or , apparel that reflects rapidly changing styles at 
low price points ( Tokatli , 2008 )  . Consumers tend to purchase more clothing items when the prices 
are low or affordable and , as a result , more garments are sold than can actually be worn 
( Banim & Guy , 2001 ; Woodward , 2007 )  . Critics of “ fast fashion ” suggest that overconsumption 
has led to increasing fashion industry waste ( Fletcher , 2008 ; Hawley , 2008 )  . Nevertheless , the 
relationship between consumers and fashion companies is essentially an interactive one : 
designers offer a plethora of styles , season after season , and buyers ( young consumers , in 
particular ) consistently seek variety and novelty ( Fralix , 2001 )  . In the contemporary market , 
both parties bear responsibility for the production of sustainable fashion design . 
2
1 . 1 Sustainable Fashion
Ecological critics of the fashion industry today suggest that it is certainly out of kilter . As a 
part of growing trend to counteract the effects of “ fast fashion ”  , blogs , books and business 
reports are increasingly promoting the practice of “ sustainable fashion ”  ( Gwilt & Rissanen , 2011 )  . 
The goal of sustainability is to “ … meet [ s ] the needs of the person without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs ”  ( Brundtland Commission , 1987 , Ch . 2 , 
paraI )  . Sustainable fashion , also known as eco-fashion , takes into consideration the total life 
cycle of fashion production . Sustainability is accounted for at every level : in design concept , the 
creation and use of materials , and in marketing , by promoting the ethical awareness of 
consumers . Eco-fashion can encourage greater environmental awareness and demonstrate the 
benefits of sustainable business practices for producers and consumers . 
To promote ecological and sustainable fashion and reduce waste , designers are turning to 
new design concepts such as zero-fabric-waste designs ( McQuillan , 2011 ; Rissanen , 2008 )  , 
technology-enabled designs ( Loker , 2008 )  , and transformable designs ( Fletcher , 2008 )  . At the 
same time , sustainable fashion designers must continue to attract consumers ’ interest and 
respond to their needs . Today , the greatest challenge for fashion producers may be in balancing 
sustainable fashion production with contemporary consumer demands for variety and 
affordability . 
1 . 2 Mass production and Mass customization
In the contemporary fashion industry , apparel of different colors , features , styles , patterns , 
textures , functions , shapes and sizes provide customers with an overabundance of choice , and 
producers expect this great variety of mass produced garments to sell . Mass production ( creating 
3
standardized goods at low cost in mass quantities ) is currently the most universal apparel 
production model and is one that has been used by the industry for centuries . However , 
increasing consumer demands for individual and original designs have caused fragmentation 
among fashion producers . In 1987 , Davis introduced the concept of “ mass customization ,  ” a 
production strategy that would cater to consumers ’ different needs and wants by providing them 
with customized products on a mass scale at a reasonable price . Mass customization was 
identified as a consumer driven business strategy that “ uses information technology to efficiently 
produce customized goods and services with maximum differentiation through low-cost 
production ” and characterized by individualized mass production ( Anderson et al , 1997 , I95-
A19 / 2 )  . Compared with mass production , mass customization is a more effective and efficient 
way to satisfy consumers ’ demands . 
1 . 3 Transformable Design
The objective of this research , and from a designer ’ s point of view , is to enhance 
sustainable outcomes by focusing on an innovative design process called transformable design . 
In this unique method , individual clothing components are connected together by fasteners such 
as zippers , hook and eyes , Velcro tape , and / or buttons . Each component can be unconnected and 
re-configured to create an entirely different garment style at the whim of the consumer . For 
example , if the basic shape is a long robe , the garment can be transformed into a long dress by 
removing the sleeves , or it can be transformed into a short skirt , a vest , and other styles by 
attaching / detaching different parts of the garment . Pockets and decorations can also be added to ,  
( or removed from ) the garment and different fabrics , patterns and / or colors can be used to 
replace individual , original pieces . The sustainable benefits of the transformable design concept 
4
are evident in the fact that an original garment can be transformed into a wide array of styles to 
serve different purposes as well as to prolong the life of the product . 
The transformable garment can have a long lifetime , as consumers need only dispose of 
or replace worn-out parts . As shown in Figure 1 , the traditional garment lifecycle process is 
made up of five stages : The first is comprised of raw materials ( fabrics , threads , buttons , zippers , 
etc .  )  ; the second stage involves the industrial production of garments from these raw materials ; 
the third reflects the transportation of garments from producers to consumers by different 
marketing channels ; the fourth stage demonstrates consumer use , and the fifth stage , disposal . 
Figure 4 . Regular Garment Lifecycle ( Allwood , Laursen , de Rodriguez & Bocken , 2006 )  . 
In contrast , the transformable garment lifecycle shows a clear difference in its last two stages . As 
demonstrated by Figure 2 , both traditional and transformable garments share the same first three 
stages of raw materials , industrial production and transportation . However , the fourth stage 
( consumer use ) is markedly different than the traditional model , as the transformable garment 
design reflects a re-circulation of use ( as modified pieces replace worn-out parts ) and a longer 
garment lifestyle . As any part of the garment can be replaced by a new piece , the amount of 
disposable materials makes a tremendous impact on the fifth stage , as the discarding of parts as 
opposed to the whole of the fabric results in a reduction to fashion industry waste . 
Material Production Transportation Use Disposal
5
Figure 5 . The Transformable Garment Lifecycle ( modified from Figure 1 ) 
To best promote transformable design , mass customization is the most appropriate 
marketing strategy . Because each component of the garment can be produced in different fabrics 
( such as leather , cotton , linen , jersey , etc .  ) and in different color and patterns , the item can be 
sold in individual pieces instead of as a whole package . This allows consumers to buy a basic 
garment shape , choose and separately purchase different component pieces they like , and design 
the finished piece as suits their needs at the moment . Furthermore , if some parts of the garment 
are ripped or destroyed by wear , new pieces of the same parts can be replaced and the consumer 
need not throw away the entire garment . The ability to both co-design and prolong the life of 
favoured clothing items are some unique advantages of transformable design that may attract 
consumers . 
The overall benefits therefore , of the transformable garment are : increase the possibility 
and variety of consumer use , diversity in style , reduction of waste , longevity of garment life , and 
potential enhancement of greater consumer satisfaction over time . The transformable garment 
Material Production Transportation Use Use
Transform
Transform
orm
Transf
New pieces
Partly Disposal
6
can also , significantly , promote greater consumer involvement with sustainability practices . 
Instead of educating consumers about sustainability through the media or publications , the 
transformable garment can act as an active agent for ecological change by engaging the 
consumer through direct participation in fashion production
Practical explorations of transformable garment design are at the core of my research , 
which aims to promote sustainable design through innovative perspectives . In order to reduce 
overconsumption and offer renewable solutions , I have created several sustainable fashion styles , 
and propose a mass customized design method to satisfy consumers ’ constantly changing 
demands . Through this project , I mean to demonstrate how transformable fashion design can 
significantly reduce fabric waste , extend garment life and more directly engage and involve 
consumers in sustainability practices . 
7
Chapter 2
Literature Review
The literature review is divided by three parts . The first part covers general knowledge 
about fashion design processes and how apparel designers can increase sustainability in garment 
design . The second part reviews existing transformable garments and the importance of 
versatility and utility in sustainable fashion design . The third part explores the role of consumer
in sustainable fashion and examines mass customization strategy from aspects of both 
consumer ’ s interests and sustainable fashion . 
2 . 1 The Considerable Role of Design in Sustainable Fashion
Sustainability can be achieved in the fashion industry through many means , including garment 
design , fashion marketing , and the consideration of consumer behaviour . The most efficient way 
to promote sustainable fashion , however , is through fashion design . In the fashion industry , 
manufacturing departments often follow a linear production model ( see Figure 3 )  . Each phase of 
design and product development , materials acquisition , production , sales and distribution all 
operate separately and are only initialized once the previous phase is complete . The first phase , 
design and product development is the most influential stage because design choices affect the 
material waste created at each phase of the production process , as well as product consumption , 
disposal , and recycling ( Loker , 2008 )  . 
Figure 6 . Apparel Manufacturing Departments ( Loker , 2008 ) 
Design and 
Product 
Development
Materials 
Acquisition Production Sales
Distribution
8
To encourage designer involvement in sustainable fashion , Ann Thorpe ( 2005 ) argues ,  
 “ designers could incorporate time and dimension into their design philosophy…designing 
resilient clothing to last beyond their life time to generations in the future ”  ( as cited in Loker , 
2008 , p . 99 )  . There are various design methods that can help to increase sustainability in the 
fashion system - effective designs should offer garments with longevity , diversity and versatility 
( Dombek-Keith & Loker , 2011 )  . 
One of the main challenges of sustainable fashion design lies in its goal to reduce fabric 
waste . Even in the clothing production process , there is up to 10 to 20 percent of fabric wastage 
( Rissanen , 2008 )  . To reduce fabric waste , a strategy known as Zero-Fabric-Waste design 
employs a sustainable method based on design re-patterning , which is an experimental practice 
undertaken during the pattern-making process in garment production ( 2008 )  . In his dissertation 
 “ Creating Fashion without the Creation of Fabric Waste ”  , Timo Rissanen , a zero-waste pioneer , 
discussed pattern-making wastage , fashion creation methods , and less wastage fashion designs . 
He presented a number of zero-waste related designs , from the “ tuta ”  , which was designed by an 
Italian futurist in 1919 to the zero-fabric-waste dress collection designed by Mark Liu in 2007 . 
Rissanen ’ s research focused on jigsaw puzzle garment designs in which the fabric pieces 
interlock , similar to jigsaw pieces . This design allows dressmakers to cut the fabric from a twodimensional unified whole to produce a three-dimensional garment without waste . Following 
Rissanen ’ s work , an increasing number of researchers have made contributions to Zero-FabricWaste sustainable fashion design ( Black , 2008 ; Bye , 2010 ; Farrer , 201 ; Fletcher , 2008 ; Lewis , 
2008 ; Loker , 2008 ; Luke , 2008 ; McQuillan , 2011 )  . Apart from the concept of Zero-Fabric-Waste , 
extending the lifespan of a garment is another approach . 
9
2 . 2The Importance of Versatility and Utility in Sustainable Fashion Design
One of the key benefits of sustainable fashion design is garment longevity . There are 
many ways to extend a garments ’ lifespan , including making high quality garments , using highquality dyes for longer-lasting color , and re-designing existing garments . Vartan ( 2008 ) claims 
that modifying , refurbishing and repairing existing garments is a more efficient way to achieve 
sustainable fashion than constantly purchasing new styles . Transformable garments reflect this 
efficiency as they can be modified and repaired by detaching and replacing different pieces , 
thereby extending its lifespan and reducing overall consumer consumption . 
A garment that has versatility and hybridity is another effective solution to enhance 
sustainability . If an article of clothing can change colors , or be modified by the user in pattern 
and style , it has a better chance of being worn more often . As a result , a consumer ’ s need for 
buying and consuming new and different garments will more likely be reduced ( Black , 2008 )  . In 
addition , traditionally designed garments are usually purchased for specific occasions and / or 
seasons ( e . g . winter jacket , shorts , vest… )  , whereas transformable garments can be used in 
multiple contexts . Though the idea of transformable , sustainable fashion may seem new , 
numerous designs for multi-functional garments have appeared in the history of fashion , 
including the ‘ A piece of cloth ’  ( A-POC ) collection by Issey Miyake ( Miyake , Fujiwara , Kries & 
Vitra Design Museum , 2001 ) the ‘ Firefly Dress ’ designed by Orth , Post and Cooper ( Huang , 
2011 ) and the color-changing dress collection made by researchers in Yonsei University ( Lee , 
Cho , Lee ,  & Cho , 2010 )  . In order to design a garment with longer lifespan to serve multiple 
purposes , it is important to understand how consumers interact and engage with the product . 
10
2 . 3 Consumer Engagement and Involvement in Sustainability
Fashion design can indirectly affect consumer behaviour to a point where buyers play an 
important role in the system of sustainable fashion . In many cases , the responsibility of 
sustainable practice is attributed to consumers rather than designers ( Fletcher , 2008 ) because 
sustainable designers are more often held accountable for the production process rather than 
consumer use ( Dombek-Keith & Loker , 2011 )  . In order to further encourage consumer 
involvement in sustainable fashion practices , detachable garment design with its active consumer 
participation enables an extended use with fewer garments ( Gwilt & Rissanen , 2011 )  . 
2 . 3 . 1 Customized fashion and sustainable clothing . Customized clothing has long been 
an option for consumers looking for original , tailored fashions . Before the industrial revolution , 
garments were mostly custom made to meet individual needs . In the contemporary fashion 
industry , however , handmade garments and tailored designs exist in niche markets aimed at the 
upper class . The majority of fashion consumers today are attracted to , and can only afford , 
clothing that is mass produced . Consumers and producers both benefit from mass production , as 
it reduces the cost of making goods and generates output in large quantities . Mass production can , 
therefore , provide goods for consumers at minimized prices and generate maximized profits for 
the producer . 
Mass customization is an emerging , alternative production and business strategy that 
combines advantages from both customization and mass production . This approach can also 
better support sustainable fashion practices in the industry . Pine ( 1993 ) identifies mass 
customization as : 
11
a new way of viewing business competition , one that makes the identification and 
fulfillment of the wants and needs of individual customer paramount without 
sacrificing efficiency , effectiveness , and low cost .  ( p . xiii ) 
In mass customization , it is not only that designers offer consumers individually customized 
goods and services ( Pine , 1993 )  , but that they engage in a memorable consumption experience 
( Fiore , Lee , Kunz & Campbell , 2001 )  . Mass customization fulfills consumers ’ desire for 
experience ( Fiore , Lee & Kunz , 2004 )  . The advantages of mass customization can be seen in the 
success of various companies , such as Ikea , Lego and Levi ’ s . Levi ’ s ‘ Personal Pair ’ collection , 
for example , is customized to provide buyers jeans with personalised measurements of waist , 
hips and rise ( Lott , 2001 )  . Customer satisfaction and engagement with the brand is demonstrated 
by this statistic :  “ the repurchase rate for Levi ’ s Personal Pair custom fit jeans was 38 percent as 
opposed to 12 percent for its traditional jeans ”  ( Berman , 2002 , p . 54 ) 
Fashion designers can choose from many different types of mass customization , such as 
adjustable customization , dimensional customization and modular customization to suit their 
needs ( Senanayake , 2004 )  . Adjustable customization refers to the adjustment of different design 
features to customize products , such as one design for two uses . Dimensional customization 
refers to cloth made with standardized designs and customized dimension , for instance , the tailor 
shop . Modular customization refers to provide a wide variety of products and services by 
combing and adjusting the modules ( Anderson & Pine-II , 1997 )  . To be specific , producer could 
repeatedly produce modular components where customization can be achieved by varying 
combinations ( Pine , 1993 )  . For example , Lego company . Modularity has been viewed as the 
most essential element of achieving mass customization ( Duray , Ward , Milligan & Berry , 2000 ; 
Feitzinger & Lee , 1997 ; Pine , 1993 ; Sawhney , 1998 )  . 
12
The appeal of mass customization has also been proven in the fashion industry . A 2001 
article from The Critical Thinking Consortium , for example , reported that many consumers 
would prefer to purchase customized apparel and footwear even if they must pay more for these 
items ( Fralix , 2001 )  . More consumers today are willing to ( and want to ) design their own apparel 
by modifying various features , such as color , texture , print , dimension and style ( Lee , Kunz , 
Fiore & Campbell , 2002 )  . Buyers do not only benefit from wearing original , personalized 
designs , but also gain a memorable consumption experience ( Fiore et al .  , 2001 )  . Several apparel 
companies have already incorporated modular design and production into their mass customized 
collections . Online sales are frequently used interactive platform for customers approach in mass 
customization . A growing number of apparel companies are now offering mass customization 
services on their websites , such as Customink , Zazzle , Brooks Brothers , Converse , Land ’ s End 
and Nike . 
13
Chapter 3
Methodology
In this research project , I employed a mixed methods approach which included 
sustainable fashion design experiments and investigation , interviews and online surveys . The 
design experiments focused on sustainability and mass customization . 
3 . 1 Experimental Research : Sustainable Fashion Designs
Sustainable fashion needs to be experienced and applied to everyday practice ( Fletcher , 
2011 )  . In order to reach the goal with the strongest design solutions , various design methods and 
design samples were created and used . I created seven garment designs which comprised the 
entire sample grouping ( these included six individual styles and one final collection of 
sustainable fashion designs )  . I then created a comparison chart to analyze the advantages and 
disadvantages of each design . All of these designs were created based on sustainable fashion 
design concepts , including one piece designs , and transformable / detachable designs . 
3 . 1 . 1 Summary of design experiments . 
• Design 1 : a one piece design which a piece of rectangle fabric shaped by elastics without 
fabric waste .  ( See Figure 1 ) 
• Design 2 : a detachable design comprised of several individual components that are made 
with two layers of fabric . Instead of sewing each piece of fabric together in the 
production process , I attached interlocking hooks and eyes which can be connected and 
separated by the user . Each fabric piece , therefore , functions separately from the other 
and both are reversible . The user can change the garment ’ s style in varying ways by 
detaching and re-attaching different parts to different areas .  ( See Figure 2 ) 
14
• Design 3 : the final collection of transformable design , which is an extension of Design 
2 . The collection features a number of components which can be separated and changed . 
In order to keep all the pieces in place , these components are connected by zippers , rather 
than hook and eye fasteners .  ( See Figure 3 . 16 ) 
3 . 2 Qualitative Research : Interviews and Survey of Design 3
In the second phase of the research , I conducted one-on-one interviews and online surveys 
in response to the Design 3 ( transformable design collection )  , to obtain professional fashion 
insiders ’ advice and consumers ’ opinions about this innovative design method . I created a variety 
of interview and survey questions to investigate the sustainability , aesthetics , functionality , and 
commercial possibilities of the Design 3 garment collection . 
3 . 2 . 1 Interviews . I conducted one-on-one interviews with seven fashion professionals 
( both adult men and women )  : two fashion designers , two fashion scholars , and three 
entrepreneurs . I recruited the participants through referrals and from Soochow University in 
Suzhou , China . I interviewed fashion professionals in four cities of China : Suzhou ( two scholars )  , 
Shenzhen ( two entrepreneurs and one designer )  , Nantong ( one entrepreneur ) and Nanjing ( one 
designer )  . During the interviews computer-generated visual images were used as a vehicle to 
elicit informants ’ perceptions and opinions ( Harper , 2002 ) of Design 3 . Each interview was 
audio-recorded and later transcribed , and the length of interviews were ranged from 30 to 60 
minutes . My main expectation in interviewing these particular participants was to gain 
information about the current production status of sustainable and transformable garment 
manufacturing in the Chinese market . Through the interviews , I also hoped to identify the 
advantages and disadvantages of the transformable garment design , and to consider the 
feasibility of manufacturing and launching the design in the Chinese market in the future . 
15
3 . 2 . 2 Survey . Consumers ’ opinions of transformable design were collected by conducting 
a public online survey , which included an experimental customization design section and 25 
survey questions . The survey questions garnered consumers ’ opinions about purchasing 
sustainable fashion , mass customized garments and transformable designs . Survey was designed 
and developed to seek responses from both male and female Chinese consumers , it took each 
respondent about 15 to 30 minutes to answer all the questions . 
As an experiment in the custom design process , in the design section of the survey , I 
created and posted an interactive website online which featured modular components of the 
transformable design collection . Online participants were prompted to choose different 
components to customize their own designs . I then used the collected quantitative data to analyze 
consumers ’ interests and perceptions of Design3 . The 25survey questions provided insight into 
Chinese consumers ’ perception of sustainable , transformable and customized garments , and 
provided information on consuming and shopping behavior , average price of clothing purchase , 
and demographics ( e . g . gender , age , occupation and location )  . 
I then used the qualitative from the interview and quantitative data from the survey to 
analyze the commercial possibilities , desirability and sustainable effectiveness of the 
transformable garment . 
16
Chapter 4
Sustainable Fashion Product Design and Development
4 . 1 Design 1 : One-piece Garment - Zero Fabric Waste Garment Design
For my first design , I meant to explore potential sustainable design methods and began 
with a one-piece garment concept that focused on transformation , flexible garment shape and 
aesthetic value . My model was primarily inspired by both origami patterns1
and the ‘ New York
by Gehry ’ 2 
1

2 
building , a skyscraper featuring a rumpled and shifting surface . In order to recreate a 
texture similar to the stainless-steel skin of Gehry ’ s building , I chose white artificial leather for 
the garment , and also developed an elastic frame to create a corrugated origami feature . 
During the garment design and production process , the first stage involved fabric sample 
making , as shown in Figure 4 . 1 . This figure demonstrates how the elastic structure , combined 
with the weight and texture of the fabric , supported the corrugated architectural shape . In the 
second stage , I developed design sketches and technical drawing ( see Figure 4 . 2 and Figure 4 . 3 ) 
outlined the work process for the one piece design ( a rectangular piece of cloth without any cuts )  . 
I sewed several elastics into the fabric , and then gathering and ruching them at the top and 
bottom of the rectangular piece , and also added one elastic to each vertical edge of the cloth . 
Figures 1 . 4 to 1 . 6 illustrate the garment ’ s versatility , and show a wide range of possibilities for 
wear and its suitability for different body types . This design demonstrated potential for using 
elastics in one piece garment . 
17
Figure 4 . 1 . Fabric sample making for one-piece dress
Figure 4 . 2 . Sketches for one-piece dress
18
Figure 4 . 3 . Technique drawing & design structure for Design 1
Figure 4 . 4 . Design 1 – One-piece dress
19
Figure 4 . 5 . Different wear possibilities for Design 1
Figure 4 . 6 . Different wear possibilities for Design 1
20
Figure 4 . 7 . Different wear possibilities of Design 1
4 . 2 Design 2 : Detachable Garment
My second detachable design was inspired by a simple , childhood object—the Lego brick . 
The brick ( the building block of the Lego construction kit ) was introduced in 1958 and is the 
most important product of the Lego brand ( Lego . com , 2014 )  . Lego bricks are sold in packages 
with hundreds of pieces which can be connected and assembled in different ways to construct 
various objects ; the interlocking feature offers the user unlimited building possibilities . Lego 
constructions can then be broken down into individual pieces and used to build anew . Lego ’ s 
slogan promises that “ It ' s just a matter of getting the imagination going – and letting a wealth of 
creative ideas emerge through play ”  ( Lego . com , 2014 )  . 
To create the Infinite Dress ,  ( Design 2 )  , I adjusted the traditional garment making process 
of making a long dress . As Figures 5 . 1 and Figure 5 . 2 demonstrate , I constructed the garment 
from six main parts : front top ( Figure 5 . 1 . a )  , the shoulder-strap ( Figure 5 . 1 . b )  , front bottom 
( Figure 5 . 1 . c )  , back top ( Figure 5 . 1 . d )  , back bottom ( Figure 5 . 1 . e )  , hem ( Figure 5 . 1 . f ) and three 
decorative parts ( Figure 5 . 2 )  . 
21
Each part of the garment was designed to be separated and reassembled by garment 
accessories ( 82 hooks and eyes in total )  . All of these pieces have two sides , one black and the
other white ( Figure 5 . 2 )  . Each part of the garment can adjusted individually , and interchanged 
with other fabrics of varying colors and patterns . I designed two extra decorative parts to 
interchange with this design ( Figure 5 . 3 )  . This sustainable long dress ( Figure 5 . 4 ) can be 
transformed to reflect at least 80 different styles by detaching and interchanging individual parts 
( Figure 5 . 5 )  . 
Figure 5 . 1 . Design components ( a - f ) for Design 2
Figure 5 . 2 . Decorative components for Design 2
22
Figure 5 . 3 . Extra decorative components for Design 2
Figure 5 . 4 . Design 2- detachable garment
23
Figure 5 . 5 . Transformable styles of Design 3- Detachable garment
4 . 3 Design 3 : Transformable Design
My final design , a modular design , was based on the foundations of the first two designs , 
drawing from the benefits of experimenting with sustainability , mass production and 
transformable design concepts . Figure 3 . 1 illustrates the nonlinearity of the design process , as I 
moved back and forth between stages to reconsider ideas and come up with a final design 
solution . 
As with the Infinite Dress , Design 3 ( transformable garment ) is constructed of small 
fabric components which can be easily separated and recombined . The user can transform the 
24
garment into a wide variety of styles by detaching or replacing the components . Technologically , 
it is an advanced version of the Infinite dress as it employs zippers instead of hooks and eyes to 
connect each fabric piece . For this design , I also used three different kinds of fabrics ( leather , 
knit and cotton ) to provide varying garment textures . Design 3 is an improved sustainable 
fashion design because the connections are more secure , it also offers more diversity of style 
choices . The garment can be transformed into different styles such as vest , jacket , dress , and 
jumpsuit , creating more than 300 style options by interchanging 39 fabric pieces . 
Figure 6 . Design processes of Garment3
4 . 4 Stage 1 : Researching and Purchasing Material 
As mentioned earlier , my previous design experiences comparing different garment 
closure systems such as Velcro tape , hooks and eyes , and buttons , led me to realize that the 
zipper was the preferable attachment to use in order to best construct a garment through modular 
transformable design . This is because the zipper can easily attach two modular pieces , and 
Research 
& Preparation
Technological 
sample making
Define problems 
& feasibilities Sketch drawing Design drawing
Material 
preparation
Pattern making 
& cutting
Modular pieces 
making
Prototype 
construction
Idetify problems 
& feasibilities 
Design change Fabric 
purchasing Draping Design 
alteration Pattern making
Modular pieces 
making
Design 
construction
Final garmentNo . 7
25
creates a strong seal when it is closed . In my preliminary research of fasteners , I searched for
many zipper designs to evaluate their performance . This was one aspect of the general research 
that I conducted on materials for modular transformable design to help me develop new ideas 
and anticipate any design issues . However , despite my preparations , unexpected problems with 
the fasteners occurred during the process of garment construction , and ultimately , I needed to 
seek out and purchase better zipper components . 
4 . 4 . 1 Sample making . It was important to thoroughly test the zipper connection 
technique prior to the garment design and construction process because the utilization of the 
zipper in this research was an important and challenging experiment . My research revealed that 
the cross and “ T ” construction of zipper had not been used before , so it was critical to test this 
option during the pre-sampling stage . The zipper research and experimentation revealed three 
key limitations and benefits of the zipper closure : 
1 . The zipper connection couldn ’ t achieve a T-construction , meaning the zippers could not 
separate a piece of fabric into three pieces to form a T connection . 
2 . Though the zipper connection could achieve cross lines , meaning four zippers could be 
used to separate a piece of fabric into four pieces with a cross-connection , they left a 
small gap in the middle of the cross ( Figure 7 . 1 )  . 
3 . Based on the structure of the human body , the separation of garments cannot always be 
designed in straight lines . Zippers , therefore , are a better solution for designing flat 
curves . 
Compared with regular garment design , modular transformable garment design which uses
zippers as connectors can limit structural design possibilities . However , the sample testing shows 
26
the function of fabric separation and reconnection can be achieved by zippers . And the 
limitations and problems can be avoided by garment design . 
Figure 7 . 1 . Sample making for zipper cross-connection technique
4 . 4 . 2 Sketch and design drawing . As Figure 7 . 2 and 7 . 3 illustrate , I created several 
design sketches and 30 design drawings based on my research . All of the designs combined 
articles of daily clothing items ( e . g . vests , dresses , tops and trousers ) to create various styles and 
silhouettes in order to offer choices for a diverse consumer base . 
As Figure 7 . 3 demonstrates ( with the exception of the first two drawings ) 28 designs 
feature a separation line on the upper waist . This line reflects a separation point for multiple , 
interchangeable components . The collection also features designs with other separation points 
( e . g . sleeve hole line , neck line… ) For example , from 3nd to 12th designs are sharing the same 
structure by detaching , resembling and changing certain modular pieces . 
27
Figure 7 . 2 . Sketches for Design 3 
28
Figure 7 . 3 . Drawings for Design 3
29
4 . 5 Stage 2 : Pattern Making of Design 3
My first prototype ( Garment 3 . A ) was a black and white version of the third design in 
Figure 7 . 3 . I chose cotton fabric and metal zippers for this design . From a process of pattern 
making , modular piece creation and prototype construction , I developed my first garment model 
( Figure 7 . 4 )  . 
Figure 7 . 4 . Garment 3 . A for Design 3-transformable garment
Garment 3 . A is comprised of 24 zippers and 12 modular fabric pieces ( Figure 7 . 5 )  . Each modular 
piece has two layers of fabrics : one side is black and the other is white . One side of a zipper is 
sewn onto each edge of each modular piece ( Figure 7 . 6 )  . When I developed the prototype , 
problems arose : First , the cotton fabric was too thin and stiff for the modular pieces with zipper 
connections . Then , I discovered that the fabric around the zipper cross-connection was uneven , 
which is because each corner has fabrics double other seams . The fabrics in the corner rose up . 
30
Figure 7 . 5 . Modular pieces for Garment 3 . A
Figure 7 . 6 . Inside layer of a modular piece for Garment 3 . A
4 . 6 Stage 3 : Design Change
To account for the two problems that developed in stage 2 , I needed to revisit and adjust 
my design drawings . I realized that I had to find a fabric that was thicker and had better elasticity 
than cotton for this collection . In addition to changing the fabric , I decided to avoid the crossconnection of zippers in my next designs . The pattern making stage revealed that it was a better 
strategy to separate pieces of fabric with one zipper instead of using multiple zippers to create a 
cross-connection , to ensure that the fabric surface would remain even . Based on my experiences 
31
with pattern making in stage 2 , I initiated the following design changes . As Figure 7 . 7 
demonstrates , I created design drawings Garment 3 . B and Garment 3 . C to adjust Garment 3 . A . 
Figure 7 . 7 .  ( Design 3—3 . A ; 3 . B ; 3 . C ) 
These reworked designs differ from Design 3 . A in that they avoid the cross-connection of 
zippers as much as possible and the separation lines of each garment run in the same direction . 
For example , most of the zippers of Garment 3 . B ( with the exception of the waist separation line ) 
run vertically . And , in the case of Garment 3 . C , the separation lines are mainly horizontal . The 
three garments maintain the same upper waist separation line , which allows the wearer to 
interchange the tops and bottoms of each outfit . In addition to the upper waist line , designs 3 . A 
and 3 . B have similar armhole lines , meaning sleeves from each separate garment can be 
interchanged as well . Furthermore , the separation lines of each design use zippers to separate and 
reconnect , which means that these three garments can be disassembled into several individual 
fabric pieces . As long as the zippers of each piece have the same length , wearers can change 
32
individual fabric pieces to reflect different fabrics and styles . Figure 7 . 8 illustrates the 
transformative design possibilities of garment 3 . B and garment 3 . C . 
Figure 7 . 8 . Drawings for Garment 3 . B & Garment 3 . C
33
4 . 6 . 1 Fabric Purchasing
I constructed the collection in January , 2014 , when lots of thick fabrics for the winter 
season were available in the textile markets ; these were exactly the kind of fabrics the designs 
called for . The main fabrics that I purchased were made of pleated artificial leather and a striped 
knit ( see Figure . 7 . 9 )  . 
Figure 7 . 9 . Main fabrics for Design 3- transformable garments
I made these fabric purchases for two reasons : the first is that fabrics with elasticity and pleating 
texture are good for eliminating uneven garment surfaces caused by zipper connections , and the 
second reason is because metal zippers and leather make a successful and appealing aesthetic 
combination ( as evidenced by the popularity of the well-known fashion brand Vivian Westwood )  . 
4 . 6 . 2 Draping , Design Alteration , Pattern Making and Modular Piece Making
In Stage 3 , 27 modular fabric pieces were produced . As Figure 7 . 10 demonstrates , these 
11 modular fabric pieces could be used to construct Garment 3 . B . Eleven other modular pieces 
made up the construction of Garment 3 . C ( Figure 7 . 12 )  . 
34
Figure 7 . 10 . Garment modules for Garment 3 . B Figure 7 . 11 . Drawings of Garment 3 . B
Figure 7 . 12 . Garment modules for Garment 3 . C Figure 7 . 13 . Drawings of Garment 3 . C
35
Figure 7 . 14 . Extra pieces for Design 3
Figure 7 . 14 features five extra pieces : two rectangular pieces of a long dress that can be 
exchanged with the trousers of Garment 3 . C ; a pair of knit sleeves which can be exchanged with 
the sleeves of Garment 3 . A and 3 . B ; and a short dress piece that can be exchanged with all of the 
bottoms of garments 3 . A , 3 . B and 3 . C . With the exception of the sleeves and the short dress in 
Figure 7 . 14 , all of the other 24 fabric pieces have two layers : one side is black artificial leather , 
and the other side is the striped knit . 
As previously described , each of the modular fabric pieces has two layers , one which is 
artificial leather and the other a striped knit . Due to the thickness of the fabric and the 
measurement requirements for adding a zipper , each modular piece needed to be wider than ten 
centimeters . To clarify , during the garment production process , pieces with two layers of fabric 
generally need to turn inside out after the seams are sewed . If the width of a single modular piece 
is less than ten centimeters , it is difficult to turn the inside fabric out . This issue means that the 
36
two separation lines on the garment cannot be closer than ten centimeters . This very problem 
occurred in the modular piece-making phase , which forced the production process back and , as a 
result , I had to return to the designing phase to make alterations . 
Design construction . In this collection , I had to go back and forth to alter designs not only 
during the garment design and modular piece making phases , but after the design construction , as
well . For instance , Figure 7 . 16 provides a look at the construction of Garment 3 . C in progress to 
demonstrate how well the zipper connections work here . 
Figure 7 . 15 . Design in progress of Garment 3 . C
However , following the principles of interchangeable garment design , the top of 
Garment 3 . C should be able to connect with the bottom of Garment 3 . A and 3 . B . A problem 
37
occurred when the top of garment 3 . C did not connect with the bottom of Garment 3 . A . As 
Figure 7 . 17 illustrates , one of the zippers on the bottom of Garment 3 . A could not be closed 
while connecting it with the top of Garment 3 . C . 
Figure 7 . 16 . Errors occurred with parts connection of Garment 3 . A and Garment 3 . B
Two sides of the zipper length were different even though the separation line was the same and 
the pattern making was based on the same size . This issue identified a sewing error that occurred 
when pieces with two different fabric thicknesses were assembled . This error also resulted in my 
having to go back to both the pattern making and modular piece making phases in order to 
resolve the problem . 
38
Final Design 3
Figure 7 . 17 . Garment 3 . C-transformable garment
Figure 7 . 17 represents the completed creation , Garment 3 . C . The completed garments 
fully demonstrate how the zipper connection can open up unlimited design possibilities for 
transformable fashion . The constructed modular pieces can be easily disassembled into 
individual pieces that the wearer may separate , reconnect , exchange and use again . As shown in 
figure 7 . 18-7 . 20 , various styles were constructed by exchange certain modular . The intention of 
the Garment 3 design was to provide as many design possibilities for the consumer as possible 
by using limited modular pieces . While the final designs may prove to be too complex for daily 
wearing , I suggest that this project in experimental garment design has the flexible capabilities of 
this design method . The objective in creating Garment 3 was not only to demonstrate the ways 
three basic garments can transform into hundreds of styles , but to explore a new design method 
that can be adapted and utilized in a wide variety of garment designs . 
39
Figure 7 . 18 . Transformable styles of Design 3
40
Figure 7 . 19 . Transformable styles of Design 3
41
Figure 7 . 20 . Transformable styles of Design 3
42
Chapter 5
Research Findings
5 . 1 Interviews
For the interviews , I approached seven fashion industry experts : entrepreneurs E1 and E23
Profile 
, 
the founders of two apparel companies ; entrepreneur E3 , the chairman of a manufacturing 
company ; P1 and P2 , professors of Soochow University ; and D1and D2 , fashion designers . 
Through these interviews , I hoped to uncover the underlying views of fashion insiders and gain 
their insights into sustainable fashion , transformable garments , and my Garment design 3 . 
Experience 
in Fashion 
Industry
Gender City of 
Residence
Occupation Number of 
Employees
Year 
Company 
Established
Products
E1 12 years Male Shenzheng Owner of Wan 
company
around 20 2002 Middle aged 
women ' s wear
E2 13 years Female Shenzheng Owner of Siji 
company
20-30 2000 Middle aged 
women ' s wear
E3 More than 
30 years
Female Nantong Owner of Nantong 
Vanwell Garments 
Co .  , Ltd . 
over 500 2003 Manufacturing , 
cooperate with 
top brands such 
as Burberry , 
CK , Le coq 
sportif
P1 21 years Female Suzhou Professor in 
Soochow Universty
P2 17 years Female Suzhou Professor in 
Soochow 
University
D1 1 year Female Nanjing Designer of 
Jiangsu Ever-glory 
International Group 
Corporation
D2 2 years Female Hongkong Designer of NeoConcept Group 
LTD
Table 1 . Informant Profiles ( E1 , E2 , E3 : Entrepreneurs ; P1 , P2 : Professors ; D1 , D2 : 
Designers )  
3 The alphanumeric identifiers in this chapter stand as pseudonyms for the research participants 
to protect their anonymity
43
5 . 1 . 1 Sustainable fashion . The participants in these interviews were asked to state their 
personal opinion about sustainability in the Chinese fashion industry . Participant P1 proposed 
that consumer acceptance of sustainable fashion depended on their education level , financial 
capabilities and living styles . She suggested that educated consumers were more likely to 
consider the long-term benefits of their purchases and would buy sustainable products , whereas 
consumers with a lower education only considered the short-term benefits without a concern for 
sustainability . Participants P2 , E1 , and D1 reported that environmental issues related to the 
fashion industry in China are regulated by the government , and that fashion and textile 
companies must follow certain rules and policies to avoid environmental pollution in garment 
and textile dyeing processes . They suggested that most companies are unwilling to expend extra 
human resources and materials to achieve sustainability after they have met the basic 
environmental requirements from the government . The priority for most Chinese companies is 
profit maximization , and in the fashion industry , environmental garment production increases 
costs without providing concrete benefits for businesses . 
Participants of entrepreneur and designer also stated that they would choose sustainable 
solutions only if the cost of implementing them remained the same as traditional methods . 
Participant E1 explained that this attitude is common in the current Chinese fashion market 
because everyone focuses on producing new and creative designs without seeing a need for 
sustainability . However , six out of the seven participants believed that this perspective will 
change , and that fashion producers will come to value sustainability in the near future . 
44
5 . 1 . 2 Transformable design . In regards to the participants ’ interest in and engagement 
with transformable fashion design , three participants stated that they had designed or produced 
transformable garments in the past , and their opinions on the subject were quite different . 
Participant E2 thought that transformable design was inconvenient for both consumers and 
producers , from both the wearing and production aspects . She believed that structural integrity is 
important to garment designs , and original designs provided the best looks , stating :  “ A garment 
is designed as a united whole , if you change parts of the design or transform it to another style , it 
will look bad .  ” From this company owner ’ s perspective , there was no need for transformable 
design . 
Participant E1 also claimed that contemporary Chinese consumers prefer to purchase two 
different garments instead of one transformable garment with two styles . He believed “ new ” 
garments ( meaning new designs and products ) were most important in current Chinese fashion . 
E1 also reported that he had experience producing a transformable garment that could be worn 
two ways . He thought that consumers only purchased the garment because they liked one of the 
two styles , and felt that mostly , consumers did not care about the transformable feature . E1 
revealed that the production costs of the transformable garment increased by 15% , meaning that 
he had to increase the sale price , and that there was no obvious change in sale volume . Therefore 
profits of the transformable design remained stable . 
Alternatively , Participant D1 had a positive experience with transformable design 
production , and claimed that it did appeal to her customers . She related that she had produced a 
variety of transformable designs , including winter garments with removable hats and fur 
decorations , garments with transformable sleeves , tops with detachable skirts , and that all of 
them had resulted in strong sales . 
45
5 . 1 . 3 Participant responses to garment Design 3 . In his evaluation of the garment 
Design 3 , Participant E1 suggested that it could be more creative from an aesthetic perspective . 
He believed aesthetics was the most important principle of fashion design , and that designers 
could not sacrifice style to achieve sustainability . Participants P1 and P2 thought that Design 3
was as good design concept , but that it needed to be simplified before it was put on the market , 
as one garment with hundreds of styles provided too many options for the consumer in their daily 
wear choices . They also suggested that using metal zippers as the main connection was not a 
good choice because they could be uncomfortable when it directly contacts with human skin . 
Participant D2 claimed cost performance was an essential element when a consumer 
purchased goods . Transform options and production cost need to be balanced . It would be ideal 
to maximize transform options while minimize production cost . 
5 . 2 Online Survey
In addition to obtaining opinions from fashion insiders , I felt it was important to 
understand both consumers ’ attitudes toward sustainability , customization , and transformable 
garments and their needs and requirements for such products . Therefore , I developed and 
conducted an online questionnaire to gain insight into these issues from fashion consumers . 
5 . 2 . 1 Basic demographics . The survey was open to both women and men ( 76 . 5% 
females and 23 . 5% males )  , and the mean age of the respondents ( N = 115 ) was approximately 20 
years old . The largest participant age group was between 20-30 years old ( 50 . 9% )  , and the 
second largest group was comprised of 10-20 year olds ( 47 . 3% )  . The majority ( 75 . 7% ) had 
received an undergraduate degree , 15 . 9 % had achieved graduate level education , 5 . 6 % had only 
attended high school , and 2 . 8% had college training experience . The survey covered consumers 
from 19 provinces of China , with a majority of 54 . 7% residing in Hubei province . 
46
Response Percentage Response Count
Age
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
0 . 466 54
0 . 517 60
0 . 009 1
0 . 009 1
Gender
Male
Female
0 . 242 29
0 . 758 91
Education Level
High School
College
Undergraduate
Graduate
0 . 062 7
0 . 035 4
0 . 743 84
0 . 159 18
Occupation
Government employee
Human resources
Manufacturer
Business and Financial
Teacher
Student
Artist
0 . 017 2
0 . 068 8
0 . 017 2
0 . 034 4
0 . 009 1
0 . 701 82
0 . 051 6
Monthly Income
1500
1500-3000
3000-5000
5000-10 , 000
10 , 000-50 , 000
0 . 589 66
0 . 188 21
0 . 134 15
0 . 063 7
0 . 027 3
Monthly Average Consumption on 
Clothing
0-100
100-300
300-700
700-1500
1500-3000
3000-5000
5000-10000
0 . 059 7
0 . 314 37
0 . 305 36
0 . 246 29
0 . 042 5
0 . 025 3
0 . 017 2
Table 2 : Online Respondents ’ Demographics
5 . 2 . 2 Experimental design experiences . At the beginning of the survey , I created an
experimental co-design section in which participants could design their own garment in three 
different stages . The experimental design section utilized drawings of Garment 3 and provided 
design choices using the modular fabric pieces that were created for this garment . The options 
47
included two top modular pieces for Stage 1 , twenty-four waist modular pieces for Stage 2 , and 
ten sleeve choices for Stage 3 ( Figure 8 , Figure 9 )  . One hundred and twenty participants engaged 
in this design section , and created 192 design results . Thirty-four participants submitted their 
designs more than twice . As the Figure 10 demonstrates , 54 . 41% of the participants chose knit as 
the major fabric of their design , and 45 . 59% chose leather . Components of 1 , 12 , 22 in step two 
and sleeve styles of 2 , 3 and sleeveless in step 3 are the top selected styles ( see Figure 8 , Figure 9 , 
and Figure 10 )  . 
Figure 8 . Co-design choices , part one
48
Figure 9 . Co-design choices part two
49
Figure 10 . Results of co-design stages
Consumers rated their satisfaction with the online design experience at averages of 3 . 28 , 2 . 81 , 
and 3 . 15 out of five , reflecting their interest in the design method , satisfaction with their design 
choices , and enjoyment of the design process . 
Figure 11 . Satisfaction with Level of Design Experience
54 . 4
1%
45 . 5
9%
Step 1 choices
2 1
22 . 63%
15 . 33%
12 . 41% 12 . 41%
11 . 68%
8 . 76%
5 . 11%
3 . 65%
2 . 92%
2 . 19% 2 . 19%
0 . 73%
Step 2 choices
1 13 22 32 21 3
12 31 11 2 23 0
36 . 50
%
24 . 09
%
24 . 09
%
5 . 84%
5 . 11% 4 . 38%
Step 3 choices
0 2 3 1 21 31
2 . 50 2 . 60 2 . 70 2 . 80 2 . 90 3 . 00 3 . 10 3 . 20 3 . 30 3 . 40
Pleased with the design process
Satisfaction of your work
Interest in the design method
How much do you satisify with the design experience？
50
5 . 2 . 3 Customized garments . As shown in Table 3 , 66 . 7% ( n = 78 ) participants did not 
own personalized garments , 29 . 1% respondents had one to five tailored items , 3 . 4% participants 
had five to ten pieces and 0 . 9% purchased more than 20 articles of customized clothes . Even 
though most of the participants did not have customized garments , their answers to the following 
questions indicated that they do find them appealing . A rate of 54 . 7% ( n = 64 ) of consumers
suggested that they liked the idea of customized garments that had selectable features such as 
color , fabric , pattern and silhouette . Participants identified style , fabric , and color as the top three 
elements that they would like to change , should they purchase customized garments . Moreover , 
42 . 7% respondents enjoyed the customized design process available through the survey . Only 
2 . 6% participants claimed that they did not like customized garments due to the complexity of 
the design process . 
Have you purchased customized garments ? 
Answer Options Response Percent Response Count
No 66 . 7% 78
Yes , I have 1-5 pieces 29 . 1% 34
Yes , I have 5-10 pieces 3 . 4% 4
I used to buy customized garments and have more than 20 
pieces
0 . 9% 1
Answered question 117
Skipped question 3
Table 3 : Purchase frequency according to customized garments
51
Regarding to customized garments , choose the options you think that are apply to you . 
Answer Options Response Percent Response Count
I like customized garments , cause I can choose colors , 
patterns , fabrics and styles that I like 54 . 7% 64
I like customized garments , cause I enjoy the design 
experiences 42 . 7% 50
I do not like customized garments , it ’ s too complicate for 
me to design a garment 2 . 6% 3
I do not purchase customized garments , because too few 
shops could provide customized products . 13 . 7% 16
I do not purchase customized garments , because customized 
garments are too expensive . I would like to buy it only if 
the price is similar to regular garments . 
28 . 2% 33
I do not purchase customized garments , because the process 
of customization cost a long period of time , I prefer to 
purchases garments directly . 
12 . 0% 14
I do not purchase customized garments , because there is a 
risk about the final garments which I do not know whether 
it is the same as I though and designed
17 . 1% 20
Answered question 117
Skipped question 3
Table 4 : personal attitude according to customized garments
Which are the features you want to change when you purchase customized garments ? 
Answer Options Response Percent Response Count
Fabric 78 . 6% 92
Size 55 . 6% 65
Color 70 . 1% 82
Pattern 64 . 1% 75
Style 86 . 3% 101
Collar 47 . 9% 56
Sleeves 42 . 7% 50
Length 38 . 5% 45
Pocket 32 . 5% 38
Accessories ( zipper , button , lining ) 38 . 5% 45
Answered question 117
Skipped question 3
Table 5 : Desirable options of customized features
52
5 . 2 . 4 Transformable garments . Ninety-seven percent of respondents claimed that they 
had purchased transformable garments before , including removable hats ( 99 / 106 )  , detachable 
sleeves or trouser legs 60 / 92 )  , removable collars ( 66 / 95 )  , changeable garment lengths ( 29 / 83 )  , 
reversible apparel ( 91 / 100 )  , and changeable colors ( 29 / 83 )  . In addition , 36 . 5% ( 42 / 115 ) stated 
that they liked the transformable garment features and used them frequently . 54 . 8% participants 
indicated that they had used changeable features once or twice , and 8 . 7% claimed they had not 
used these options . Eighty-one percent of respondents preferred one garment that offered one to 
three changes in style . 
Have you purchased below transformable garments ? 
Answer Options Yes No Response Count
Detachable hats 99 7 106
Removable sleeves and trousers legs 60 32 92
Detachable collars 66 29 95
Length of garments could be changed 29 54 83
Reversible garments 91 9 100
Colors could be changed 29 54 83
Yes , I have transformable garments other than above choice . 10
Answered question 111
Skipped question 9
Table 6 . Purchase experiences of transformable garments
How often did you use the transformable feature ? 
Answer Options Response percent Response Count
Frequently used 36 . 5% 42
Only once or twice 54 . 8% 63
Haven ’ t used 8 . 7% 10
Answered question 115
Skipped question 5
Table 7 . Use frequency according to purchased transformable garments
53
How many change options you prefer when you purchase a transformable garment ? 
Answer Options Response percent Response Count
0 , I do not like transformable garment 8 . 6% 10
1-3 81 . 0% 94
3-10 6 . 0% 7
The more the better 0 . 0% 0
Answered question 116
Skipped question 4
Table 8 . Change options of transformable garments
5 . 2 . 5 Sustainable garments . The lifespan of a consumers ’ vest , t-shirt , top and dress is 
generally three months to one year , and a coat or pair of trousers may last from one to three years 
depending on garment construction and fabrication . The majority of participants stated that they 
owned one to five vests , t-shirts , tops , coats , trousers and dresses during the spring and summer 
seasons . Most of them spent one to ten dollars on a vest , 10 to 20 dollars on a T-shirt , and 20-50 
dollars on a top , coat , pair of trousers , or dress . Sixty percent of participants ( 68 / 113 ) claimed 
that they considered sustainability when they purchased garments , but that they were not very 
knowledgeable about sustainable garments . Only 2 . 7% of respondents claimed to be very 
concerned about sustainability , and suggested that they understood the principles of sustainable 
garments very well . 
Did you pay attention on sustainability when you purchase garments ? 
Answer Options Response percent Response Count
No , and I ’ m not familiar with sustainable fashion 37 . 2% 42
Yes , a little . But I ’ m not very understanding about 
sustainable fashion 56 . 6% 64
Yes , very concern . I know some about sustainable fashion 3 . 5% 4
Yes , very concern . I know a lot about sustainable fashion 2 . 7% 3
Answered question 113
Skipped question 6
Table 9 . Attitude towards sustainability
54
How long is the average lifespan of your garments ? 
Answer 
Options
less than 1 
month
1-3 
months
3 months-1 
year
1-3 years 3-10 
years 10 years Response Count
Vest 3 34 48 30 2 1 118
T-shirt 0 20 57 35 2 1 115
Top 0 3 55 49 6 1 114
Coat 0 1 41 57 13 1 113
Trousers 0 3 42 65 4 1 115
Dress 2 5 41 37 6 1 92
Answered question 118
Skipped question 2
Table 10 . Garment lifespan
What is the average price of your garments ? $CNY
Answer 
Options
10-
50
50-
100
100-
300
300-
500
500-
1000
1000-
3000
3000 and 
above
Response Count
Vest 57 46 8 2 1 0 0 114
T-shirt 15 60 37 1 1 0 0 114
Top 8 25 57 17 7 0 0 114
Coat 2 10 47 32 18 4 1 114
Trousers 2 22 67 20 4 0 0 115
Dress 8 13 48 15 5 2 1 92
Answered question 118
Skipped question 2
Table 11 . Costs of purchased garments
In regards to the three features of customization , sustainability , and transformability , 35 . 9% 
respondents stated that they would spend 10 to 20% more for customized clothing features and 
less than 10% additional price for both sustainable and transformable feature . In reference to 
making future shopping purchases , 40 . 5% of participants stated that if the Chinese apparel 
market developed more sustainable fashions , they would be open to new designs . In addition , 
46 . 6% claimed that even though there were numerous products to choose from in Chinese 
clothing stores , they still felt it difficult to find a fashion design that they were truly happy with . 
55
Choose the answers that you think are applied to current Chinese fashion market
Answer Options Response percent Response Count
Various options , I always can purchase the garments I need 17 . 2% 20
Fashion trends change fast , new styles add on shelves every 
month 36 . 2% 42
Fashion market changes to diversity , consumers feel confident 
to accept new designs 40 . 5% 47
Even though there are various products , it ’ s still hard for me to 
find a design I want 46 . 6% 54
Garments quality is not as good as previous time as fast 
fashion becomes popular 27 . 6% 32
Others 6
Answered question 116
Skipped question 4
Table 12 . Opinions of Chinese fashion market
Compared with regular garments , how much more you would like to spend on below designs ? 
Customized design Sustainable design Transformable 
design
Answer Options Response Percent Response Percent Response Percent
0% 1 . 7% 6 . 9% 11 . 2%
0%-10% 12 . 8% 35 . 3% 30 . 2%
10%-25% 35 . 9% 21 . 6% 27 . 6%
25%-50% 22 . 2% 19 . 8% 12 . 1%
50%-100% 21 . 4% 14 . 7% 17 . 2%
more than 200% 6 . 0% 1 . 7% 1 . 7%
answered question 117 116 116
skipped question 3 4 4
Table 13 . Shopping intention toward customized design , sustainable design and 
transformable design
56
Chapter 6
Conclusions
The qualitative research that I have conducted for this study demonstrates that my 
transformable garment design ( No . 3 ) can be adapted to produce different silhouettes and styles 
for various fashions , and may be successfully used in apparel-manufacturing processes . 
Furthermore , both the interviews and online survey indicate that Chinese consumers do have an 
interest in transformable designs such as Garment No . 3 , and may be willing to spend additional 
costs on three critical features of the design : customization , sustainability and transformability . 
The data additionally reveals that these consumers would like to participate more in the fashion 
design process to help produce customized , transformable and sustainable clothing that better 
reflects their particular needs and desires . 
Both the design research and pattern making aspects of this project revealed that the 
design of Garment No . 3 could reflect greater sustainability in its use of fabric ( e . g . leather ) and 
accessories ( e . g . metal zippers )  . Details such as these helped to identify sustainable fashion as a 
critical objective in contemporary clothing production ; one that requires careful consideration of 
sustainability at each stage of garment design . In this project , garment design No . 3 successfully 
reflected sustainability in its reduction of fabric waste , extension of garment life and reduction in 
overall garment consumption . If , in the future , designs such as Garment No . 3 are utilized in 
combination with sustainable fabric sourcing and ethical labour practices , fashion design can be 
one step closer to achieving the goal of true sustainability . My hope is that transformable design 
methods will be more readily adopted by the industry and that an increasing number of designers 
and consumers participate in the design process , whether they are drawn in by sustainability , 
mass customization , or a general interest in transformable fashion . 
