INTRODUCTION 
The science of clothing so far has never been developed; it is something new, almost pioneer scientific work. The personal science of clothes and of being 
clothed, then, is the topic on which I would suggest a few considerations from a 
somewhat technical point of view. 
It includes, as I shall consider it, two phases, first, a physiological psychology of 
clothing, and then the beginnings of the applied psychology of clothing. These 
complement each other. All this is a new application of psychology (the general 
science of how to live), and one of which the great public is much in real need. 
The public, to be sure, does not realize this need, any more than it knew that it 
was in pressing need of information on diet or on sex or on other things. The public does need basic scientific information on how to clothe themselves properly so 
that they will be both more efficient and more happy, because continually more 
comfortable. 
I. The Satisfaction-Efficiency Ratio. - Underlying this whole matter of the physiology and the psychology of clothing is an ancient idea which is of fundamental 
importance throughout the whole matter. In the lectures to my students I give it 
the technical name of the sthen-euphoric index or ratio,-but we wont worry about 
the name. Sthen and euphor are two Greek terms; sthen stands for strength or energy, and euphor for well-bearing, contentment, well-being, happiness; while ratio, of course, or „index“, is the relationship between the other two. The old and 
simple-enough idea then, is, to put it wholly outside of scientific terms, that one 
expends more energy and is therefore more efficient in many ways when he is 
contented and happy, using the word happy as a symbol for the broad translation 
of the general Greek term euphoria. When a person is satisfied, contented, in good 
humor, when he is „happy“, in short, he expends more energy, has more initiative, 
and is altogether more efficient than when he is unhappy, worrying about something, or when he 
2 
„has a grouch“, or any other of the conditions opposite to happiness. Freedom 
from discomfort underlies it. It importantly underlies the psychology of clothing 
in particular, without any doubt at all, because personal comfort is absolutely essential „in the long run“ to a high-grade of efficiency in the long life-run. This is 
not so much true of an Eastport man for example feeding sheets of tin to a sardine-box stamping machine, but it is true of any kind of work which involves the 
optimum action of the „higher“ and freer phases of the mind and skilled body. 
Comfort in general is indispensable to ideal behaviour that is at all free. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 5 (57) 
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 5 (57) 
Comfort has both a physiological and a psychological aspect; but both aspects 
underlie efficiency in a way which is measurable even in dollars and cents. The 
factory-managers, as you already are aware, not many years ago started out to 
prompt their employees and operatives to maintain better health, to keep them in 
better „condition“; finding that it was a „good policy“, even as income was concerned, to go so far as to hire a „doctor“ at two or three thousand a year to help 
keep the employees well. 
The next inevitable step will be to apply exactly the same principle to keeping 
them personally contented and „happy“. That's the next economic step, and a 
friend of mine at Harvard and myself hope to make some observations after the 
war, on that matter, with the intent to see if a child in school who is „happy“ does 
not do better learning-work than one who is uncomfortable or unhappy; to see, 
too, if a girl working in a paper-box factory does not make more boxes in the 
course of a week when she is „happy“ than she makes when she is wretched, unhappy, discontented. 
There is a scientific basis underlying this notion that happiness is related to a large 
expenditure of energy and to a high mental efficiency; and the higher the grade of 
the activity, the freer the mental work, the truer it certainly is. The fine-artists 
have been showing us that all along. Poets, musicians, painters, sculptors often 
refuse to work when they „don't feel like work“, and they have always found by 
experience that only thus can they make their highest grade of achievement. 
3 
I say comfort then is a matter both of passing life-enjoyment and of dollars and 
cents,-and the latter is perhaps the best, because the ultimate, materialistic index 
and way of suggesting the practical phases of the subject. The two are interdependent very intimately, and related „in the long run“ so that they cannot be separated. 
2. A General Public Need. 
The present discussion concerns first the physiological psychology of clothes. My 
approach in this knowledge is mostly that of pure science from the universities 
and from the psychological and physiological laboratories, although no actual 
researches that I am able to hear of have as yet been done in a scientific laboratory 
on the psychology of clothing. There have been some questionary observations 
made, (at Clark and, I have heard, at Columbia), they have asked young people 
questions, but no psychological laboratory, so far as I am aware, has ever taken up 
the widely interesting matter experimentally. It is a matter of some difficulty, and 
much expense and apparatus. (A university professor wrote me recently that he 
had been intending for some years to attack the problem, but that the difficulty of 
it and his lack of time had so far kept him from it.) 
I offer you the scientific base-facts so far as I can get them, to be used as you 
please, hoping some time to be able to start in one way or another some actual 
relevant psychological experiments. It is a matter that can be experimented on and 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 6 (57) 
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 6 (57) 
reduced t to more or less exact figures, so that the conclusions are certain, rather 
than vaguer corollaries from certain scientific principles. 
If ten per cent be a moderate estimate of the present inefficiency arising from 
maladapted clothing, it is obvious that adequate endowment for the scientific 
study of human raiment is a public need,-a need not as yet widely realized, perhaps because never before scientifically defined. We shall do at least that much! 
4 
II. PHYSIOLOGIC PSYCHOLOGY 
There is much more physiology in the science of adequate clothing as a process 
than most men, even the physiologists, would at first suspect. And yet it is obvious, on thought for a moment, that any covering as heavy, as complete, and as 
relatively rigid as an average suit of clothes or a proper gown could not help having multiform influences within and without over the body which wears it. Because so universal and so continuous, these influences are of noteworthy scientific 
and practical importance. 
The reason in a nutshell for this is that one's clothes are one of the important 
things that intervenes between the individual personality and his environment, and 
you understand that life itself in a sense is a reaction of an individual to his environment. As Webb puts it, „As a matter of fact, our artificial coverings have become so much a part of our life that one may perhaps be allowed to apply the 
methods of the naturalist to their consideration, and deal with them as if they were 
part and parcel of the creature which wears them“-as pragmatically they are. We 
might almost consider clothes as a vicarious or artificial skin, almost an extension 
of the individual's boundary, involving important relationships between the person 
and his environment, spiritual as much as material. And that is the reason, the 
deeply fundamental reason, why there is so much real science in the physiology 
and the psychology of clothing, subjective and objective, personally and socially 
and industrially. 
Let us take up first then the discussion of the physiological psychology of clothes 
in three groups of relations: 1, to the skin; 2, to bodily action or behavior; and 3, 
to body-temperature. 
Since the centuries,-those slow, groping, aspiring centuries!-when manhood and 
womanhood were new and our preprogenitors were covered with a fairly thick 
mantle of hair, the human animal man has been a naturally naked creature. He 
naturally is so, still. For a reason none too easily apprehended, there seems 
5 
to us something ludicrous in this nakedness of the naive savage. Thomas Hood the 
Younger, for example, almost blushes as he tells us
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 7 (57) 
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 7 (57) 
 „And their principle clothes were a ring through the nose 
 And a patch of red paint on the forehead”, 
while other poetasters less known to fame than Thomas Hood, and escaped missionaries and cartoonists innumerable have almost vied with each other in expressing in memorable phrases the insistent natural nakedness, always adorned, of 
natural man. This interesting and important negative phase of our subject we must 
for the present all but ignore. 
The human animal is naturally, if you please, then, and normally a naked animal, 
and up to within about three hundred years ago people were allowed to live in 
corners of Europe, specially in Ireland and in Germany (Rudeck), naked. Up to 
three centuries ago, at least, the nakedness of the primeval man had not become so 
entirely „immodest“ that it was prohibited by enforced law. Man is naturally a 
naked animal, and it takes a very long time indeed to adapt an organism to artificial, „acquired“ new conditions. Furless and with little hair was primeval man; 
and he still likes to be so. 
In clothing him, therefore, one has to respect and not ignore this natural nakedness; and especially the basal fact that man gets his highest comfort when naturally warm environmental air is freely playing over and on his skin. You all know, 
of course, the delight of exposure to the breeze, and to warm showers, and to other 
conditions of the natural environment, when you are naked. 
Now, this basic principle of the physiology of clothes, (that man is constructed for 
efficiency-with-happiness, primally as a naked animal) requires that he be ratherl 
in adapting ideal clothing to his requirements, because man, after all, is a highly 
sensitive being. His efficiency is an intricate and a rather susceptible thing, and 
has to be catered to, if he is to get the most out of his few and flying years. 
6 
1. Relations of Clothing to the Skin. 
I have briefly described in my Text-Book of Human Physiology, (pp. 312-326) 
published ten years ago, nine functions of the skin. I am not going greatly to bore 
you with these nine functions, because they are too physiologically technical, but 
there are some of these nine functions which are important for our particular purpose in studying the science of being clothed. The nine are: protection; the regulation of body temperature; sensation of various kinds; the excretion of sweat; the 
secretion of sebum, (which is the oil of the skin and hair); respiration; the absorption of certain things; coloration of the skin, (which add to the individual's beauty 
and protect him from undue light), and, technically, support of the hairs and nails. 
 A. Protection of the body by the skin is served largely by the outer portion 
termed the epidermis. It is 0.1 millimeter in thickness and consists of many layers 
of stratified epithelium, the outermost of which, called the stratum corneum, consists of horny, non-nucleated squames, the layers nearest the surface being practically dead and dry. As the lower layers of the epidermis develop, the outer layers 
are shed by maceration in bathing and by friction. This highly fabricated structure 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 8 (57) 
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 8 (57) 
of the outer portion of the skin is one eminently adapted to protecion of the highly 
sensitive body, beneath it in at least the following respects: 
(a) It is a bad conductor of heat; (b) It is mobile on the tissues beneath it and so a 
minimizer of friction from a more or less harmful environment, (c) It is free of 
nerves, and so insensitive in itself, (d) It is flexible and yet hard and resistant because made up of scales, (e) It is extensible and so readily adaptable to the temporary variations in the size of parts beneath it. (f) The skin is in many places a soft 
and elastic pad, thus preventing irritating jars (e.g., on the heel), (g) For the same 
reason it often prevents pressure on delicate parts beneath, (h) Because dead, the 
epidermis prevents parts (e.g., the toes) from growing together, (i) The skin by its 
oiliness prevents undue maceration of the body when in water and very moist air. 
(j) The epidermis dry is an excellent non-conductor of electricity, (k) Its keratinous composition makes it resistent to many chemicals. 
 B. Excretion of Sweat is, next to protection, the skin's most important function. Sweat is a clear liquid of a specific gravity
7 
of 1004, either alkaline or acid in reaction. Average daily amount is about fifteen 
hundred cubic centimeters, it being evaporated continually into the atmosphere. 
Sweat when visible is termed „sensible“, when invisible „insensible“ perspiration, 
the latter being by far the more important. 
The composition of sweat has been determined variously, 1.2 per cent is solid, and 
of this, three-quarters are „organic“ including neutral fats, cholesterin, fatty acids, 
proteid, 0.1 per cent of urea, pigment, sodium and potassium chloride, phosphates, 
uric acid, skatol, phenol, creatinin, carbon dioxide, and a little nitrogen. 
The secretion of sweat is determined by: a, Temperature of environment; b, Activity of heart; c, Vascular tone; d, Muscular activity; e, Fluidity of blood; f, Relative 
activity of kidneys and rectum; g, Ingestion of certain drugs; h, Nervous system. 
The sweat-centers seem to be located in the medulla oblongata, with subsidiary 
centers up and down the cord, perhaps. 
The chief function of sweat is to excrete half the ingested water, thus controlling 
body-heat to a large extent, evaporation and radiation being, of course, cooling 
processes. Soluble salts, especially urea, are also excreted by the skin, often in 
visible amounts. 
 C. Secretion of Sebum is the work of a set of glands in the skin, the sebaceous 
glands. Their ducts empty into the hairfollicles. The cerumen or wax of the external ear, and the secretion of the Meibomian glands on the eyelids' edges are both 
modified sebum, whose uses are obvious; and there are others. 
The function of sebum is to soften with its fats the epidermis and hairs and to keep 
the skin impervious to water. 
 D. Regulation of the body-temperature, (to a considerable extent) is brought 
about by the skin through its position at the periphery of the body, where loss of 
heat by radiation conduction, and by evaporation of water, would naturally take 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 9 (57) 
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 9 (57) 
place. Four conditions at least, control the storage and loss of bodyheat so far as 
the skin is concerned: 
(a) The amount of blood passing through the dermal capillaries helps to determine 
the amount of heat-loss because the loss takes place by radiation and conduction 
of the heat brought from within the blood, and by the evaporation of the sweat, 
dependent largely on the dermal blood-flow. Hence. 
(b) The amount of sweat excreted has much to do with heatloss (thermolysis) and 
heat storage, evaporation being greater when sweat is greater in amount. 
(c) The relative oiliness of the skin determines to some ex- 
´ 
8 
tent heat-loss, because an oily skin is very much better conductor of heat than is a 
dry skin. Radiation and conduction of heat would be greater when the skin is secreting much sebum. 
(d) The humidity and temperature of the atmosphere are important factors in 
thermolysis and heat-storage, for radiation and conduction would be greater on a 
cold, damp day, than on a dry, warm day. Evaporation, on the other hand, would 
of course, be less on the damp, cold day, while on the dry, cold days, other combinations would obtain between radiation and evaporation. Thus in the dermal 
capillary circulation and in the sweat-glands there is a possible means of great 
delicacy and adaptability of regulating body heat. How elaborate the actual 
mechanism may be, we do not know. 
 E. Respiration, is conducted by the skin, but on a very small scale, only a few 
grams of oxygen passing into the blood and a few grams of carbonic dioxide passing thence into the air, in twenty-four hours. The dermal respiration is certainly 
not one per cent of that through the lungs, but is more prominent when the lungs 
fail to do their work, a „vicarious function“, 
 F. Sensation is certainly a very important function of the skin, for thereby 
only to a large extent can the animal adapt itself to its complex and everchanging 
environment. 
The skin is the site of neural end-organs of (a) touch, (b) pressure, (c) heat, (b) 
cold, and probably also of (e) pain, and of (f) pleasure, with a possibility rather 
remote that (g) tickle, (h) moisture and (i) electricity are also made known to us 
through dermal sense-organs. Considering the complexity of our minds, the presumption always is in favor of a greater variety of sense-organs than we now can 
positively describe, although a dozen are now known. 
G. Absorption through the skin is slight save of fatty substances when placed upon 
it or rubbed into it, and of such substances as may be actually dissolved in this fat. 
We have seen above that a little oxygen and carbonic dioxide also pass in and out 
through the skin. Water apparently does not to any great extent. 
 H. Coloration in the human animal is useful in giving beauty to the body, 
thus adding a factor to sexual selection. In some of the lower animals, e.g., fishes, 
frogs, and insects, great protection from devouring enemies is afforded by the 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 10 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 10 (57)
adapted deposition of pigment so the better imitating the animal's environment. 
Pigment protects against too much light: tan and freckles. 
 I. Support of the hairs, etc., which grow in nearly all parts of the body, is the 
last of the dermal functions we mention. The 
9 
support is both mechanical and chemical, for the skin furnishes oil and moisture to 
the hairs. Explanation of the presence of the hair in man must be sought in evolution, partly as a survival of the necessary protection from cold in case of the 
brutes, the growth on the head, and on the face in men, serving the same function 
for humanity. Their esthetic value also should not be overlooked. The lanugo hairs 
scattered over most parts of the body are the most sensitive of all organs of touch, 
each having about it within its sheath a ring (Bonnet's) of nerve-fibrils. This may 
be considered as their most important function, but they help to protect the brain. 
The nails also are dermal appendages of quite essential value in human behavior. 
Of these nine dermal functions, protection, the regulation of body-temperature, 
the sensations of various kinds (*), sweat-evaporation, and breathing are five 
which have fundamental relations to the science of clothing. 
A, Let us consider first that the clothes must not irritate the skin,-briefly statable, 
but of quite primary importance. There are sense organs everywhere in the skin in 
multitudes, and obviously clothes which irritate, (a scratchy linen collar, for example, or a coat-collar which comes habitually against the back of the neck, poisonous hosiery-dye, or a projecting heel-nail), is an extreme cause of irritation not 
only to the skin, but through the integrating nervous system to the entire individual. 
B, Breathing must be allowed by the clothes. Only about half of one per cent of 
the respiratory exchange really goes on through the human skin. We are not like 
frogs, which breathe half through their integument and so satisfactorily that they 
can spend a winter buried deep in the mud at the bottom of a pond, of course 
meanwhile living perfectly well because they can breathe adequately through the 
efficient moist skin. It isn't then that the human integument in itself is an important organ of respiration; but it is that it serves importantly as the receptor reflexion-organ, probably, for the control of the respiratory movements in, and possibly 
of, the lungs. The physiologist Bohr (unfortunately he recently died, and before he 
had a chance to 
_______________ 
(*) See Smith Ely Jelliffe: „The Dermal and the General Sensations“ in Moffat, Yard & Co's. Our 
Senses Series, to be continued after the war. 
10 
demonstrate) worked out the very probable concern of the skin in the ventilation 
of the lungs. It is important, then, that the skin by being wrongly clothed should 
not be deprived of part of its natural function of somewhat regulating the respira-
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 11 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 11 (57)
tory process, so that this reflexion is prevented, and the important friction of air, 
and even of the cloth on the skin thwarted by clothes generally too tight or too 
impervious or both. 
The present writer already had made some suggestions in this line in the Psychological Review of May, 1914. We may repeat two paragraphs: 
The second process (the first is sweating) which appears to actuate dermal receptors so as to effect an euphoric tone in the individual's consciousness (not to say in 
his subconsciousness) is oxidation, one of metabolism's foundation-stones. Experiments done long ago seemed to show that so far as the body's respiration is 
concerned only about 0.5 per cent occurs directly through the skin. But this small 
fraction shows that oxidative processes do occur in the skin. When one considers 
the minuteness of the various dermal receptors and their possibilities of actuation 
by the „circumambient air“, together with physiologic data immediately to be 
noted, the reasonableness of supposing dermal oxidation to be a factor of euphoria 
is readily admitted. Bohr showed that ventilation of the blood in the lungs is 
probably a reflex process of active secretion by the alveolar epithelium. Y. Henderson on the other hand, while admitting the oxidative secretion, supposes that 
the depression of „mugginess“ comes from the kolionic inhibition of this secretion 
in the lungs. The receptors of this reflex oxidation, it is possible or rather more, 
are in the skin, and may be found to be one of the varieties of end-organ mentioned considerably above. Graham Lusk showed by experiments in which men 
were emersed in water at 10° C. for from seven or eight to twelve minutes that the 
metabolism increased 181 per cent.-and respiration is always the metabolic index. 
The experimenter ascribed the increase to the men's shivering, but it seems possible at least in the light of Bohr's work that the increased activity of alveolar secretion of oxygen into the blood may have something to do with the heightened oxidation. 
11 
This supposition seems strengthened by late work of Max Verworn which demonstrates, among other important things, the immediate dependence of the action of 
the nervous system on oxygen,-an extension of his much earlier proof that ameba 
stops flowing in about an hour when oxygen is removed from its environment. 
Without ideal speculation as to the affective tones of ameba (!), it is fairly rational 
to presume that some or all of the delicately complex receptors in the human skin, 
close to the air as they are, may have their activity and their consequent streams of 
neurokinesis increased by exposure to moving air as contrasted with air that is 
dead. It is my present hypothesis, then, that moving air in some way has a tonic 
action on the afferent influences from the skin by stimulation of whichever receptors in that very complex receptive field are tuned to this mode of energy. The 
mere presence of oxygen is not enough for a normal euphoria-it actuates, perhaps 
by way of the pulmonary epithelium, only when coming as a moving force (with 
friction perhaps) against or over the skin. If, however, friction be really an element in dermal cenesthesia, it is probably not the gross mechanic friction one is 
apt to think of first, but rather a subtle sort of physiologic friction, so to say, 
adapted to the extreme delicacy of the organic instruments so abundant in the hu-
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 12 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 12 (57)
man skin. On the other hand, the mysterious highly euphoric stimulation of a gale 
of wind when not outside the optimum range of temperature (as in the splendid 
Nova Scotian summerland in September) is known to all, and this implies that 
gross friction, friction in the ordinary physical sense of the term, may be also a 
factor in the experienced product. Massage and the caress seem to possibly imply 
the same thing. 
This is part of the psychophysiology of the future, these complex but all-important 
recondite functions of the skin. At the present time, it is plain that the skin is an 
organ proper, with its own work of great importance to do; but it is equally plain 
that the skin of man is also a highly intricate and all-important receptive field, 
with receptors that serve to relate the individual with his always complex effective 
environment. Respiration seems likely to prove part of this wide integration of 
vital functions. 
12 
The euphoric, or comfort-, factors of the skin, set forth already in the article from 
which we have just repeated, we may not take space further to discuss. But it must 
be noted that they are important both for efficiency and in themselves; and that 
clothing is a closely related theme for applied science to study. 
It is close at hand that one's clothing must be fabricated on the general principles 
which are of importance in all of these recondite dermal and organic affairs. But 
here we may only hint at some of the most obvious conditions. 
Here comes in first, of course, texture, whether open or tight. A free movement of 
the air on the skin is of fundamental importance. Or this may be secured by a general looseness of the clothing. Our wiser English cousins have practiced this for 
long. It appeals to me scientifically as well as personally very strongly that clothing both hygenically and for comfort should be loose, and thus allow of a slight 
circulation of air, so to say, off and on, underneath it over the body clad beneath 
in our intricate and sensitive skin. 
C, Various kinds of protection are served by our clothing; clothes protect us from 
many different kinds of things. I am going to spend some time later on going into 
some of the details of the psychological protection; but there are sundry physiological protections offered by raiment that we may mention now. From cold, for 
example; on the other hand, the day-laborer digging trenches in the street in overhot weather knows by hearsay and by experience that two or three thick woolen 
undershirts then will keep him cool as well as they will keep him warm in winter, 
in July keeping the heat out as in January this clothing will keep it in. 
Proper clothes protect the person from sunburn too; from some insects; from various mechanical impacts. And, more important by far than these mechanical influences, clothes afford protection from various mental things, which I will make a 
business of suggesting and briefly discussing in the third section of the monograph. 
On a very rough estimate, every adult evaporates probably at least five liters of 
sweat during each sultry summer day. I have 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 13 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 13 (57)
13 
in my notes a scientific report of hand blowers in a glass-factory ho averaged a 
daily excretion of twenty-three pints of sweat, and work would have been impossible quite without the cooling produced by this ample vicarious evaporation. One 
can see that the sweating-process is a very important one, and hence one not to be 
impeded by inadequate clothes, day or night. 
2. Relations to Bodily Action. 
The second general habilatory notion that I would suggest, is the need of freedom 
for bodily action. As we shall see, this is not only related to the actual material 
movements of the body itself, but underlies also the higher efficiency of the mind 
as well as of the body,-the two indeed being aspects of one thing, the actual living 
personality; of us, in short, who wear the clothes.
One of the things that has been quite ignored in thinking of clothes-comfort and 
hygiene is the set of sensations of the interior of the body („coenesthesia“) and of 
the muscles, tendons, and the joints, technically called kinesthesia, („the feeling of 
movement“), but, more commonly, still termed the muscle-joint sense. The viscera, the muscles, the tendons, the joints, the skin, and the bones are continually 
giving to the brain and into the mind a multitude of sensations that represent the 
various strains and the various movements and restraints of each of the parts of 
the body(*). 
In the science of clothing these coenesthetic and kinesthetic data are of preeminent 
importance. Unless these movements are unrestrained and free, unless these conscious and subconscious sensations are kept from being restricted and therefore 
made unpleasant, the individual is not comfortable and cannot be fully efficient or 
consciously „happy“, but there is a more or less conscious lack of freedom and of 
satisfaction. The naturally naked man feels none of this unpleasant restraint. 
If clothing fits, it interferes little with our life-activities, and „fit“ means fit the 
one particular body that it is made or intended for. Everybody and also the actions 
of everybody are characteristically different from those of every other body. Each 
individual is unique, has a personality of his own. Please ob- 
_______________ 
(*) See the volume on these sensations, on the sense of „feeling“, in the „Our Senses Series“, already cited. 
14 
serve that he has not only a body of his own, not only a material body to be fitted 
with clothing, but a group of actions to be fitted. It is my small experience that the 
average tailor pays far too little attention to the fittable body in its action-aspect. 
A really well-fitting suit of clothes or a gown fits the body as that particular body 
actually works in the course of a day and night. It doesn't fit it as it is quietly 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 14 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 14 (57)
standing up on a stool, but fits it as the habitual continual movements of that particular individual require it to be fitted. 
Fit involves at least five kinds of freedom, freedom of the body primarily, but in 
both its reflex and voluntary aspects. 
A, Digestive actions. The relations of clothes to the digestive organs is obvious to 
many people about or after middle life, (thirty-five) but seldom are noticed by 
those who are younger. The stomach and the transverse colon, it must be remembered, are conspicuous in front just above the top of a man's trousers and about the 
middle part of his waistcoat, vest. When the stomach is tender from neuritis, ulcer, 
mild inflamation or worse, or when the transverse colon, as it often is, grossly 
overloaded, it is obvious that clothing too tight around this region would have a 
very disturbing, although at first often subconscious, influence on the person's 
general comfort. Often too, as we know now better and better, very frequently the 
stomach is dilated from habitual distension from too fast and over-eating, and this 
adds a similar, but more acute element, to this disturbing influence at the waist. It 
is very likely that man's curious but confirmed habit of standing on his hind legs 
has much to do with the etiology of ptosis of the stomach,-as surely it has to do 
with his clothing. 
B, Breathing movements. It need not be pointed out in this place that practically 
the entire body is disturbed or very actively concerned in even the ordinary 
movements of respiration. The abdominal influences affect the entire abdomen, 
the abdominal walls being pushed forward and sidewise, and all the viscera more 
or less displaced. Many of the muscles of the abdominal wall and of the thorax are 
actively concerned in the process of expiration, especially. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 15 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 15 (57)
15 
Fig. 1. Hemobarogram B2 14. (Each square on the horizontal (abscissa) line represents five minutes of time; and each square on the vertical (ordinate) line means ten millimeters-of-mercury of 
pressure in the brachial artery as it is commonly measured at present with the cuffsphygmomanometer,-in reality „too high“, The upper graph is the systolic series of pressures, the 
lower the diastolic; the space between them represents the pulse-pressure at any moment. This 
blood-pressure record then is 38.5 mins. long, with 33 systolic measurements and 26 diastolic, the 
extremes being 140 mm. Hg and 68 mm. The diastolic was measured in this case by the oldfashioned „third-phase“ criterion, now abandoned for the more certain criterion of „sounds gone“, 
These graphs of course are to be read from left to right.) 
Three rapid rises of arterial tension are shown in this hemobarogram, each involving (as sometimes does not happen) both the systolic and the diastolic phases. The first begins in the fourth 
minute from recalling a bad fire-scare years before; the second begins in the nineteenth minute 
from a slight feeling of recalled embarrassment; and the third in minute twenty-five from „heat and 
anger“ recalled. (In the thirty-first minute is shown the brachial rise incident to multiplying 98 by 
76 „mentally“.) 
The subject was a young-woman teacher (26.5 yrs.) in the Harvard Summer School, 1916. 11 a.m. 
Heartrate at the beginning 74, twelve minutes later 76, nineteen minutes later 78, and at the close 
85. 
Here, then, is the rise of blood-pressure developed as the result of disagreeable stimuli, a feeling of 
unpleasantness. Note the marked rise-a maximum of about twenty-three millimeters of mercury, 
twenty-three points - in the course of two minutes from the „mere“ recall of some unpleasantness. 
It doubtless happens exactly like this and more lastingly from the mental or bodily irritation of a 
badly fitting gown or suit of clothes. Data are not yet at hand which would show the nature and 
degree of the chronic influence of persisting unpleasant conditions, save when they are on the 
verge of being pathological, when the rise-results are conspicuous enough. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 16 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 16 (57)
16 
The thoracic relations of breathing to clothes are still more conspicuous, and conspicuous in proportion to the normal, „athletic“, development of the individual. 
But really it does not need elaboration that respiration is to a considerable extent 
under the influence of over-tight or locally constricting clothing. This matter became common knowledge centuries ago, and was thoroughly threshed out, medically as well as socially, by society women, novelists, and physicians. 
C, Heart- and arterial action. These influences have never been adequately considered in discussing bodily movements and bodily comforts. It is not at all obvious but what the heart has (vagal) comforts and discomforts all its own, relating to 
direct compression of the thorax, and pressure indirectly upward from the epigastrium. 
Young women used to „faint“ and still do now and then, and the mechanical cardiac elements of the complex are not known; they may be of consequence. Their 
abdomens, at least, often were so tightly compressed that their viscera were 
pressed upward and there interfered with the free action of the heart. The first 
thing one does ordinarily when a woman „faints away“ is to loosen her clothing 
around the abdomen and chest, and so give her heart a chance to beat normally 
again. 
What we are especially concerned with at the present time, however, wholly new 
so far as I know, is the arterial tension, the blood-pressure, not only of the skin
immediately compressed by clothes, but on the two principles of „liquid“ transmission and of reciprocity, the arterial tension of the entire body, muscular, cerebral, and visceral. 
My research-interests for some two or three years, have been quite a bit on bloodpressure, and I present some blood-pressure records (hemobarograms), made by 
my new quasi-“continuous“ method, which illustrate very interestingly some of 
the conditions connected with clothes in regard to arterial tension. These graphs 
have not been prepared for this present purpose at all, but I think you will find 
them apropos of our present work and very suggestive as well as interesting. 
The capillary and venous relations between clothes and over- 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 17 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 17 (57)
17 
Fig. 2.- Hemobarogram (part) A 19. This graph represents twenty-five minutes out of a hemobarogram just two hours long made from a medical man who is an athlete and self-trained in various 
kinds of physiologic “stunts“. The extreme arterio-tensional ranges measured during the two hours 
of that September, 1916, afternoon were: systolic, 74 mm. Hg, maximum, 196; diastolic, 35 mm., 
minimum 61 mm., sounds-gone method. (The plotted hemobarogram entire is 620 by 365 mm. in 
size.) The subject all the while sat quietly in his chair, be it remembered. 
The systolic fall beginning in the eighth minute was occasioned by several full breaths plus relaxation; the subject's own words were, „I let go and was almost numb“, The tension promptly sprung 
back. The rise beginning in the tenth minute was occasioned by excited talk about an expiratory 
method. The rise beginning in the seventeenth minute, in both diastolic and systolic observe, was 
occasioned by expiratory apnea-holding the breath with diaphragm relaxed. The tension snapped 
back to the average and the diastolic, as usual, below it. Number of measurements, 29. This man 
was a Yankee nearly 50 years old; he had had, it chanced, nothing whatever to eat since 24 hrs. 
before. His heart-rate before the measure- 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 18 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 18 (57)
18 
ments was 42, the same 75 mins. later, 21 mins. later 40, and at the experiment's close. 45; his 
„Sweedish-system“ training is here illustrated. 
This fall is clue solely to relaxation and to deep breathing, two of the physiological processes 
which cannot occur in an over-tight and ill-fitting suit of clothes! Incidentally, these suggest the 
importance of systematic exercise, including the old-fashioned, „Swedish“ habit of deep breathing. 
The marked rise beginning in the seventeenth minute (expiratory apnea) has little obvious relationship to the clothing or to its wearing, save that tight clothes would make such a rise easier. 
tightness are already familiar to most of you, being more obvious than the arterial 
tensional variations. Venous stasis and congestions from compression by clothing 
are not infrequent where the sartorial conditions are bad enough whether from 
design or necessity. An obliging society-woman of „the old days“, whose memory 
had remained undimmed, could relate more examples of these particular relations 
of clothes to the circulation than anyone would care to print. The intelligent gynecologist could relate more which would be still further impressive. 
Besides the five hemobarograms reproduced herewith, there are many among the 
hundred and more in my present portfolio that are almost equally a propos to our 
immediate purpose of discussing clothing-fit. One systolic rise represents a state 
of unpleasantness; there is nothing particularly striking about it, but extreme unpleasantness often is due to improper clothes. Another is marked „worried“, the 
individual meanwhile recalled a subject of worry. (I never inquire what stimuli 
exactly are, for I am satisfied to know that it is either pleasant or unpleasant.) Another shows a marked reaction at the recall into the mind of some old worry in a 
young woman. Here is a very marked reaction of pleasantness, some mode of 
pleasure that is imagined; there is a marked fall which is always the case provided 
the pleasantness does not excite, does not come as a shock. General pleasantness 
proper will lower the blood-pressure,- compare clothes satisfaction! 
I am surprised to see that I can get as strong a reaction by asking a subject to think 
of an unpleasant thing or of pleasant action as from the actual thing. It is very 
striking indeed how somatically strong the imagination is; and this is a point that 
is worth while for our immediate purpose: Whether a person 
19 
does „look like a guy“ or not, if he thinks he does it amounts to the same thing, so 
far as the bodily reaction is concerned. 
There is an extraordinary curve of the rise of blood pressure from holding the 
breath, a rise up to two hundred and thirty millimeters in a man who had been 
trained in breath-holding. This gentleman, Dr. J. G. Smith, held his breath two 
minutes and the thoracic venous congestion put his pressure up from his average 
one hundred and thirty-five to two hundred and thirty,- 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 19 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 19 (57)
Fig. 3.- Hemobarogram B1 4 shows, among other reactions the vasomotion of relaxation of mind 
and body while sitting. In the systolic range the lowering began in the eighth minute, but the diastolic rose for a minute and a half. The rise in the fourth minute came from an exciting pleasureable memory; that ten minutes later from anxiety; while that in the seventh minute represents the 
powerfully dynamic concomitance, if not effect of imaginary physical exertion: „chinning“, pullups, in this case. 
The subject was a most energetic fine tall woman of nearly 22; suspected to be “in love“. Her 
initial heart-rate was 96; nineteen minutes later 76; at the end 84. The high rate at first may have 
been due partlv to much physical exertion preceding the making of this set of 36 measurements. 
The habilatory psychology of this hemobarogram is chiefly relaxation reaction inexpedient in 
clothing either tight, or irritating from malfitness. 
in two minutes. That too has a slight application for our work, that the respiration 
should be free and that you should be freely able to take deep breaths, often. 
20 
There is a record showing the vasomotion of anger, a marked rise, though purely 
imaginary anger. I do not have to get my subjects really angry; merely to have 
them imagine that they are angry, or recall certain company, etc., is enough to 
have a great rise in the systolic and the diastolic pressures. That is the condition in 
which a tailor's patron is when he allows him to be angry when buying a suit of 
clothing. Plainly clothes have much to do with the emotions. Here is one which 
the subject reported his condition as „heat in anger“; he „got a little hot (vasomotion) about the collar“, he said! But enough for now of the blood-pressure records. 
I have a hundred or so of these, and each one represents two, three, or four hours' 
work; but most of them are worth the while as human documents. 
These conditions then, (to summarize the blood-pressure matter) : Anxiety, worry, 
unpleasantness of various kinds, chagrin, grief, anger, terror, holding the breath, 
all tend to raise unduly the blood-pressure. And, on the other hand, pleasantness 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 20 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 20 (57)
and calm pleasure, satisfaction, relaxation, and deep breathing tend to lower it. In 
general, local and general compression would tend to stand for the first group; and 
lose and perfect „fit“ ness would tend to make, of course, for pleasantness and 
satisfaction. (See below.) It may be always kept in mind, as of basal practical and 
psychologic importance, that it is the emotional tones, the pleasantness and the 
unpleasantness, and the excitement, of emotions which provide the motives of 
behaviour, both vegetative and deliberate. Clothes have very strong emotional 
interests for most women and children and men, and their influence would be undeflected by ideas. 
The accompanying hemobarograms, then, show on one hand the effects of „inside“ influences: chagrin, anger, terror, and holding the breath, toward raising the 
peripheral arterial tension. Others of them show the effects of mediate pleasure, of 
pleasantness, motor and mental relaxation, and of deep breathing, in lowering the 
arterial tension. The first group, tending to raise the blood pressure, is brought 
about in general by constriction such as would be caused by generally too-tight 
clothing. On the other hand, clothes-fitness such as we have already considered, 
21 
And general Ioose accommodation to the body, equal in all places, would make 
for low pressure, in the way of greater comfort and life-satisfaction. These sample 
graphs and the legends which accompany them make apparent this rather important relationship of clothes to the essential blood-supply. 
In the earlier experiments on surgical shock, Professor George W. Crile of Cleveland had made for him a complete suit of hollow clothes inflatable with air from a 
pump, the intent to compress the body of the shock-victim and to exert a uniform 
and considerable pressure on nearly all parts of the skin. The object of this elaborate and bothersome experiment was in brief to raise the peripheral blood-pressure 
of persons who were dying because their arterial tension was far too low in the 
central 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 21 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 21 (57)
Fig. 4. - Hemobarogram B2 22. This is the thirty-minute record of a woman of 42 years who tests 
only 1.6 years on the Yerkes point-scale system of tests. When the cuff was first distended (170 
mm. Hg.) she burst quietly into tears, emotionally shocked at the novelty of the painless sensation. 
Within the next 13 minutes her systolic brachial-artery tension had fallen 46 mm Hg., her diastolic 
11 mm., her heartrate falling meanwhile from112 to 88, where it remained. Within seven minutes 
from the beginning she was in her usual good humor. This record, atypical of the hemobarograms 
of mental defectives, is presented solely to illustrate the physiological „limit“ of blood-pressure 
rise (due purely to office-apprehension) and its spontan22 
eous fall under the more usual office conditions. Very many persons, both adults and youths, some 
of whom would „test up“ rather better than 1.6 years Yerkes, show just this kind of blood-pressure 
phenomenon-however little the „rank and file“ of physicians as yet realize it 
Heart-rate before the measurements, 112, fourteen and twenty minutes later and at the end each 88. 
Measurements, 51. 
Here is a record that importantly shows the fall of blood pressure from becoming calmed down 
with the loss of anxiety. I have a scientific grievance against the medical profession, in general, 
although I am a member of it, that they have been „taking“ blood-pressures once or twice when up 
and only then, wholly regardless of the fact that perhaps ten minutes later it has fallen thirty or 
forty millimeters. 
For our present purpose, this clearly represents the marked fall of arterial tension when one ceases 
to be worried about anything. This, I take it, will appeal to a young woman perhaps more than to a 
young man:-if she have a suit of clothes on that has in it or on it absolutely nothing about which 
she can worry, you might expect to lower blood pressure in that manner; and to keep it low! „The 
peace which religion cannot give“, as the lady explained to Herbert Spencer. Habilatory science 
must apply itself- in part along this direction, thus lowering the prevalence of Americanitis. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 22 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 22 (57)
Fig. 5.-Hemobarogram A17. This patient was a woman nearly sixty years old, normal, but typical 
of the Yankee women who are always busy and usually worrying about something, imaginary or 
real, be it only their clothes, at rare intervals. The variations here are spontaneous nearly, and with 
a systolic maximum of 42 mm. Hg in 5 minutes and a diastolic maximum of 15 mm. Hg in 7 minutes. The diastolic curve shows the relatively small variation characteristic of the arteries after fifty 
years. The heart-rate remained about 60. 
The systolic rise from 128 mm. to 144 beginning in the tenth minute was „from“ a momentary 
anxiety; the relief-reaction (to 115) is rather striking. In the twenty-second minute there began a 
very marked systolic rise (from 
23 
120 to 157 mm.) due to the sudden onset of „worry“ (as the protocol reports it), and generally 
sustained for nearly three minutes. This vasomotor constrictor spasm is weakly reflected in the 
diastolic series of measurements. 
When rises such as these occur from slight anxiety in a woman of sixty or so with normally sclerosed arteries, it is easy to believe that in many younger women clothes-worries and chagrins considerably upset the equilibrium of the vasomotor system. 
nervous system, the vegetative vital processes, therefore, being in a state of rapidly mortal decline. 
Over-tight, universally over-tight, clothing must act in the same way as Crile's 
shock-suit, namely to raise the blood-pressure, but now when it is already high 
enough, and so to help continue and make worse the rather notorious „Americanitis“, (inflammation of the American) the pace of mental tension and general 
strenuosity that kills. General irritation or compression of the surface would at any 
rate materially tend to congest the viscera and the brain, irrespective of the actual 
arterial tension in any part of the body. The skin, as is well known, is one of the 
five great vasomotor reservoirs for the blood; and if by compression its arteries 
and arterioles are flattened, a large amount of the blood must be forced into the 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 23 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 23 (57)
viscera and the brain. Until we are certain of the truth of the finding of Professor 
Jno. F. Shepard that sleep involves cerebral congestion, the precise significance of 
this reciprocity must be still more in doubt even than heretofore. My own vasomotor observations tend to corroborate Shepard's results, and from an entirely different source. This whole matter is well worth emphasis in the psycho-physiology of 
clothing, for what it may later (when we know more about vasomotion) prove to 
be worth, which probably is much. 
Clothes to a degree fit themselves. This auto-fitting of clothing to the action of the 
body which it covers is more or less proportional, and in various ways, to three 
characteristics: 1st, to their material; 2nd, to the amount of use which the clothes 
have; 3rd, to their tightness. This automatic fitting tends to come about, it is plain, 
by the process of stretching where the garments are relatively tight, and of wrinkling (often fairly tightly) where the costume is looser. A week's wear is necessary 
to make a suit really fit the man's body in its quiescent shape and 
24 
also in its action. This is a practical point which tailors seemingly should take into 
consideration if they wish to do ideal work in every way for their patrons, and to 
leave them wholly content in and therefore with their clothes. 
D, Voluntary movements and posture. Skills. We come here to the consideration 
of voluntary movements, not more important for life, perhaps, but far more interesting and more psychological than the three groups of influences and relations 
we have just considered. Skill of a thousand kinds and grace of many varieties, the 
two combining into various kinds of efficiency, are concerned with clothing in 
this particular respect. It is the movements, the behaviour, of the man which is the 
important thing, and not, so to say, his chance shape when he is standing on the 
tailor's stool to be measured. Old clothes fit, and therein mostly arises the common satisfaction of wearing them, especially when one is at work. The psychology of this runs perhaps somewhat thus: The control of voluntary movements, of 
all movements in fact, is largely by the inherent sensations of the action-system, 
formerly and technically called the muscle-joint sense, but now increasingly often 
and more properly kinesthesia. These guiding inherent sensations are normally 
(save in new and truly voluntary movements, which are rare) more or less subconscious or even wholly unconscious. It need not, however, be suggested at even 
this early stage of physio-psychology, that such sensations are none the less effective because they are subconscious. 
These sensations and subsensations constitute, it is plain, the chief of the sensory 
influences, in fact of all the afferent nerveimpulses, that are of practical, work-aday value in a world still and for many centuries to come primarily a work-a-day 
world. Their nature in somewhat greater detail, based on research, the present 
writes already has stt out.(*) Perhaps one may repeat two or three paragraphs relating to the neurologic conditions of skill, from that article: 
Between these partially opposed types of motor consciousness 
____________________ 
(*) G. V. N. Dearborn: „Kinesthesia and the Intelligent Will“, Am. Jour. Psychol, XXIV, 2, April, 1913, 204-
255, illstd. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 24 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 24 (57)
25 
are many indefinite degrees, apparently, according as a given limb is more or less 
skilful in a given group of movements, in number of course uncountable. It is, 
then, one of the inductions of this experimental work that the motor skill of a person in general, and also in particular actions, is more or less proportional to his 
habit and capability of using the conscious kinesthesia for the current inhibition of 
actions elsewhere coordinated and actuated. As has been shown already this actuation comes from (spinal?) kinesthesia in combination with external control, 
usually either visual or auditory. We are rapidly learning that all bodily processes 
and conditions are the algebraic resultants of balanced tendencies, whether nervous, chemical, or mechanical. The neuro-physiology of skill as in part determined 
by the afferent neurograms of movement, certainly is no exception to this rule. 
The unconscious and the conscious, the actuating and the inhibitory kinesthesia, 
surely share and complement each other in motor control. A person's skill, therefore, appears to be a 'function' of his habit of usefully fusing together his motor 
ideas proper and the resident movement-sensations which in him are adequately 
conscious. Compare Slinger and Horsley's conclusion that „the muscular sense 
under necessity can, by education, be brought to a point at least one-fourth better 
than that learnt by a normal seeing individual“. 
But, again, compare the practically unanimous opinion and practice of instructors 
in all kinds of motor efficiency (music, instrumental and vocal, manual training, 
physical education, legerdemain, etc.) that attention to the sensations of movement disturbs the performance and is therefore to be avoided. At least one successful instructor in voice, of my acquaintance (Mr. B. G. Willard, late of Harvard 
University and now of the Sargent Normal School), makes this avoidance of local 
consciousness the very key-note of his method, substituting therefor an intensified 
general consciousness of effort. 
Reconciliation of these two attitudes, one academically scientific and the other 
purely empirical, but both obviously true, would seem to lie in what has been 
learned in these experiments, if indeed skill does consist in a trained fusion of the 
extrinsic motor ideas and the intrinsic inhibitory conscious control. 
26 
As the original research-report in the Journal für Psychologie und Neurologie 
(January, 1913) showed, these conscious motor skill-sensations probably are inherently inhibitory, as is the neopallium of the cortex cerebri, their „center“. If 
therefore they are shut out of the conscious mind or disturbed to a practical extent, 
impulsive action is in no wise prevented from its function to „carry on”, but the 
fine coordination of forms of motor skill, including grace, is destroyed and the 
productive practical efficiency coming from skillful ability, for the moment or for 
good, is lost. As already has been suggested, the vexations and discomposing sensations of the skin, of the kinesthetic regions, and of the viscera produced by constricting and otherwise ill-fitting clothes, are just those sensations and irritations, 
fully felt or not, which would be most apt to disturb the skillful flow of the skillneurility. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 25 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 25 (57)
These same considerations apply to grace, which concept relates always properly 
to movement actual or implied, kinetic or potential. Veriy recently (1917), G. H. 
Browne (of the Browne and Nichols School, Cambridge), himself a skilled fancy 
skater, has published at my suggestion, in „Mind and Body“, an interesting discussion of the psychology of grace, and also, a few months later, a translation of 
the first chapter of the third part of Souriau's neglected „L'esthetique du mouvement“ (1889), found in Harvard's Philosophic Library, and referred to and quoted 
from by Vernon Lee in her refreshing books. Both of Browne's articles provide 
timely examples of graceful movement, to which the clothing concerned, both 
subjectively and objectively (see below), has direct and important relation. Inasmuch, however, as grace is only a glorified aspect of skill (with beauty added to 
utility as its goals), we need make no special study of it here. The same principles 
that apply to skill apply also to grace, a form of skill. 
Avoidance of this clothes-cause of awkwardness and of motor inefficiency, thus 
due to an unnecessary (and still unnatural!) source of distraction („man by nature 
is a naked animal“), may be reduced to a requirement that local clothesconsciousness, indeed general clothes-consciousness, should be avoided. The 
27 
whole world in its bodily work demands this relief, whether it be an endowed philosopher elaborating a fine metaphysical knot or snarl for some endowed „Kantian 
Journal“, or the equally useful body-“laborer“ helping to dig out a new citysubway; or milady murdering sleep and Stravinsky (who „jolly well” deserves his 
fate) on her rosewood concert-grand. The whole world gets something of this relief too, because every bodyworker wears some adapted form or aspect of 
Work-Clothes. This phase of our clothing is the best available sign that the rational human worker in the long run everywhere tends to adapt his raiment so that 
it will not limit in any degree his bodily action, thus lessening his basal vocational 
skill, earner of his daily bread. It is doubtless true that the worker realizes this not 
at all or at any rate less fully than he realizes the other reason for work-clothes, 
namely clothing- and money-economy. But try to imagine Kreisler playing his 
violin at a concert when he was wearing a coat with arm-holes too tight! He 
would from preference, I doubt not, startle his conventional but easily appeased 
audience by playing to them in his bath-robe. 
Consider the increasing hundreds of trades and occupations over the world and 
see that each, in forest, work-shop, or in atelier, has its own work-clothes more or 
less characteristic, from the loose coarse breeches of the sweating puddler to the 
elaborate mask or armor of the dangerous trades. Most of these sets of clothes are 
directed toward the securing of the greatest expedient freedom of bodily and of 
mental movement. Otherwise they would not be workmen equipped for their 
work, but dilettanti in the popular sense of the word. 
Each movement, more or less, is a unit of behaviour represented by a definite 
brain center, as is shown indeed by their specific derangement, technically called 
apraxia. These centers seem to be situated especially in the frontal (and parietal) 
lobes. Smooth action, then, of every sort, skill, grace, and efficiency in any motor 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 26 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 26 (57)
ability, are more or less dependent on good bodily attention and neuromuscular 
tension (corpus striatum?), on the undisturbed process of control from the forebrain. These impulses coming from the central nervous system, especially the 
28 
brain, are what are called, of course, motor ideas. If they be interrupted and disturbed in their flow, especially by a purely artificial stimulus, vision is brought in 
to control the motions, displacing and deranging the normal governing kinesthetic 
impressions and giving them extrinsic control of the actions, but making the latter 
jerky, angular, and unskillful. 
Now the restraints, discomforts, irregular pressures, irritations, constrictions, lack 
of support, and other bothers of ill-fitting clothes (in man, perhaps, more than in 
woman?) are precisely the kind of interrupting sensations most certain to disturb 
ideal bodily action, so intimately are they related to the disturbed flow of kinesthetic sensations. Such intrinsic sensations of the skin and of the action-system 
within it disturb personal psychomotor action far more than would more conspicuous extrinsic sensations such as sounds, voices, odors, and the seeing of 
moving objects, coming from without the organism. Work-clothes, then, as old 
clothes, mean to efficiency far more than economy of clothing-cost,-they mean an 
excellent fit by bodily adaptation, stretching here and wrinkling up there, so that 
comfort remains at its maximum and undisturbed. This happy and yet familiar 
condition of clothing-affairs prevents those distractions of the inherent movements and sensations which actually control the organism. To be perfectly at ease 
when clothed, this kind of ideal fit, acquired only by actually wearing the clothes, 
is indispensable. Otherwise there is either the discomfort leading to the combined 
inefficiency, or one form or another of a bad form of clothes-consciousness 
which, as we shall see below, is a mild emotional state which in itself and for the 
moment of course is distracting. This matter would bear qualitative and quantitative elaboration in a laboratory. 
E, Considerations of general behaviour. In this discussion of behaviour, we refer 
now to one's social movements among his fellows and to one's habits in life so far 
as social communications are concerned. This phase of human behaviour is more 
determined by clothing than many have ever stopped to think or to realize. Without much thought, the following at least may be suggested as social movements 
greatly or slightly, as the case 
29 
may be, determined by one's raiment, and others there are a plenty. 
 1, How much one „goes out” both into the street, and 
 2, Into society in general, how many „calls“ one makes; 
 3, The time of day or night at which one goes out when living in town, for 
several reasons. 
 4, Where one goes, that is, the sort of place to which one goes, both in town 
and in the country. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 27 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 27 (57)
 5, How much company one invites to his home, and, 
 6, To some extent, the nature of that company. 
 7, How much one attends church, disgusting Easter parades, etc. 
 8, How much one attends the theater, and the nature of the entertainment so 
designated, whether it be a dark movie among often unfashionably or ill-dressed 
people, or the grand opera with its brilliant promenade and conspicuous visiting. 
 9, Clothes frequently help people to get „jobs“, and to hold them, but (see 
below), 
 10, Clothes help others to miss positions and to lose them. 
 11, The amount of exercise one takes and its variety are determined to a considerable extent by one's habits of dress, and especially perhaps by one's laziness 
in regard to the frequent changing of one's clothes. 
 12, How much one sits and where and how one sits. (One thinks here of the 
attention which the „dude“ pays to the creases in his trousers, and even dignified 
madam to her dress-skirts.) (When I was a young lad it was inevitable that a boy 
having a pair of „hand-me-down“ trousers thrust upon him should take them first 
to a tailor that the creases in them might be wholly removed!) And sitting has 
much to do with the adolescent maldevelopment of the pelvis, concerned in the 
birth-rate. 
 13, How much one eats and drinks (the very basis of much bodily comfort) is 
determined to some extent by the clothing. 
 14, How much checking-balance one may keep at the bank, determinant of 
behavior to a noteworthy degree. 
 15, One's personal beauty (in the case of the beautiful sex.) It is obvious that 
even in a list thus laconically set down there 
30 
are topics enough for several essays in the socio-psychology of dress. Some of 
these essays if they reached as far down in the fundamentals of human biological 
nature as it is meet they should, would prove of importance in the unravelling of 
quite a bit of human motivity. 
The last has a perhaps appropriate word at this point. Bodily beauty is as much a 
matter of behaviour, of action, as of structure. Males human have no personal 
beauty in the proper sense of the term save this beauty-of-action, but the female 
(child and adult) enjoys (and often how keenly!) both kinds of beauty. As we have 
seen, improper or ill-fitting clothes readily check free and graceful action, and 
perhaps all but abolish whatever personal beauty a baby girl, a girl, a young 
woman, a woman, or an elderly woman may exhibit to herself as well as to others. 
Thus clothes, feminine clothes especially, tend to determine by limitation the lifebeauty of their wearers. 
Sixty years ago Herman Lotze published several pages in his well-known „Microcosmus“ which come very pat into our present discussion, although unknown until 
quite recently to the present writer. He suggested three points, each of which has a 
good deal of psychologic interest: 
1st, That clothes often tend to expand the personality, and in several ways, each of 
which is of basal import. Clothes, or at least parts of one's costume, may be con-
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 28 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 28 (57)
sidered as a kind of implement, he points out, to the outer limits of which our personality tends always to expand. In using a chisel, for example, a man's personality is on the bevel or on the edge of the tool. In like manner, in using or „wearing“ 
a cane, one is apt to have his attention at the further end of the cane, or at the 
proximal end, or at both ends. High heels act in somewhat the same way. Swagger-sticks, so common now, and crutches obviously tend spatially to expand the 
personality; so do high hats, very broad hats, coiffures like those of Elizabeth's 
day; even bustles tend to extend the individuality of the wearer and in a direction 
at which one „wonders“, But compare certain wellknown ideals of gluteal obesity 
still fashionable in the French Congo! In my „Emotion of Joy” 1899, I emphasized other factors and condi31 
tions of this personal expansion and motor extension, but wholly missed this sartorial one which Lotze suggests. In a smaller way thick ulsters, topcoats, furs, 
clumsy overcoats, and superfluous wraps are a badge of enlarged personality of 
their wearer. It is plain from the frequency with which well-to-do light-headed 
people assume these implements which connect their personalities with the environment that there is always a great amount of pleasantness and often snobbish 
satisfaction connected with their use. They are in fact an important factor in social 
life among naive people who pay over-attention to such extrinsic matters. 
The second point which Lotze makes is that clothing often lends a joyous sense of 
motion, and especially of the freer motion, to its wearer. Flowing garments, hanging or waving drapery, nodding millinery, and so on ad extravagandum, make us 
„feel as if we ourselves were present in the gyrations of the freely flowing ends”, 
as Lotze movingly expresses it. To the philosophy of the pragmatic ME we actually are so present, of course, for the personality so seen includes all that immediately concerns the individual. But more than one's actual clothes, all hanging, 
nodding, swaying ornaments (bags, plumes, belt-ends, ribbons, coattails, lapels, 
furbelows, veils, tippets, scarfs, hatbrims, wide-flowing skirts) act in like manner 
to lend a sense of vivacity to the wearer, and even to the observer by the principle 
of empathy. 
Kinesthesia comes in here too, and explains how this interesting effect of action is 
produced by subconscious stimulation of the movement and freedom which stands 
in general for youth, for freedom and so for happiness. It is like seeing or feeling 
one dance, which gives all rightly-minded people considerable pleasure (See below). And the social relationships of clothes go even further than this into sexual 
attractiveness as Robert Herrick, wise man, keen for such feminine things, points 
out in his familiar poem: 
 „A sweet disorder in the dress 
 Kindles in clothes a wantonness: 
 A lawn about the shoulders thrown 
 Into a fine distraction; 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 29 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 29 (57)
32 
 An erring lace, which here and there 
 Enthrals the crimson stomacher; 
 A cuff neglectful, and thereby 
 Ribbons to flow confusedly; 
 A winning wave, deserving note, 
 In the tempestuous petticoat 
 A careless shoe-string, in whose tie 
 I see a wild civility; 
 Do more bewitch me, than when art 
 Is too precise in every part“. 
Silks, therefore, thin, light, but not too precise, easily flowing by the bodily motion as well as by the breeze, make, for purposes of grace, the ideal fabric, especially light Chinese, Indian, and Japanese silks, and chiffons. 
On the other hand, heavy ceremonial silks, for example the black grosgrain skirts 
which some of us remember in our childhood „that would stand alone“, give the 
restraint which we shall next consider, following Lotze, as well as the expansion 
of the personality and the organism which we have just discussed. 
Soft, light-weight silks, therefore, are the most psychological material, so to say, 
for at least feminine dress, not only for their own beauty and warmth, but for their 
extension of the activity, real as well as imaginary; and not only those of the 
wearer, but of the observer as well. 
The third point which Lotze makes, relates to the tightness of clothing, especially 
to stays and corsets, and we might add, to the tight coats of the British „Tommy“ 
on parade, of five years ago. Says Lotze, „The greater or less tension and firmness 
possessed by the material in itself or due to its cut, is transferred to us as if it resulted from our bearing“, That is, a corset's firmness on all sides, thinks Lotze, 
makes us feel as if we ourselves were thus firm and self-reliant. Constraining 
garments thus may at times tend to give some one a self-consciousness which has 
distinctly self-exalting features, as here suggested, but personally I think that far 
oftener this oppressive restraint works quite the other way, namely to lessen selfconfidence and to limit one's tendency to initiative and to action. It acts as a suggested discouragement, and therefore is „all to the bad“ in the majority
33 
of cases. The important matter of arterial tension in this restraint connection has 
been discussed already. One paragraph from Lotze's four pages is so good in various respects that I need not refrain from quoting it: 
„With this sense of firmness which she does not quite despise, the maiden mingles 
the feeling for easily moved and finer garments, for as a matter of fact the fragrant 
folds of the light and gauzy stuffs with which she drapes her form are not merely 
intended to be graceful in the eyes of others. On the contrary, the wearer herself is 
by feeling directly present in all the graceful curves that with featherweight touch 
but a few points of the skin, and yet through these points excite the most distinct 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 30 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 30 (57)
sensation of the breadth, lightness and softness of their sweep. Nay, often the 
pleasure afforded by such a sight is derived far less from the pleasing effects of 
the drapery we see than from the fact that we can transport ourselves by thought 
into the imaginative joyous or dainty vital feeling which the myriad petty impressions from the garments must infuse into the form which they conceal“, One could 
scarcely find a better suggestion of empathy than this from Lotze; see the remarks 
below. 
To interpret these undoubted facts, we must seek practically the same conditions 
that underlie the subjective and the objective pleasantness of dancing, skating, 
swimming, and „calisthenics“. This, in short, is the psychology of skill and of 
grace into which Mr. George H. Browne, for example, has recently ventured. 
Kinesthesia in its relations, first, to bodily, and second, to mental control; third, to 
the imagination of the consciousness of others; and fourth, to bodily attitudes as 
determinants or concomitants of emotional states of mind, (as the James-Lange 
theory of emotion shows) is concerned here, of course, importantly, in an explanatory way. The muscle-joint sense, so-called, as the connector or index between 
bodily motions and strains and our mental processes, is here of satisfying explanatory importance. This matter, however, is of such a nature, so complex and so 
subtle in description that its exposition would require more space than can be here 
afforded, and must be postponed, to be done, it may be, elsewhere. 
34 
This feeling, however, of a perceived person in graceful action, and the mediate 
realizing of the sensations and the excitements and the low emotional tones which 
the dancer or skater is with delight experiencing, is what Lipps many years ago 
termed Einfühlung and what, as you know, Titchener has recently named empathy, and expounded in various directions. Empathy certainly is of permanent importance in the psychology of clothing. For example, each individual who personally „dresses“, wishes every observer of her success to get into empathy with her; 
to realize how much her clothing is adding to her personality; to appreciate how 
much satisfaction and enjoyment it is giving her; and to estimate, even at the 
value which she sets upon it, how much it adds to her personality and to her importance, personal, matrimonial, and social. Plainly empathy has kinesthesia as its 
heart and stomach, as well as its skeleton. Such imagined kinesthesia, secondhand, as it were, is one more evidence of the frequently quite indispensable subconscious aspects of mind in our behaviour, both personal and social, and every 
instant of our lives. 
The psychology of the discomfort and unpleasantness as well as the inefficiency 
which come from the expedient if not forced inhibition of naturally free bodily 
movement, or even from their compelled restraint, by some passing fashions in 
clothes, is not so briefly statable, although even more important. It involves obviously that basal physiology which relates to motor inhibition. Some of the underlying conditions are suggested in my „Notes on Affective Physiology“ (Medical 
Record, New York, 89, 15, 8 April, 1916, pp. 631-641, illstd.). This material explains scientifically the reason why tight, stiff, and cumbersome clothing lessens 
efficiency both directly (by mechanical restraint) and indirectly (through discom-
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 31 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 31 (57)
fort and inhibition) that is, physiologically and psychologically, Lotze, a man of 
the most excellent wisdom and breadth of view, to the contrary notwithstanding. 
This material following provides the foundation on which a scientific art of adequate dressing might perhaps be erected, for it explains the psychologic basis of 
limitation and of restraint, both of which modern clothing implies. 
35 
Too little emphasis certainly has been laid upon the twofold nature of human personality, upon the complete duality of man's nature, especially to its physiologic 
and psychologic foundations. Poets and philosophers have seen and beautified its 
moral aspects, and have shown in terms that cannot be forgotten that the sanction 
of our very conception and incarnation and birth and living lies all but wholly in 
the logical necessity of developing individual personalities through temptation, 
struggle, „denial of the will-to-life“. Whether we see it every day in the unselfish 
self-denial of the dear women in our own households or read in leisure hours of its 
esoteric system in the wilds of ancient Thibet, we are continually aware that it is 
one of the dominants of our actual world. 
And when we turn to the anthropologic aspects of this same matter we find our 
fundamental just the same and find it closer to physiology and neurology. The 
phylenic „series“ shows at first a preponderance of biologic egotism, of racial 
impulse, of pleasant activity, expansion, push. There is excess of movement over 
control, the utter mechanism of the plant, the tactic processes of the protozoa, the 
simple behavior of the early metazoa, play, the noise and irresponsibility of childhood, the dance, boisterousness, freedom of every kind, the grand flourish, license, extension of personal and family and national power, „might makes right“, 
„to the victor belong the spoils”, force, great guns, invasion, pleasant hopes of 
conquest, freedom to progress even in the sun regardless of all but one's self. 
But the secret of the sanction of our incarnation lies not here! Rather does it lie in 
a process which uses all this as Emerson says, „as hands and feet“ by which it 
may accomplish its great world-purpose each in his own individual way. I mention such relations in this discussion of physiology (which ordinarily tells none 
too much of God and personality), only to show how important and basal and 
deep and universal are the ramifications of world-processes which at heart are in 
practice muscular and nervous and even epithelial. And it is worth while to see it 
so. 
Man, then, generically and individually becomes civilized, even if slowly, grows 
up, attains the full measure of a being who 
36 
„dares do all that doth become a man“, even to attempted conquest over the vegetative and biologic machinery which gives him his energy. He restrains his impulsive machinery, serves as governor to his flywheel, so to say, often so massive 
and with such dreadful inertia of motion! He learns to inhibit especially his emotions and thereby, more than in any other way, qualifies for a citizen of our little 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 32 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 32 (57)
world against whom that world will not rise in wrath. It is of course now our hunt 
to trace out some few details at least, or relative details, of the nerve-paths and 
nerve-knots of that inhibition, especially in relation to the algodonic tone of the 
emotions and the feelings. 
It has already become reasonably certain that freedom in itself is pleasant, and that 
restraint biologically speaking-that is, naturally, in naïve individuals - is inherently disagreeable, whether from without or from within. I would emphasize the 
provisional clause in this part of my thesis, „biologically speaking- that is, naturally, in the naive individual“, for we shall suggest below that it loses this unpleasantness as the person becomes a psychologic personality. As the wise 
„George Eliot“ says in „Felix Holt“, „There is a sort of subjection which is the 
peculiar heritage of largeness and of love; and strength is often only another name 
for willing bondage to irremediable woes“. We all know that freedom as such is 
pleasant, and a seven-foot shelf of books, or one even longer, might be readily 
written, given time, to extol freedom's pleasures in every possible realm of human 
experience. It has, I think, not been often effectively suggested, on the other hand, 
that in the unsophisticated animal, dog, or child, or savage, inhibition is essentially and inherently unpleasant (until, by submersion-see below-its disagreeableness has been mostly lost). * * * * 
It seems to suffice for our present concern in clothes-physiology to point out that 
the inhibition of impulsive tendencies (mostly pleasant on well-accepted principles) is by their very nature usually an unpleasant process. Even if unaware of the 
fact from personal experience, the reader cannot fail to realize that sometimes the 
restraint of our impulses, of our biologic, vegetative instincts in particular of 
course, rises into the heroic' 
37 
involving as it does a maximum of struggle against unpleasant lacks of action 
along ancient hereditary paths. To restrain one's fatigue, one's wrath, one's hunger, 
or one's lust is oftentimes, to many men and women, their experienced maximum 
of disagreeableness. These are gross examples which the check to the onrush of 
biologic satisfactions, teleologic intentions, sufficiently „explains“ to the average 
student of neurological psychology. It should, however, be noted as we pass them 
that in this contest between an impulsive process and a tendency to its restraint 
obtains the precise relationship to which early psychological biologists (e.g. Romanes) ascribed the origin of consciousness in the evolving phylenic order. 
McCabe's notion is far less satisfying: he actually refuses to admit the consciousness of animals less complex than birds, a truly Cartesian sophistry; but „the 
worse is not the better reason“, after all. 
For our present purpose it is an important consideration that in the personal, as 
well as in the social consciousness and memory, unpleasant experiences actually 
are more conscious, more vividly real, and much more memorable than pleasant 
experiences. And this is true as a well-realized fact wholly independent of any 
theory of feeling or of neurology. It is the blizzards, not the periods of delightful 
weather, which are remembered; a moment or an hour of agony agitates the memory long after ecstacies have gone, almost past recall. This is not due to some in-
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 33 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 33 (57)
herent pessimism in the human mind, we may be sure, for the majority of folk are 
practical optimists. It in part is due, say I, to the basal physiologic condition of 
innervation, namely that the conscious restraint-kinesthesia underlying mentally 
the movements concerned is more closely related to unpleasantness than is the 
actuating movement-neurility.
Another reason doubtless arises in the fact that the grand mean balance of human 
experience is pleasant rather than unpleasant; on this basis alone would a human 
people with power of initiative to suicide remain in the long run alive, for „Lo, 
you are free to end it when you will“!, as William James again reminded us. Here, 
then, is a background of moderate pleasantness and against this the lurid experience of pain or of the dis38 
agreeable in any mode stands out with far more distinctness than would an experience toned like the background. As we pass, it is worth noting that almost all the 
behavior of the average adult is physiologically impulsive and reflex and semiautomatic, what we may best denote perhaps as habitual voluntary action. As thus 
impulsive it is pleasant because relatively free. As this voluntary and inhibitory 
only to a slight extent, strictly voluntary only at extremely rare intervals and in 
many persons never, after childhood, it has little of the difficult unpleasantness 
which is related to the kinesthetic foundations of restraint. To the galley slave, 
„Jean Valjean“, life for just the opposite reason was unpleasant- and revengeful, 
inhibitory, fearfully voluntary, a memory to embitter eternity. We return then to 
our scenario with widespread evidence that free action is by nature pleasant and 
inhibition, characteristic of voluntary movement, whether devised from within or 
forced from without, difficult, unpleasant, and hard. * * * * 
We are especially concerned now, therefore, with inhibitions that are voluntary 
until by habituation they have become more or less mechanical. As example of 
one of these basal voluntary inhibitions closely related to the emotional tonebalance consider the checking of muscular movements when listening to real music. By real music is meant music with a wellmarked rhythmic beat. If one attend 
many orchestral concerts, even where the music performed is of the very „highest 
class“ and the audience the most „cultured“ group of society, it cannot fail to be 
noted that the spontaneous, that is real, enjoyment is greatest from the music with 
strongly marked rhythm, and least, with a forced fashionable applause if any, at 
the artificial concoctions which ramble instead of march. At a recent concert, for 
example Beethoven's symphony in F major (Eighth) was in contrast, after an intermission, with Stravinsky's impressionistic and unrhythmic „Feuerwerk“, vastly 
to the hurt of the latter, bad as it is. Some of the modern music forgets or ignores 
this neuromuscular basis of musical emotion and offers concatenations of harmony when the truly appreciative listener craves only what his inevitable organism demands to satisfy it - sympathetic and 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 34 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 34 (57)
39 
synchronous activity. Thus music or that which pretends to be music now and 
then strives to express ideas when its sole language properly is feeling or feeling 
with a tinge of will. 
True music then, we are sure, has a well defined rhythmic beat and is met in the 
naive and natural individual at whatever age by voluntary muscular movements of 
the feet, head, or hands; within oftentimes are corresponding but ill-defined contractions of the vegetative organism. Now to inhibit these (unfashionable because 
disturbing) movements is distinctly an unpleasant effort and takes away from the 
musical enjoyment and continues to do so in a measurable degree at least long 
after the inhibition-habit has been thoroughly acquired. One longs subconsciously, 
so to say, that he might hear such music when he were free to meet it in the natural way. Here, of course, is the basal psychology of the dance, and likewise to 
watch dancing while standing or sitting still is an unpleasant experience and that 
despite the joy from the well-marked music. In all this, it seems plain, we have the 
somatic (neuromuscular) prototype of the pleasant unimpeded impulse and of the 
unpleasant experience of inhibiting this impulse, both being essentially kinesthetic. 
This vegetative impulse furnishes the ways and means, the thrust and push, the 
substantial and inherently enjoyable activity even to abandonment which makes 
life interesting. On the other hand, the restraint of all this to suit the needs of a 
social environment, requires strife and weariness whose only reward is itself. 
There is here, however, the half of the personality, in fact that part of the total 
human behavior which is commonly deemed (but wrongly, we may see) the very 
essence of humanity, of civilization, culture, delicacy, or whatever other term 
marks off for us our proud humanness from brutishness. * * * * 
On the contrary there are two things (they appear to be but examples of many) 
which suggest that, to the young child, restraint, inhibition, personal control, 
whether in voluntary movement or in the feelings, is eminently unpleasant: First, 
the extreme infrequency of such acts of will, in itself prima facie evidence that 
they are disagreeable experiences, since agreeable acts tend to be learned early 
and to be frequently repeated. Second, 
40 
direct observation (see, for example, my „Moto-Sensory Development“, p. 89, 
Day 211) shows a long latent period (ten seconds or so) for such difficult voluntary movements, resolved at length by a quick and frequently clonic motion, the 
whole suggesting difficulty physiologic and hesitation and unpleasantness psychologic. * * * * 
Moderate feelings, weak emotions, are certainly not all pleasant (worry is a notable example), nor are all strong feelings disagreeable. But, on the other hand, 
there certainly is a correlation between the novel inhibitory or hesitational difficulty of an innervation and its unpleasantness. The ancient wisdom that one in 
time becomes accustomed to anything is but common recognition that emotions 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 35 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 35 (57)
tend to lose their original unpleasantness by use, by habituation on the universal 
principle, whereas novel environmental situations producing strong emotional 
reaction have with them usually an admixture of unpleasantness. This, physiologically, I take it, is a restraint, a hesitation toward the unfamiliar, an example of the 
inherent unpleasantness of uncertainty. 
Integration.-Possibly the above considerations are already enough to suggest to an 
unprejudiced mind that there is some kind of a direct relationship between doubt, 
hesitation, restraint, and inhibition proper and the unpleasantness of feelings. This 
concomitance seems based in the dual structure of the nervous system itself, and it 
is perfectly possible but not yet to be actually proved in a corresponding duality in 
the mechanism of muscle, both voluntary and vegetative. 
The fears and unpleasantness and restrictions of ill-fitting and ill-adapted raiment; 
and the freedom and empirical satisfaction of clothes that are adequate, really 
adequate in the sense defined in this monograph, cannot but be based in this fundamental opposition-in-complementation above indicated. 
Underlying many of the human motives is one of the deepest of human satisfactions, (and at heart a worthy one) the esteem of our fellows. An aid to our egotism 
or even vanity in many cases, usually, none the less, it is an important element in 
expedient „success“ and in the development of our personalities, 
41 
save in the most „exaltedly“ unhuman of individuals, To the rank and file of us to 
be esteemed is very much indeed, and to be generally despised is as bitter a cup as 
we are apt to have to drink. Says Edgar Wallace (as a chance coroboration of this 
idea), „The majority of crimes in the world are committed by people for the same 
reason, - they want to be well thought of. . . . Here is another gentleman who murders his wives in their baths in order that he should keep up some sort of position 
and earn the respect of his friends and his associates. . . . Here is the great financier, who has embezzled a million and a quarter, not because he needed money, 
but because people looked up to him. Therefore, he must build great mansions, 
submarine pleasure courts, and must lay out huge estates-because he wished that 
he should be thought well of“. This motive at heart is physiological. 
Our present concern with this „ruling passion“ and „national characteristic“ is that 
by its very purpose and by its location on the subjecto-ejective boundary, it is 
clothing which more often than anything else whatever furnishes the data on 
which the esteem of others, or their disesteem, is based. As Mr. H. L. Hillman of 
Boston truthfully advertises, „the clothes proclaim the man“ (either directly or 
inversely!), and on their proclamation largely depends whether we are thought 
well of or ill. It is unfortunate, but undoubtedly it is true for nearly all our cursory 
estimation of one another in a crowded and busy world, too hurried to banish any 
accessible indication. 
Fatigue, one of the most significant and pressing problems of psychology and of 
economics, has intimate relations to clothing in several respects. The details of the 
matter are too complex for our present discussion, and indeed the whole science, 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 36 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 36 (57)
to say nothing of the art, of fatigue, weariness, and fatigue-prevention are in a 
formative stage from every viewpoint (*) 
In general, then, for present purpose it is enough to suggest that our day-clothes in 
general are distinctly and needlessly heavy, and confining and therefore unduly 
tiring to both the 
________________ 
(*) See Meyer Solomon's volume on the sense of weariness in the Our Senses Series. 
42 
body and the mind. Everyone who wears our kind of clothes (unfortunately the 
fashion is diffusing over the entire Earth) has felt the almost „delicious“ relief of 
getting them off, thus allowing the body, if only for a few moments, to be free. 
Unrestrainedly to breathe both by lungs and skin; heart free to beat; and to move 
limbs and torso unhindered by a thick and hindering mass of rigid clothes to 
which the sensitive and easily fatigued nervous system as yet has not wholly 
adapted itself! The clothing-fatigue relations are complex and for some future 
detailing. It is something, however, to have in mind that clothes and fatigue are 
related, and importantly. 
Sometimes, in some fashion-periods, the fatigue-effect of clothing, on women at 
least, amounts to a positive disability. This may be, and not very infrequently, a 
matter of life and death. Elizabeth Stuart Phelps, for example, in her „What to 
Wear?“, writes: „When I read of the sinking of steamers at sea, with 'nearly all the 
women and children on board'; and the accompanying comments, 'Every effort 
was made to assist the women up the masts and out of danger until help arrived, 
but they could not climb, and we were forced to leave them to their fate'; or when I 
hear the wail with which a million lips take up the light words of the loafer on the 
Portland Wharf, when the survivors of the ‘Atlantic’ filed past him, ‘Not a woman 
among them all! My God!' - when I consider these things, I feel that T have ceased 
to deal with blunders in dress, and have entered the category of crimes“ „These 
things“ are being bettered the forty-five years since then; yet none too fast for a 
rational world. 
A foot-note in this same book (1873) shows how much physical education has 
done: „Said a professor of elocution, of experience in the instruction of both 
sexes, 'When I first gave lessons at the Young Ladies' Seminaries, I was greatly 
puzzled. Some of my exercises are calisthenic, and require active movements of 
the arms. To my surprise, the girls could not meet their hands above their heads; 
many of them could not raise them half way to the required point. I was a young 
man, and did not know much about a lady's dress; and for some time the reason of 
this did not occur to me. At length I bethought me,
43 
that their mode of dress was at fault. I have been obliged to discontinue ! 
entirely the use of those exercises in girls' schools, though I think them very important to an elocutionist“. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 37 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 37 (57)
3. Relations of Clothing to Body-Temperature. The third group of habilatory 
influences concerns body-temperature. Man is a „warm-blooded“ (homothermous) animal and his success in living well is dependent on his maintenance of a 
fairly uniform temperature. People who have the intelligence (and the goodfortune) to avoid infectious diseases, may go through an ordinary life with no 
more variation than two or three Farenheit degrees during their whole time. On 
the other hand, a frog, (if we could think of his mind being deranged!) might have 
a variation of sixty degrees in the course of the six months between the end of 
January and the first of August. Like the other mammals and birds, we, then, are 
„warm-blooded“, and have a very elaborate and competent apparatus for maintaining a relatively constant temperature whatever be the environmental conditions, or the (normal) balancing of energies and calories in and out of the organism. If this wondrous thermotactic mechanism be deranged, we have „fever“-or 
else „collapse“, For the detail one must consult a treatise on physiology or on the 
applied physiology of exercise. Now with this thermotaxis our clothing has a great 
deal to do. In the first place, there is 
A, The Texture of clothes. The base-idea here is that it is the layer of evaporating 
dead air next to the skin which makes us sometimes so uncomfortable. Anything, 
then, including a type of clothing, which will relatively prevent a layer of dead air 
from forming against the body will tend to keep us cool in summer, and, on the 
other hand, make us warm in winter. If anything will keep us cool in a warm environment it is the evaporation of sweat,-anything, that is, short of actual immersion 
in cool water, or in a rapidly evaporating breeze. The texture is the most important 
factor of this matter,-whether it be a close weave or a tight weave of modern 
loomwork. 
B, The Material of clothes. Fur is warmer than wool, and wool than silk, and silk 
than cotton, and cotton than linen, and linen than darkness or just skin simply because, in the order 
44 
mentioned, they retain a layer of „dead“, non-conducting, air . next to the living 
body. The material of clothes comes in very importantly then in that familiar way. 
C, The Color of clothes. This is almost an art by itself in the attire of women. The 
basic principle in relation to the bodytemperature, of course, is that white reflects 
the warming light and therefore is cool; and black is usually „warm“, remember. 
White reflects and black absorbs the radiant energy-all understand that trite matter 
perfectly, and it need only be mentioned. 
On the other hand, red excites, and thus warms. Red and all the bright colors excite, even green. Blue is the least exciting. Colors exert more influence on observers than they do on the individual. Black, on the other hand, depresses both wearer 
(by suggestion?) and observer; and yet somehow it seems for general use the most 
suitable color for dignified, responsible men and women. Many women look far 
less charming in any other color. Would that more of them effectively realized 
this fact! 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 38 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 38 (57)
The mental influence of the colors of clothes, in men as well as in women, have 
been more or less well worked out, but not yet in a psychological laboratory. It is 
obviously true, in the case of women especially, that there is no assignable limit to 
the mental influence of gowns, and of their gowns' colors in particular, on their 
emotional state of mind. Human dignity is often scared away by woman's fine and 
fashionable raiment; and nowadays a true gentleman of good taste is seldom seen 
in „colors“. But it is, after all, only a matter of ephemeral „style“, because up to a 
century ago the best of men wore the most vivid colors that could be made by 
fabric-dyes; and gloried in them, apparently. 
Dinginess of color especially is not worthy, and therefore is of practical importance. Whether this dinginess come from the fading of dyes, especially „cheap“ 
black, or whether it be an original, intended dinginess, dinginess is of considerable importance. This is not only because it can be seen further than any other 
common defect in clothes, but because it is a primary, conventional sign of the 
„hobo“, of the tramp, the consistently „unsuccessful“ man, of the „down-andouter“, It comes next 
45 
to patches, „shreds and patches” as a sign of old clothes and of unsuccess. It is the 
first step toward structural and mental shoddishness, as all are aware. Dinginess 
shows a lack of proper color-appreciation when dingy clothes are bought new. 
Color has self-respect as well as other things have, and clothesdinginess is a lack 
of color-self-respect,-as much so as. habilatory color-saturation. 
I had a little discussion last spring with one of my publisherfirms. I objected to the 
dingy color in which they had clothed one of my books,-a sort of „dirty“ olivebrown; psychologically, no color at all. The head of the publishing firm wrote 
back that in their long experience the cover-color of a book seemed to have nothing whatever to do with its popularity or sale. I „put that proposition up“ to another large publisher and he disagreed flatly, and said that from his wide experience they had learned that the color of a book has a great deal to do with its sale. 
The latter gentleman undoubtedly is right in the long run. Psychologically it could 
not be otherwise. The same principle exactly applies to the dinginess and other 
color-disagreeableness (dirtiness, for example) of clothing and still more importantly, although sale is not supposed here at present to be concerned. Yet a feminine gaudy dresser proves inevitably thereby her lack of womanly dignity, or else 
her racial lack of taste-restraint. 
About the patterns of fabrics, I am not so certain. Of course, this too is a textile art 
in itself. Stripes and checks and diagonals and dots are all very important. Their 
psychology, however, is very complex, and it were wholly unscientific and therefore wholly unjustifiable to say very much about this matter until it has been 
worked out practically in some adequate psychological laboratory. 
Obviously, dots strike or at least pepper one in the face. We do not need to be reminded that dots, large or small, (unless they are so small that you can't see them) 
are bad taste. But stripes, all manner of stripes, have an inconsistency, so far as 
their clothing-psychology is concerned. As I have found by inquiring of women, 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 39 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 39 (57)
when the stripes run up and down they are generally supposed to make the individual seem taller. Based on 
46 
experience, not on psychology, it has always been the tailor's theory that „a very 
tall man should never wear stripes“. 
One finds in almost any elementary text-book of psychology, however, two 
squares of exactly the same height, one of them filled with horizontal lines and the 
other vacant or filled with vertical lines. If one did not know that it was intended 
as an illusion, invariably he would be sure that the square with the horizontal lines 
was taller than the other. Invariably one would think that, and yet when he runs 
his eye along the tops of both, he finds that they are absolutely the same height. 
Here is an inconsistency between tradition and fact that I have not yet had time to 
„figure out“, but scientifically it has some interest: Women assert very seriously 
that horizontal stripes make them look short and „dumpy“, and yet, as a matter of 
pure psychology, horizontal stripes make a square appear taller. I suspect that 
other essential factors, some recondite, enter the costume-problem that are wholly 
lacking to the drawn squares. Suggestion probably is one of these other factors, 
from deep in the traditional subconscious feminine mind. But perhaps habilatory 
horizontal stripes make their wearers seem to them wider and so proportionally 
shorter, because the critical women observers look so hard and vigorously along 
the odious stripes that the exaggerated kinesthesia quite overwhelms the more 
accurate comprehension of the retinal proper,-psychology familiar enough. However, the matter is one of relatively small account, stripes now being uncommon 
and out of style heaven be thanked!, even in the prisons since Thomas Mott Osborne and others have shown us anew their inherent criminality to their victims. 
Later on, when these jail-stripes have wholly gone and been forgot, stripes will 
doubtless become fashionable for less blameworthy but freer women and men-for 
it is just this kind of suggestion among others, which determines, or helps to do 
so, widespread and relatively long-enduring modes, as has been seen over and 
over again. 
47 
III. SOME APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY 
We come now to the more purely psychological aspects of clothes-science so far 
as I have been able to dig them out from the concatenated nature of our pragmatic 
personalities. Quite plainly, the expensive research required to adequately develop 
to its inductive ideal the science of raiment is at present wholly inexpedient, but it 
is to be anticipated that the extensive makers of clothing and of gowns will be 
eager to finance this scientific undertaking when its interest and practical human 
and economic importance have been appreciated. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 40 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 40 (57)
The psychology of the ever-changing mode has been somewhat adequately studied, and hundreds of volumes, probably, have been printed to set forth the dramatic history of costume and its substitutes among mankind of both cultured and 
savage races of men. Some of these are folios and beautifully illustrated; some are 
in Latin, and deal with the efficient clothing of the ancients, especially the Greeks; 
some cover the entire human range from the savage up to the date of composition. 
Most of these histories of costume are national in their scope and show how intimately clothes and racial history are interwoven. Perhaps the most important of 
the American treatises is that of Alice Morse Earle dead all too early, who has 
done very much for American patriotism. 
So far as the writer has been able to learn, G. Stanley Hall, keen biopsychologist, 
was in 1905 the first to approach the psychology of clothing in a sociological 
questionary, summarized and somewhat oriented and discussed by L. W. Flaccus 
in 1906 (see list of references at the end). This paper is entitled „Remarks on the 
Psychology of Clothes“, a name commendably modest but on the whole just. The 
conclusions are various, and for the most part suggest the concensus of the remarks which one any day may hear from a group of women (or from some types 
of men) when talking about their costume. The questions 
48 
employed were grouped under fifteen heads, and run as follows: „1, How does a 
sense of being well dressed or the opposite affect you 2, How are you affected by 
shabby or illfitting gloves or shoes? 2, Do you feel a change in your personality, 
and if so describe it, from being (a) in conventional evening dress (b) in an outing 
costume which gives unwonted freedom of action? 3, Do the materials of your 
dress affect your feeling, i.e., whether they are filmy soft stuffs or stiffer and more 
unwielding materials? Do you like the rustle of silks? Does the wearing of fur 
have any special effect upon your mental state? Does the character of your hat? 
Do you like to wear a train? Why ? 4, How does the presence of some defect in 
your clothing, which may not be obvious to others, affect you? Are you conscious 
of a difference in feeling due to fresh, dainty underwear, irrespective of external 
dress? 5, Are you particular about the fit of your clothes or to have them of the 
latest style? Have you special preferences for certain articles of clothes, e.g., hats, 
lace, jewelry, fine gloves or shoes, handkerchiefs, pins, neckties, etc., so that any 
extravagance in dress is apt to be in that direction? 6, What is your feeling toward 
imitation lace, jewelry, etc.? 7, What proportion of one's total personal expenditure do you think should be devoted to clothes ? 8, Children usually like to „dress 
up“, Did you do this when a child and in what lay the enjoyment of it? As a child 
were you particularly conscious of your clothes, and to what influence would you 
attribute this? 9, How are you impressed by the dress of others? Does it affect 
your estimate of a person and if so in what ways? 10, What individual tastes and 
preferences do you sometimes indulge that are at variance with fashion? 11, What 
can you suggest about the care of clothes and its educative value? 12, What do 
you deem important in the care of nails, dressing the hair, cosmetics, facewashing, etc.? Can cleanliness be excessive, and what about exposure of certain 
parts of the body, both in society and to sun and air in summer-going barefoot, 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 41 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 41 (57)
gloved, bareheaded, etc.? 13, What reforms in the dress of men, women, and children would you suggest, and what about too much or too little clothing? 14, What 
about ornaments and adorn49 
ments generally? 15, Say something about canes, parasols and fans, and also state 
any experience with masks, masquerades, theatrical costumes; the lies of clothing, 
e.g., padding of all kinds, fits, pinchings, tight fits, and loose flowing raiments, 
and what changes are natural at different ages and periods of life?“ One hundred 
and eighty-one sets of answers came to these questions from a normal school in 
New York State, the sex of the writers not being stated. „Because of the very limited number of answers”, says Flaccus, „little would be gained by working up the 
material in percentage form“, but he points out some of the interesting types of 
answers and some individual replies, after he has arranged them in three groups: 
„1, minor and incidental matters, psychological tidbits, etc.; 2, changes of feeling, 
fluctuations and changes in personality, differences in feeling-tone, diffusive and 
expensive effects; and 3, effects on the self as a social reflex phenomenon“. 
Little is to be found in the answers discussed concerning the physiological psychology of clothing, but what there is undoubtedly corroborates Lotze's keen 
hints, already related above. Little, too, is to be found in Flaccus's report concerning the interrelations of our clothes and our cenesthesia, basis in a way and in a 
degree of our behaviour and a continual influence over our wills, especially when 
unrealized and therefore unopposed by conscious effort. Clothes in several important respects are the frontier of our environment; but no less are they powerful 
determinants of our own inner consciousness. It is here, and in the raiment's direct 
relationships to our ejective, social environment, that lies the future applied psychology of clothing whenever facilities shall be afforded toward the unravelling of 
the numerous problems which President Hall's questions so interestingly suggests. 
Please remember that the mental influences and the practical relations of clothes, 
in all their complexity and force, begin at birth, nowadays, even in state wards and 
in some institutions for children. The influence then received always is lifelong; it 
is absorbed with the mother's milk, so to say; in the home it has strong motor 
emotional tones from the first. Quakers are a 
50 
noteworthy exception to this rule; they have it as one of their fundamental tenets 
and attentions that they will not pay any attention to clothes, and relatively to 
most others they have always succeeded, and doubtless will continue to do so. 
And the convict's extreme interest in his shameful clothing is happily now a thing 
of the past, or as obsolescent as the lash. 
But interest in clothes, verging into vanity, comes in our ordinary life from the 
very „first“ day, and maternally long before. That is one of the reasons, scientifically, why it is impressed so deeply and so emotionally on the dynamic subconscious mind of young people in general. The children who are not by their own 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 42 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 42 (57)
initiative victims of too much clothes-consciousness usually feel it and hear about 
it in others, and so the effect is about the same. Clothes-consciousness is relatively 
insignificant in childhood, notwithstanding all this influence. The exceptions are a 
certain „type“ of little girls. 
This consciousness so far as it relates to the inessentials of the art of dressing, 
leading through habit to personal vanity and sundry kinds of fixed ideas, is of 
course an evil thing for the child, for it narrows her interests and tends to wrong 
the growing ideals of personal beauty which are at heart properly anatomic and 
physiologic. 
On the other hand, rightly directed, dress-consciousness becomes but a part of that 
universal awareness of body, which elsewhere(*) I have already praised as an universal cenesthesia,- the only firm foundation for that self-knowledge on which 
valid education and efficient worthy living possibly can be based. 
But in either of these two cases, the clothes-consciousness of the child, even if it 
be mostly negative, a negation of the desire, constitutes the firm and life-lasting 
foundation for the phenomena of clothes-psychology which begins to be so conspicuous with the florescence of the personality at puberty: 
In the more physiologic part of our discussion we have seen that clothes serve 
sundry protections, just as the skin does: the „box-coat“ of the tortoise, the quills 
of the hedgehog, the feathers of the robin, the armor of the sturgeon, the colors of 
the 
____________________ 
(*) The Mother's Magazine-eight articles on habit and on early sensetraining, 1917-1919. 
51 
flounder, are all examples of clothes, we might say, in the lower animals, which 
serve as protection, very important, indeed quite indispensable protection, of various mechanical and physical kinds, giving them more freedom. And I tried to 
make it understood that especially freedom is served by our own armor, our clothing; freedom from various things which are various forms, in short, of fear. We 
may note without danger of being successfully contradicted, that clothing at one 
time or another, in some people if not in others, protects us against fear: fear
1, of ridicule; 2, of the estimation of poverty; 3, of the estimation of inefficiency 
or stupidity; 4, of numerous dermal discomforts; 5, of bodily internal discomforts; 
6, of the estimation of bodily immodesty; 7, of anxiety; 8, of the estimation of a 
lack of self-respect; 9, of the estimation of a lack of good taste; 10, of obtrusiveness; 11, of an under-estimation (real) at „first impressions“; 12, fear of the estimation of homeliness or lack of the desired beauty.
Many of these fears, it is obviously true, are subconscious. It is not easy, however, 
to believe that clothes could mean so immensely much to so many people, unless 
underlying its applied psychology were some emotionality which takes a tensely 
gripping hold on the deeper being of the individual. For instance, snobbery is not 
valid. Emotions other than fear, (notably vanity, modesty) affect the wearer of 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 43 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 43 (57)
clothes in any social environment, but I believe that the moving emotion, the actuation, is fear more often than any other; and at heart always self-protection. 
Fear certainly mostly underlies the psychology of clothing as it does the psychology of other important features of our common social life. I should like, if it were 
necessary?, to enlarge on this super-importance of fear generally in our daily life, 
for there is no one thing in this astounding world that the vast majority of children 
and of men and of women need to be relieved of more than of the various kinds of 
dread, worry, and fear. Fear is one of the very worst enemies of our race's civilization as well as of our personal comfort and moreover of our efficiency. Why fear 
(as Morton Prince has shown), has made the 
52 
megalo-maniac Wilhelm II into a beast-fear of losing his anachronic „job“. But 
really nowadays one does not need to enlarge upon this matter, for the whole consistent trend of modern psycho-therapeutics, of „Christian Science”, and of all the 
other aspects of mental influence, is striving its best to coax or to drive fears of 
various kinds out of people's minds. And the most important aspect of fear, of 
course, is worry, a chronic, but a none the less harmfully powerful, form of fear. 
Protection and relief, then, from such fears, in addition to those that I have already 
mentioned of a more physiological nature, I take to be la raison d'etre, the real aim 
and purpose, of the wearing of clothes. And that is of importance. 
Now, fear is so instinctively and yet so unpleasant a part of each unique conscious 
individual, that relief from it in all its phases often is a positive and a lasting joy. I 
wish to call especial attention to this familiar proposition, that to be relieved of 
fears of various kinds is not only a negative thing but sometimes in some natures a 
source of positive satisfaction, of conscious delight and contentment. My hemobarograms show this. Then add vanity; self-confidence; pleasant anticipation; satisfactions with oneself; and other emotions; and we have the strong, pleasant emotional tone which lends to some persons the tremendous energy and „pep“, so to 
say, the desire, always to be „well dressed“, But as we have seen, after due consideration the essence of the psychology of being well-dressed seems to be 
statable scientifically as preponderantly a relief and protection from various kinds 
of fears.
Clothes-fear is none the less powerful and effective as a motive because often 
subconscious. Sometimes the individual is wholly unaware of it, but on that account it is none the less cogent and practically important. Fear, obviously, of this 
kind, relating to being not well-dressed, is more subconscious in men and boys 
than in girls and women. That is to say, most women have more consciousness of 
being ill-dressed or well dressed than have men. It is part of their blessed nature, 
and rightly so. The vast biological purpose and use of the desire to be beautiful, 
and even self-assertive, on the part of the female is plain to all, but worth 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 44 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 44 (57)
53 
noting, and withal worthy, too. The same conditions obtain in the male, but in a 
far less degree of consciousness and of inconsistency and of importance. Perhaps 
in many self-reliant men it exists in too small a degree; many men after thirty 
years need in some way to be aroused to pay more attention than a great many of 
them pay to their personal appearance and success-index so far as clothes are concerned. And so too they would attract womanly young women of sense more certainly yet, frequently to the common benefit. 
Those who have been brought up in university communities have occasionally 
seen men, often philosophers in the philosophic departments, or deans of colleges, 
who would disregard this whole matter. Diogenes, or Cleanthes? None the less, a 
large majority, of course, even of academic people and of „bookworms“, pay due 
attention nowadays to this matter. 
Being well-dressed, then, is part of the essential ratio between happiness and personal ability and efficiency which I am continually trying to emphasize. The practical value of contentment, indeed the whole matter of contentment and of physiological self-satisfaction, are worthy of notice. Fear, conscious or subconscious, 
ordinarily maintains, even at great and varied cost, this contentment, and at times 
almost instinctively. Contentment, rational self-satisfaction, has its roots extended 
into nearly everything in life. 
It is related, for example, very closely to love. In a recent novel („Troubled Tranton“) by W. E. Norris, published in 1916, in England please observe, purely by 
chance I find this statement: 
„-she had really loved him almost from the very beginning. 
From the very beginning, at all events, she had had a feeling about him that she 
had never had about anybody in the world before. 
Asked what sort of a feeling, she replied: 'The sort of feeling that one gets when 
one's clothes fit absolutely. It's a rich and rare sensation, but you wouldn't understand it, I suppose’. 
He understood well enough to be wildly exultant, and for a minute or two, as eloquent...,” etc., etc., etc. 
This is a rather striking illustration to come from a novel writ54 
ten by an English literary observer and therefore really a „knock“, quite unscientific but certainly timely, on the highly commendable lack of tightness in the average tailor-made clothes of English men and women. This recalls in like manner 
the feelings of the fine lady of intelligence who assured Herbert Spencer, as his 
diary tells, that the consciousness of being perfectly well dressed gave her „a 
peace such as religion cannot give“ (E. A. Ross). 
And comfort, I have tried to show, is indispensable to a high efficiency, and I 
must not allow you to forget or to mistake that point. It isn't merely a matter of 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 45 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 45 (57)
creature-comfort, but it is a matter of efficiency as well, and efficiency both 
physical and mental. 
Fitness. „The sort of feeling that one gets when one's clothes fit absolutely“, as 
Norris puts it, (and he is a close observer and withal a man) comes only from 
„fit“ness, from an absolute fit, not tightness. We need next see what that means, as 
applied to clothing, for the term might easily mislead. To me, two criteria are essential, one of a general and the other of a particular nature. First, a uniform snugness with a reasonable amount of looseness for the organism as a conscious and 
living and variously active „machine“ with vital and mental processes to carry on, 
within the clothes. We have already discussed this matter of body-fit and how it is 
compatible with a uniform looseness. 
Second, fitness to each unique individuality. As has been pointed out, fit appears 
to be very well brought about in a fitting of clothes-types. At least ninety-nine out 
of every hundred not-deformed men could be fitted by a reasonable number of 
well-developed factory-types of clothes, and I believe better than the average custom tailor would accomplish it for each unique individual. There is a relative fitness for his clothing, (uniform snugness so far as compatible with an equally uniform looseness!); general appropriateness; above all, appropriateness to the personality; and this usually (see below) involves a relative 
Unobtrusiveness. Indeed that is the next point I wish to emphasize. An essential thing about a well-fitting suit of clothes (remember we are not talking solely 
about the body any more, 
55 
for clothing must fit the dual, the multiple, personality), an important element of 
fitting a personality, is that it must be unobtrusive. That is my idea of a wellfitting suit of clothes: one which fits and is unobtrusive. 
 Obtrusiveness. Of course there are exceptional people in whom obtrusiveness 
is a necessity made a virtue. The clergyman, the detective, for example, the prostitute (see Robert in our little bibliography), the hospital-doctor, the „sport”, the 
politician, the butler, the army-general, the nursery-maid, the policeman, and a 
great many others, all wear clothes which should be obtrusive; their clothes' business is to be so. The widow wears her sombre-colored clothing, the sport his 
flashy checks, the cruel „Boches“ their pointed helmets. The cassock of the priest; 
the ultratightness of the clothes of the dude; the mere startling surprises of the 
female fishers of men (whether as husbands or lovers or both)-all such are a variety of „sandwich-men“ with their business glaring front and back. 
 Self-confidence is another form or aspect of the essential satisfaction arising 
from clothing-fitness. Protected, fearless initiative; unirritated, mind-free, normal 
manhood and womanhood, confident of its eternal and universal mastery, arise 
from rational self-satisfaction. Clothes help this in no small degree,- or hinder it. 
„Success“ has as one of its conditions a self-confidence, a fearlessness, and success in general usually is not probable without that self-confidence, this eye-toeye fearlessness of general criticism. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 46 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 46 (57)
Several writers, for examples H. Addington Bruce, the wellknown psychologic 
writer, and Bruce Barton, recently have called popular attention to this very practical relationship between success and self-confidence and wellfitting clothes. 
„Success” and clothing are inter-related. 
Adequate clothing and success. From my 1917 summer-school class in psychology at Harvard, men and women, twenty-four of them, averaging twentyeight years in age, there are answers to the general question, Why are „success“ 
and clothing interrelated? There are seventy-eight answers, made up of thirteen 
different reasons; the replies were written out carefully, but 
56 
spontaneously. (This summary of these reasons was kindly made for me by Miss 
Winifred D. Muhs of the Chicago Public Schools and two of her friends, to whom 
I extend my compliments and thanks.) 
A well-dressed person more easily gains the confidence of people in the business 
world. Fifteen answers said practically that. 
Consciousness of good personal appearance frees the individual from the fear of 
the most common form of adverse criticism. Fifteen also said practically that. 
The personality of an individual is judged, first of all, by his external appearance. 
(That is absolutely inevitable.) Eight replied thus. 
Those habitually well-groomed carry that neatness to things beyond clothing. (It 
suggests a neatness which is sure to be applied to other things.) Seven said this. 
Social advantages are frequently obtained as the result of pleasing personal appearance. Six gave this reply, in substance. 
First impressions are lasting with many individuals. Five suggested this. 
The appearance of having money carries with it the impression of the power to 
make money. Five said so. 
To see an individual well-dressed produces a pleasurable sensation in others and 
puts them in a favorable mental attitude toward the individual. (Empathy.) Five
answered thus. 
Being well-dressed has an unconscious effect on the carriage of the individual, 
and conversely a good carnage promotes a desire for good clothing. Three said 
this. 
Being well-dressed has an effect upon the emotions of the individual, such as joy, 
ecstasy, etc. Three answers. 
Clothing often reflects the habits of living, such as home influences. Two suggested this. 
Being well-dressed requires a certain amount of cleanliness, therefore is hygienically worth while. Two gave this idea in answer. 
Half the world is being bluffed by the other half; dressing well helps your bluff. 
Two answered in that way, both of them men. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 47 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 47 (57)
57 
Miss Muhs almost summarized the whole matter, and especially well from a 
feminine viewpoint, by one of her own answers: „If you feel right, you can get 
good results“. Two implications come from this intuition, both good clothespsychology: If you are well-dressed you will „feel right“; and „success“ depends 
on getting „good results“. The conclusion is various, but interesting. 
Now those are answers to the question as to how „success“ is aided by clothes, 
from young men and women, mostly teachers. They probably represent the unbiased opinions of people who have so immediate special concern with clothes in 
any way, aside from what every one (hereabouts) has. 
Appearances, remember if you please, may rise far above the reality. One's 
clothes may be far better than his soul, his mentality, his body, or his bankaccount. But none the less, till every lass and madam and „man Jack“ is a philosopher, and a Stoic philosopher aft that, the wise man in an average social 
community will not ignore appearances,-unless, at least, he be well fixed above 
that community. 
It is certain that the philosopher, even the amateur philosopher, can rise above his 
clothing. It is still more certain that philosophers (Zenos and such) are scarce, not 
to say rare and obsolescent and very nearly extinct, so far as practical affairs are 
concerned. One sees them oftenest perhaps in the modern representatives of the 
secular hermits, the men who live secluded lives more or less alone, and therefore 
tend to lose the clothes-consciousness with the clothes-fears and the need of protection. This relation of adequate personality-fit of one's apparel, to his „success“ 
from the „low world's level stand“, involves many principles of human nature and 
of human personal and social motivity. They will gradually be worked out, but not 
here. 
First appearances and „success”. For any who doubts that clothing is related to 
„success“, I report some typical and actual cases. I asked the members of one of 
my classes to recount actual personal or observed experiences in which the being 
welldressed was of actual benefit, actual aid or the contrary, to success. I venture 
more or less exactly to transcribe a few of these instances from „real life“: 
58 
A young woman: „I was to have an interview in ----- in reference to a position as 
instructor in a settlement-work home there. I wore plain tailor-made clothes. The 
lady was evidently impressed by my appearance. She had never seen me before, 
but before leaving for Boston, she offered me the position as „director“ in the institution, and writing to me afterward, said : 'Your tailor-made appearance as you 
stepped from the train made more than a pleasing first impression; it was indeed a 
striking one’, etc., etc“. 
Here is another: „I know two young men, one in particular, who is not at all sincere in any work, who is always losing his positions but who always obtains good 
ones. He ever makes it a point to be well-dressed and groomed when seeking interviews, and his dress and pleasing manner always 'land' him a place“. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 48 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 48 (57)
Another one: „The experience I had was in applying for positions and in that I 
heard that, on account of my being well* dressed as it was termed, meaning by 
that a medium apparel, tailored not extravagant, nor yet slack. The Faculty and 
Board thought the influence I might have on high-school girls to do away with the 
present-day foolish desire for display would be as great as the physical training. 
Impressions made on first appearance are often very lasting and very important 
for the applicant. If one is careful about appearances, employers can nearly always 
be sure their work will have the same care by their employees. Clean-cut people 
are always the winners and nearly always demand attention of others“. 
Here is another: „I recall a teacher who, though she paid high prices for the articles of clothing that she wore, but who did not dress well, tasty and neatly, was 
without a position for a number of years“. 
Another: „A teacher applying at the ----- Agency in person was so suitably 
dressed and harmoniously with her own personality, that she was offered the position on the spot, apparently regardless of recommendations, etc., by the Superintendent who happened to be watching“. 
Another one: „My brother in 1911 secured a position with 
59 
an electrical company in competition with six other men who were graduates of 
the same institution as he. The manager afterward told him that he was chosen for 
several reasons, one of which was the fact that his personal appearance, clothes, 
and general make-up were more pleasing than that of the other men“. Another: 
„Two years ago I was asked to make personal application for a teaching position. 
I considered that my obtaining the position 
was partly due to the fact that I was well-dressed. My suit was smart and becoming in color. All accessories were in excellent taste and the whole effect was good. 
I am sure my impressed the Superintendent, for he asked me very conscious nor 
more sure of myself“. 
“As a child of nine years“, says one, „our teacher always pupil to run her errands 
to other rooms in the building. In those days little girls wore aprons but there was 
one among us who wore fancy dresses and bobbing curls“. She was usually the 
favored one „except where some of us would first time m a new dress-not covered 
by an apron. I did not realize the significance of the attractive dress a few years 
later“. 
Another: „In Kansas the Board of Education depends a great deal on personal appearance in selecting their teachers. They must all visit the town, and as good 
clothes cover a great many faults-if they make an imposing appearance they are 
generally taken on that basis alone. They want a model for the pupils and I have 
known them to turn away a woman with a sloppy appearance“. 
Another: „Saw an experience in an employment-bureau some while in town. 
There was a large number of applicants of various stages of prosperity, judging by 
clothes and appearance. The proprietor or manager singled out a young man of 
about 20 years of age, because he was well groomed in personal appearance and 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 49 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 49 (57)
his clothes looked clean and well cared for. There was no other reason to choose 
him the waiting crowds except his general appearance of care“. 
60 
Here is the case (of almost historic interest in Boston and in New Hampshire) 
given in „Every Week“ by H. Addington Bruce, in September, 1916. 
„A good many years ago there arrived in Boston a young man whose total capital 
to begin business life was less than five dollars. Naturally, this did not carry him 
far; but it did carry him to a position as oyster-opener in a little all-night restaurant. Here he made the acquaintance of a 'night hawk' cab-driver, who became 
very friendly with him and promised that he would 'tip him off' to a better paying 
place at the first opportunity. 
One night the friendly cabby gave him the news he had been anxiously awaiting. 
'I've got another job for you’, he announced. 'They want a man behind the bar at a 
hotel where I have lots of friends. The job is yours for the asking'. And he named 
one of Boston's leading hotels. 
The young oyster-opener handed in his resignation, and hurried around to the hotel. The hotel manager, after one cold, appraising glance, curtly told him: 
'I've got nothing for you. Yes, a man was wanted; but we don't want anybody 
now'. 
It took the over-confident young man nearly a month to get back his too hastily 
resigned place in the restaurant. Meantime, if hungry and homeless, he used his 
eyes and ears and his mind to good advantage. Accordingly, when the cab driver a 
little later informed him again that a man was wanted at the hotel where he had 
already applied vainly, he did not rashly resign the place he held. Instead, he 
asked for a night off, and hunted up an acquaintance, a man of about his own 
build, but more prosperous. 
'Jack’, he said, 'I want you to lend me your Sunday clothes, walking-stick and all'. 
Next morning, after a good night's sleep, well shaved, and dressed better than he 
had ever been before, he called once more on the hotel manager. The latter, needless to say, did not recognize him. 
Politely he inquired what he could do for the well dressed 
61 
stranger listened attentively to his application, and expressed regret that he had 
nothing suitable to offer him. 
‘But’, persisted the applicant, ‘I understand that you want a man behind the bar'. 
‘That is true. But it is not a place that would suit you. What we want is a man to 
clean glasses and get rid of empty bottles'. 
‘I’ll take that place. When shall I begin work'? 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 50 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 50 (57)
This, I say, happened in Boston a good many years ago. As time passed, the 
young man prospered until long before his death, he was the owner of several big 
hotels. One of these was the very hotel where he had begun work as a glasswasher. You may be sure he never forgot that he owed his start in the hotel business to the wearing of a good - if borrowed - suit of clothes“. 
Many of my readers have seen and enjoyed the clever and interesting comedy, 
„The Tadlor-made Man”, developed by Harry James Smith out of Gabriel Dregley's „The Well-Fitting Dress-Coat”, and ably staged by Cohan and Harris. The 
cost of seeing it in money, bother, and time is a capital investment not only in 
delight, but in applied psychology as well. 
Just usefully to exemplify the important scientific principle that there are two 
sides to everything (unless it be a mother or a geometrical point) we may quote 
the only expression of doubt offered by my students. (Several others said they had 
had no experience of relation between clothing and success.): „I don't know personally of any case at all where the clothes have been the cause of a person's success.-It's usually the personality of the person that gets them by. I happen to know 
of one man who came up to Harvard from somewhere down South. He was about 
as poor as a church-mouse and if personal appearance had had anything to do with 
it, he wouldn't have gotten very far. His college life was successful-won scholarships and all sorts of things for his work. Also a very successful position in a law 
office. But I would call it ambition, personality and stick-to-it-tiveness, not 
clothes”. It may not be wholly unscientific to the conjecture that the clothes of this 
Harvard man “from somewhere down South“ were a not inconspicuous and factor 
in that personality, which according even to 
62 
the second and more immediate summer Harvard-man is what „gets them by“,-
whatever that may mean for psychology. 
Now those are actual illustrations which may serve as well as many more from 
any number that might be obtained, to emphasize that, in the estimation of most 
people, to be well-dressed is a distinct aid even to practical dollar-and-cent success. For a wider and deeper personality and its better values, nothing further need 
be said, for all recognize freely the meaning of the pragmatic „me“. 
First impressions really are of great practical importance because as „beginning 
stimuli“, sudden excitation, they impress the mind very strongly, and then through 
continuous action of the subconscious gain permanent influence. Physiologically, 
we have here a contrast-effect, a change, and a sudden one, in the environment 
(Verworn). We have the vigorous impression that comes from something wholly 
new and perhaps striking, striking certainly in the sense that it is the first impression obtained of that individual, making the base-neurogram in the cortex. Perhaps this is stronger, the first impression, in women-observers than in men. Perhaps in them, too, it is more intuitive and more emotional. 
Therefore is it that wives and sweethearts are the proper chaperons of men when 
they go to buy their clothes, whether made or to be made. This is something that 
perhaps is well worth consideration: that women in general are very much better 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 51 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 51 (57)
judges of well-dressed men than men are,-than they themselves, the buyers, are. 
And if the industrial side could in some way educate men actually to trust to their 
wives and sisters and sweethearts and mothers or even aunts, as to when their suit 
is fitting or not - fitting to the personality, remember, not to their body only, - it 
would be a distinct advantage in the securing of satisfied customers, and thereby 
of a better-dressed public. A woman is the ideal arbiter of manly clothing. 
Most women have distinctly a faculty of „sizing-up“ an appearance, especially of 
a man, which rests on their intuitive faculty, a power which in its quick and subconscious form men for the most part lack. Men are reasoning creatures, but 
women 
63 
can go through the reasoning process (as I have recently pointed out* anew), only 
they do it very quickly sometimes, and instinctively; but regularly it is just as accurate a product, and oftentimes far more so, than that which the man slowly 
could work out by that which we call reasoning. 
Uniformity, save of uniforms, is a crying wrong in general in our system of dress, 
but it is less true of women perhaps than of men. Among the more indigent people 
(with an apology to Kipling), we may say: 
 They are like as a row of pins, 
 For the Colonel’s lady an' Judy O'Grady 
 Are sisters [over] their skins“, 
as well as „under“. There might and should be far more personal latitude given to 
clothes. Instead, there is slavery to set styles, partly because of extensive factory 
manufacture and partly for the very different reason of adherence to the very latest 
mode. 
Dress-making is a typically feminine high-accomplishment; and properly speaking, as a matter of theory, each womanly woman might well make her own gowns 
and accessories, thus giving them a personality-fit in its logical limit of perfection; 
an uniqueness exalting to the unique personality making and wearing the clothes. 
As I see it, the „house“ that provides the men's clothing that will best fit the vast 
majority of personalities, in the long run is going to get more than its proportion 
of the business. On the other hand, the unobtrusiveness which is so essential in a 
welldressed man and woman is sure to be lacking in a general servility to style 
and fashion. On the third hand, again, overuniformity is sure to lessen the individuality in more important respects than clothing suggests, often, however, at a 
great common benefit. 
Uniforms in general for soldiers, policemen, firemen, sailors, etc., are clearly 
much more than a symbol of the quite indispensable esprit de corps. The uniforms 
one might almost say ex- 
____________________ 
(*) „Intuition“, Psychol. Review, XXIII, 6, Nov., 1916, pp. 465-483. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 52 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 52 (57)
64 
press the esprit de corps; they certainly preserve it. One cannot imagine an army, 
in these days, at least, (but recall the „Minute-Men“!) that didn't wear uniforms. 
The clothes of the private individual should be unobtrusive but should not be uniform, just as the individuality is sacred beyond any greater „unit“, because every 
conceivable such unit exists only for the furtherance of the individual; on no other 
base can Democracy, the Vast Cry of this urgent period, stand and endure. 
Evening-dress in the case of men is essentially uniform, and a uniform, although 
made of broadcloth instead of olive-drab cloth. As such, the wearing of it tends, 
and to a degree often noticeable, to merge the personality of the real man in a kind 
of unreal snobbery and pretense of class or group, in this case „fashionables“ or 
would-be-fashionables. Present evening male dress therefore is condemnable not 
only for its somberness and supposed stiffness and (frequently) tightness, but because of this unscientific uniformity which makes for impersonality precisely 
when the one thing important beyond all else is unique personality, the man. He is 
something usually worth while when encouraged to be in each case his own self 
rather than a fashionable in fashion's uniform. Better the mess-house garb in the 
lumbercamps of Newfoundland! Personality is there. 
The all-pervasive Burton's „Anatomy of Melancholy“, antique store of erratic 
wisdom, 1652, observes, „ . . . now most men are esteemed according to their 
clothes. In our gullish times, Cf. 1918 
whom you peradventure in modesty would give place to, as being deceived by his 
habit, and presuming him some great worshipful man, believe it; if you shall examine his estate he will likely be proved a serving man of no great note, my lady's 
tailor, his lordship's barber, or some such gull, a Fastidius Brisk, Sir Petronel 
Flash, a mere outside. Only this respect is given him, that wheresoever he comes, 
he may call for what he will, and take place by reason his outward habit“, And 
certainly is this last statement true in 1918 as in 1650 to a degree not supremely 
complimentary to the sincerity and ideals of human nature. First impressions prevail. And Burton again, but in regard to women's dress this time, quoting from 
Ovid: 
65 
 „Auferimur cultu, et gemmis auroque teguntur 
 Omnia; pars minima est ipsa puella sui“. 
It would be interesting to hear old Ovid's opinion of some of our contemporaries 
who have developed camouflage (not to say plain padding), apparently to its somatic, if not to its logical, limit, yet moderated in essential details since a century 
ago, even if developed in other respects. 
Deceits in clothes (aside from the adulteration or the substitution of their materials) have been numerous and are in some ways of much interest. Padding is an old 
aspect of it and usually has as its aim (save in deformities) apparently, the heightening of sexual attractiveness; one thinks of the broadened coat-shoulders of the 
male as quickly as of the bust-extenders of the female or of her hip-pads. 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 53 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 53 (57)
A peculiarly subtle sexual camouflage that I have recently noticed is a complete 
set of unbuttonable buttons and buttonholes down the front of a silk shirt-waist, 
the garment being properly closed by concealed means beneath. The psychology 
involved in such a device for producing situations suggests beautifully how the 
science is permeating even the most commercial phases of society! 
But the deceits of clothing would require a monograph for themselves to be adequately set forth and analyzed. 
The really well-dressed persons in general wear clothes which are not easily differentiated from the rest of their personality at all. Indeed, philosophically speaking, one's selfness includes all of his relationships. If you please, this is a matter of 
good philosophy, not merely a matter of hearsay, that a man's personality is absolutely all of that man's relationships, what James pointed out as the pragmatic Me. 
The psychology of clothing emphasizes it, as it is not hard to understand. Naturally, in a social community a man's clothes are part of his very self. It is a worthy 
philosophic proposition. Clothes are not something that he puts on and may 
wholly tal^e off; a parasite that bears no relation to his personality. The clothes a 
man wears are really part of his personality considered from a common-sense (the 
pragmatic) point of view. Therefore, they should fit into 
66 
it as well as on to it. They should be for whom they are made unobtrusive. They 
should be part of the individual. And then, properly and socially speaking, they 
are part of him. 
Thomas Carlyle in his classic „Sartor Resartus“ delineates this symbolic aspect of 
raiment once for all, but the work as a beautiful whole deals with man, not with 
man's clothes. But this symbolic aspect of our raiment may not profitably be ignored. 
Fine, expensive clothing implies wealth of the wearer or else the having of 
wealthy friends; and well-fitting clothes in like degree imply taste and culture. 
Therefore, to the cultured and the wealthy, fine and well-fitting clothing is right 
and normal. „Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy“, By the same token, however, 
it is a means of pretense to many who are neither cultured nor rich, but who are 
not positively adverse to being thought either, or even both; hence frequent gross 
extravagance. 
Initiative. The self-respect and self-confidence which seem to be, in fact, (however loath we may be to accept the fact), partly dependent on clothes in some persons, and in some persons largely so dependent, - this self-respect and this selfconfidence are intimately part and parcel of the essential initiative of every individual. Initiative stands for strong personality. If a man has not self-confidence, he 
will not have initiative. He will not „start“ things; nor keep them going. He will 
not have that self-confidence which is the necessary preliminary to normal success. He won't try to do things. With self-confidence, he is apt to have a larger 
amount of initiative. In my deliberate opinion self-confidence for the great mass 
of men and women is to some extent obviously dependent on being well-dressed. 
My own introspection when „all dressed up“ (and somewhere to go) emphasizes 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 54 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 54 (57)
freedom from the obsession of clothing, leaving a chance for untrammeled initiative. The „peace that religion cannot give“! 
I have tried to emphasize already and perhaps enough that self-confidence actually 
is part of the energy and the efficiency of the individual. So is this feeling, true or 
false!, of being of some account in the world and on an equality with the best or 
67 
even with the richest! And even if a man is well-known to be indigent, a downand-outer even, if you will, a rather large per cent of men and women, as a matter 
of fact, will take the counterfeit at its face value, for snobs are not only snobbish 
and most despicable, but often shallow and insincere even at that. The snob sees 
no deeper into a man than his underclothes, at furthest. 
For the most part, the „hobo“, the truly down-and-outer, does not appear even 
among snobs well-dressed; and only rarely is the highly „successful“, (that is, 
merely rich) business-man positively ill-dressed however much of a philosopher 
he may be. For practical business purposes, then, clothing certainly does, as Hillman says, „proclaim the man“. There is no doubt of the numerous exceptions are 
not relatively numerous, but only seem so because we notice the sartorially exceptional cases and seldom the vast majority of the well-dressed, because, as we have 
seen in the philosophy of dress, these are unobtrusive. 
To young people and to middle-aged people the clothes proclaim the man more 
exactly, of course, than to elderly people, who, wiser and broader oftentimes, realize how inexpressibly complex are human social nature and human motivity, and 
so look for more caprice in the matter of clothing than their juniors allow for. 
The discomfort of ill-fitting clothes may not readily be exaggerated. Personally, 
although custom tailors have made my clothes since I was fifteen at least, I know 
that the sum of the clothing discomforts is very considerable, and of very great 
practical importance; that is, as far as constructive mental efficiency goes, at least. 
My continual aim, save when in the cold, is to get offending garments off as soon 
and as much as possible. Coat-collars behind may be too high; waist-coats too 
tight; or too short; trousers too waistly tight; their legs too long; the arm-holes too 
small; the coat-sleeves too long; and an irregular fitness all over the body. Then 
add scratchy hard collars and tight shoes and hot hats and squeaky shoes and 
ephemeral socks and ill-fitting underwear, and it is certain that to a man or woman 
whose efficiency is closely related to his freedom of mind 
68 
and to his relative comfort, the clothing-matter is one of much importance. The 
multiform discomforts of clothes are an important economic factor, one worth 
attention from the consistent economist. 
Pockets numerous and roomy that may be freely used are noteworthy features in 
truly comfortable and efficient raiment,-as many officers in Army and Navy ser-
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 55 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 55 (57)
vice recently have learned through their enforced negation. Few women know 
what they miss by their stinginess in pocketry. 
Purely, of course, as a rough judgment, I believe that the discomforts of people of 
relatively free efficiency that come from ill-fitting clothes, in various ways, detract very considerably from their practical efficiency. As I look back over my 
workhours and see how very many of them were disturbed, not to say spoiled, by 
various kinds of discomforts of ill-fitting clothes, of one kind or another, I judge 
that on the average, fully ten per cent of inefficiency may come from the lack of 
proper, that is, primarily, comfortable, clothing. We will now say nothing of the 
unhappiness itself, although we have an inherent right to contentment,-and to 
happiness, if we can reach and keep it! 
Personal bodily modesty is a clothes-topic whose psychology and sociology 
scarcely need discussion in our little Sartor Resartus Dissectus. It is simple and 
sad enough: the young women and even the no-longer-young women use their 
clothing as well as their lack of clothing to advertise their bodies. No one has discussed this more ably, perhaps, than Professor Winfield Scott Hall, well known 
for his widespread lectures (and booklets) on social hygiene as well as for other 
important things. He points out that a young woman should use her clothes, if at 
all, as part of an attractive and love-worthy and marriage-worthy personality,-
never in such ways as to advertise her person. This logical and psychological opposition between persons and personality seems to be the keynote of the whole 
sex-modesty matter in its relation to clothes. (See Havelock Ellis for the anthropology and the psychology of the subject, in the reference-list below.) 
The base-principle of this matter is that clothing has created 
69 
the concept-feeling complex which we designate as immodesty when used in reference to nudity and to naked human bodies in modest posture. The other basefact is that clothing can be far more inflammatory than nudity - a clothed body 
more lascivious than a naked body. „Clothes have made modesty, not modesty 
clothes”. Ellis has made this as plain as it can be. 
At the same time, I have long had the impression that one consideration which 
somewhat opposes this proposition in its bare form has been ignored (or I think so 
from memory) by Ellis, Hall, etc. Namely, that in some lands at least (notably the 
Congo-see Cureau's important „Savage Man in Central Africa”, recently translated) caresses of all kinds are so frank and so universally common and so much a 
matter-of-course that bodies of the opposite sex have neither the erethistic 
strength nor the insistence as stimuli that they have for persons where some restraint is fairly common. Consistent satiety would provide no continuing motive 
toward the development of either or clothing. And coldness of the climate by itself 
is reason enough for clothing away from the equator; and the heat of the equator 
reason enough for its absence there. Second Avenue, New York, early in August, 
1917, exhibited on its fire-escapes along the elevated railroad as good an illustration as one need have that modesty in the conventional „proper“ sense is easily 
forgot even by people of the highest respectability whenever life and death or 
www.modetheorie.de 
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 56 (57)
www.modetheorie.de
Dearborn, The Psychology of Clothing, 1918, 56 (57)
even extreme discomfort are involved in being „modest“. Like some other things 
„modesty“ either is sometimes superficial or an obsession. 
F. Boyle (see reference in the list below) is typical of the few who like to expatiate on the harmfulness of clothes as covering of the body. 
The Art of Scientific Appareling. If the corollaries of the foregoing essay into the
psychology of clothes and their wearing be not too indefinite for general acceptance (and perhaps they are not), it is clear that there can be no „laws“ social and 
much less official for scientifically clothing the population. In the centuries past, 
all such attempts (mostly sumptuary) to legislate have been abandoned forthwith, 
at first de facto but 
70 
soon de jure, as unnatural interference with personalities, whether costermongers 
or earls. The Quakers have done best in this direction, but only because they have 
insisted on a relative negation of the personal „fit“-ness, adaptation, of their raiment. 
It is, then, to the personal „laws“ or sanctions of scientific appareling that 
physiopsychology must apply itself. Clearly enough, these sanctions may be as 
scientific, as detailed, as elaborate, almost as the relations, physical and mental, of 
the human and his environment 
To be well-clothed, in the sense of this monograph is to have good taste in many 
things, one of the surest general indices of substantial intelligence; and is to have 
a good realization not only of the pragmatic Me, (the only kind with two legs to 
stand on) but of this Me's intricate relations psychical and material with its effective and ever-flowing and ever-changing environment, as intricate qualitatively 
even as itself. The female (horrid but necessary word!) with her superior intuition 
will always remain the passed-mistress of this personal art, and science can do 
much, but always only in an individual case, to suggest the basal sanctions for the 
guidance of her habitual intelligence. 
