SPOTLIGHT :  ‘ I WANT TO BRING HOLLYWOOD TO PAKISTAN ’ 
Mohammad Kamran JawaidPublished April 18 , 2021 1
Michael Shannon in Echo Boomers -Photo by the writer
Omer Paracha walks over to his garden , where I ’ ve been seated by the house ’ s security .  “ I hope you don ’ t mind ,  ” he says , telling me that with elders in the family , they ’ re taking every precaution possible regarding Covid-19 . Of course , I don ’ t mind . 

Omer , a young producer from Hollywood , whose debut film — Echo Boomers starring Alex Pettyfer , Patrick Schwarzenegger and Michael Shannon came out last year — seems nothing like your average showbiz producer . He doesn ’ t walk the walk , or talk the talk of a know-it-all bigshot who ’ s got it made . There ’ s a sense of untarnished innocence in the way he explains himself , that ’ s not really there in the industry . His simplicity , mind you , does not mean that there ’ s a lack of perspicacity . 

A graduate of Lynn University , Florida , where he did his Bachelors and Masters in multimedia and design , Omer learned filmmaking before venturing into production . 

Like his elder brother , Habib Paracha , who has produced several films in Hollywood , and whose interview Icon carried last year , Omer doesn ’ t want to just do films . He has a bigger plan in the works . 


The young producer of Monstrous and Afterward , set for release between this and next year , Omer Paracha is slowly putting in place plans to make a bridge between Pakistani and Hollywood cinema 
 
 “ Echo Boomers was my stepping stone to get into the industry ,  ” he says with a sense of candid calmness .  “ I ’ m , hopefully , stepping into bigger features .  ” 

Omer Paracha -Photo by the writer
Echo Boomers is about five college graduates who , struck down by the debt and bad economy in America , rob the rich ( who are insured , by the way ) as a way to get even . The film , surprisingly , has engaging performances from Patrick Schwarzenegger ( Arnold Schwarzenegger ’ s son ) and Michael Shannon ( The Shape of Water , 99 Homes , General Zod from Man of Steel )  , with a fresh twist of perspective . To the youngsters in the film , it was more about making a statement of the injustices , rather than just stealing , Omer explains .  “ The film has a millennial-meets-Gen-Z vibe to it ,  ” he says , clarifying that , since the characters are dealing with deep personal problems , the heists felt like a release .  
 
 “ This was a true story . This actually happened in Chicago to people , they ’ re in jail now .  ” The director , Seth Savory , Omer tells me , knew them .  
 
 “ I guess , I found my niche in realistic stories ,  ” he says , not that he ’ s saying no to more fictional fare . His next film , in fact , is Monstrous , a horror set in the 1920s , starring Christina Ricci . It ’ s about a single mother who runs away from an abusive husband and contends with supernatural forces , he explains . The film is in post-production . 

Hayley Law
Taking out his phone , Omer plays me the sizzle-teaser of the film that ’ s made for festivals . The era really gives the film a distinctive visual appeal , unlike routine horror films . 

Like Echo Boomers , the project was brought to Omer by a friend , and Ricci was already attached when he came on board , he says .  “ I have been a fan since her Casper days ,  ” he laughs . 

Immediately after Monstrous is Afterward , his third film that ’ s now on the floors , starring Aaron Eckhart ( Thank You for Smoking , The Dark Knight )  , Terrance Howard ( Iron Man , Hustle and Flow ) and George Lopez ( Spy Next Door , Rio )  .  
 
 “ It ’ s a thriller about a man who loses his wife and child in an accident .  ” There ’ s a twist that , Omer explains , unfortunately for the time being , remains confidential . 

Did Habib , his brother who already has five films to his credit , inspire him to become a producer , or was it his own , conscious decision ?  
 
 “ Was it a conscious decision to produce films ? Yes . It wasn ’ t something my brother helped with in any way . He was doing his own thing , but I made my own connections .  ” 

A few weeks later , we meet again at his place , this time in a room that is pulling double-duty as a temporary placeholder for renovations or shifting ( I didn ’ t feel it polite to ask )  . Standing at one end of the room is a heavy-duty tripod and , at the other end , some fishing equipment . The help shifted stuff for Omer ’ s other brother while we discussed Zack Snyder ’ s four-hour cut of the Justice League . 

Alex Pettyfer
During the conversation , I realise that Omer is into comic book mythologies . He would like to produce a movie from a high-profile comic book character , he says , showing me concepts he ’ s already cooking up with fellow partners . His question , though , is why isn ’ t anyone doing high-profile films in Pakistan ? 

Despite explaining the dire circumstances of the industry and the creative deficits therein , I have no answer for his simple question . Omer has a hard time believing why we ’ re not able to deliver stories that reach out to the world . 

Again , taking out his phone like the last time , he shows me a commercial he directed for Paraval , his fashion outlet in the US .  ( Fun-fact , he interjects before playing the clip : the opening of his brand ’ s Los Angeles store led to an association that launched Echo Boomers )  . 

The minute-long fashion film was shot on a RED camera , and had every bit of the spiffy zeal one sees in a high-profile fashion commercial in Pakistan . Only , it was made at a fraction of the cost . 

Omer suggests that since we claim not to have international-level talent working technical jobs in the film business , why not create a bridge between Hollywood and Pakistan , where technicians are brought in to train people ? 

The idea is noble , I tell him , and all it needs is the right push . He says that that ’ s his intention all along .  
 
 “ I want to make a merger where I can bring Hollywood to Pakistan , and do movies where Hollywood and Pakistani cinema ties together . At the end of the day , there is such a big market for multicultural films , so why can ’ t we work together as one industry ?  ” he questions . 

Patrick Schwarzenegger 
 “ I ’ m not just talking about simply learning from Hollywood . The conversation should be about gelling two cultures here . It ’ s about bringing two worlds together .  ” 

Omer then confides about another project he ’ s developing — a strong story on female rights , injustice and empowerment . The screenplay , whose fast-paced first act I ’ ve read , is currently being written by Omer and a screenwriter from Hollywood . The still-untitled film , about a woman standing up for herself and others , will be shot in Pakistan and the US .  
 
 “ Without giving too much away ,  ” he tells me ,  “ it ’ s about getting an important issue out to the world . It ’ s a sensitive topic and a matter of big relevance .  ” 

Omer wants to direct a film eventually , though it might not be this particular film . With Monstrous and Afterward set for release between this and next year ( depending on how Covid-19 turns out )  , the young producer is slowly realising his plans to make a bridge between Pakistan and Hollywood . 

It ’ s a huge undertaking , but he ’ s in no hurry , he tells me with the same calm earnestness that I heard in our first conversation . From the looks of it , it ’ s just a matter of time before things start coming together . 

Published in Dawn , ICON , April 18th , 2021