Elsa Klensch , longtime fashion correspondent for CNN , dies at 92
Elsa Klensch in a jacket with a floral decoration on a lapel
Elsa Klensch was one of CNN ’ s first hires .  ( Anderew Eccles ) 
BY STEPHEN BATTAGLIOSTAFF WRITER 
MARCH 5 , 2022 12 : 50 PM PT
Elsa Klensch , who over two decades brought fashion news to CNN ’ s global TV audience , has died in New York City , according to the network . 

CNN did not give a cause of death . Klensch was 92 . 

Klensch hosted the weekly series “ Style With Elsa Klensch ” from 1980 to 2001 . She traveled to major fashion centers around the world and presented trends and designers every Saturday morning .  
 
 “ Style ” became one of CNN ’ s most popular programs in its early years and Klensch emerged as one of the network ’ s signature on-air talents , especially as the channel ’ s reach expanded internationally . 

ADVERTISEMENT

Klensch gave dedicated followers of fashion in-depth reporting in an age before social media and bloggers , when consumer coverage of the industry was largely the province of glossy monthly print magazines . Broadcast TV network news divisions covered fashion , but did not have the time that CNN was able to provide as a 24-hour news service starting out in the 1980s . 

For years , Klensch was the only TV reporter at many fashion shows , elevating her status and giving her greater access to big names as coverage of the industry became more prevalent . 

Designers such as Miuccia Prada , Marc Jacobs and Karl Lagerfeld and supermodels such as Naomi Campbell and Christy Turlington all sat for Klensch interviews . Journalists covering fashion today cite Klensch as an inspiration . 

In 1999 , the New Yorker said Klensch “ reports on developments in design , on innovations in fabrics , and on mutations of hemlines as soberly as if she were covering the State Department .  ” 

Resorts World Theatre - AEG	PAID CONTENT
Resorts World Theatre - AEG
By LA Times
Resorts World Theatre in Las Vegas has officially opened its doors and has been welcoming sold-out crowds . 

Chris Wallace will have an interview show on CNN + four nights a week . 
COMPANY TOWN

After Zucker exit , CNN streams forward with a new service . What happens now ? 

March 2 , 2022

Klensch became a style icon herself , inducted into the International Best-Dressed Hall of Fame in 1990 . She did not accept garments from the companies she covered and received no clothing allowance from CNN , which was notoriously tight-fisted in its early years . 

Born Elsa Aeuschbacher just outside Sydney , Australia , Klensch began her journalism career in London in the 1960s . She began as a freelance business writer for Women ’ s Wear Daily . While working in Hong Kong , she met her husband , journalist Charles Klensch , then the Saigon bureau chief for ABC News . They were married in Vietnam in 1966 . 

Klensch moved to New York in the 1970s and toiled as a fashion editor for WWD , Vogue and Harper ’ s Bazaar . She freelanced for New York newspapers until an 84-day strike shut them down in 1978 , which led her to try television . 

Klensch was among the original cadre of specialty correspondents and experts hired by CNN founder Ted Turner when the network launched in 1980 — a hedge against the possibility of slow news periods . 

Klensch left CNN in 2001 after its then-parent Time Warner merged with AOL . She continued to write and lecture on fashion and wrote several mystery novels . 