Dress and Identity
Mary Ellen Roach-Higgins
Joanne B. Eicher
Authors’ Addresses: Mary Ellen Roach-Higgins, 12 Pin Oak Trail,
Madison, WI 53717; Joanne B. Eicher, Design, Housing, and Apparel,
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108.
Abstract
Development of a theoretical framework for understanding linkages between identity and dress depends on
careful selection and definition of terms and development of a broad, holistic view of Social Aspects of Dress. A
comprehensive definition of dress includes both body modifications and supplements to the body. Properties of
these modifications and supplements can be cross-classified with sensory responses they evoke. Because dress
functions as an effective means of communication during social interaction, it influences peoples’ establishing
identities of themselves and others. An individual’s self incorporates identities based on assigned and achieved
positions within social structures, especially those that organize kinship, economic, religious, and political
activities. Identities communicated by dress are also influenced by technology and society-wide moral and
aesthetic standards for dress. Specific types and properties of dress that communicate identity may change through
time in response to economic, demographic, and other societal changes.
Our general, long-range goal is to update and expand
upon a theoretical framework we first presented in 1965 as a
series of overviews for a book of readings on the social
significance of dress (Roach & Eicher, 1965). In this paper we
limit ourselves to four specific tasks. The first is to urge use of
the term dress by social scientists rather than other frequently
used terns such as clothing, adornment, and costume. In this
effort we offer a definition of dress and a classification system
for types of dress based on this definition. We also present a
critique of other terms that scholars use in attempts to identify
the concept we believe is best expressed by the term dress.
Our second task is to explain why we believe that Social
Aspects of Dress is a better name for a field of study than the
one used as an umbrella term for a 1989 Association of
College Professors of Textiles and Clothing (ACPTC-now
ITAA) Post-Conference Workshop, that is, Sociological and
Psychological Aspects of Dress. Third, we comment on
functions of dress, emphasizing the importance of the social
function of dress as a means of communication. Last we
consider, in more depth than we have before, how meanings
communicated by dress relate to establishing identity.
A Definition of Dress
In 1965 we suggested that the word dress was broadly
interchangeable with several other terms used by social
scientists. Included in this list of terms were appearance,
clothing, ornament, adornment, and cosmetics. Since then, we have opted to use the word dress in a more specific way
than is possible with these other terms. We have also,
through time, developed a definition of dress that is unambiguous, free of personal or social valuing or bias, usable in
descriptions across national and cultural boundaries, and
inclusive of all phenomena that can accurately be designated as dress. According to this definition, dress of an
individual is an assemblage of modifications of the body
and/or supplements to the body (Eicher & Roach-Higgins,
in press). Dress, so defined, includes a long list of possible
direct modifications of the body such as coiffed hair, colored skin, pierced ears, and scented breath, as well as an
equally long list of garments, jewelry, accessories, and
other categories of items added to the body as supplements.
The classification system (see Table 1) indicates subtypes of body modifications and supplements and provides a scheme for cross-referencing these sub-types with their
properties. On the basis of this cross-referencing, a tattoo
can be identified as a body modification that changes surface design and color of the skin and a permanent wave as
a modification that transforms shape and texture of hair.
Rhinoplasty is a transformation of shape and volume that -
involves the muscular-skeletal system. Trousers and a rigid
bracelet are pre-shaped enclosures, each with specific properties. An A-line long coat, with patch pockets as structural
sub-units, qualifies as an enclosure, with its overall shape
dependent on wrapping, suspension, and preshaping of fabric. Earrings of many shapes, textures, and colors are
attachments that can be either inserted in ears or clipped on
with pressure. Parasols and many purses are hand-held
objects with innumerable variations in properties. Custom
sometimes requires that a parasol be held in place by a
person other than the one it shelters.
Our system for identifying dress imposes a somewhat
arbitrary conceptual separation between biologically determined body characteristics and dress, each of which is
Acknowledgments: This is a revised version of a paper presented for
discussion at the ACPTC Post-Conference Workshop: Sociological and
Psychological Aspects of Dress, Atlanta, GA, October 28-29, 1989.
Published as Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station Publication
No. 19,113.
Downloaded from ctr.sagepub.com at Serials Records, University of Minnesota Libraries on February 5, 2014
2
Table 1. Classification system for types of dress and their properties.’
*Eicher & Roach-Higgins, in press. This system is based on previous work as follows: Roach & Eicher (1973); Roach & Musa (1980). We wish to
acknowledge suggestions from various students and colleagues. Bruce Olds, University of Wisconsin-Madison journalism student, suggested the handheld category. Gigi Bechir, University of Minnesota sociology student, suggested that breath can be modified. A discussion with colleagues at a Design,
Housing, and Apparel seminar at the University of Minnesota convinced us to use types rather than forms of dress.
bBoth body modifications and body supplements can be further classified according to (a) general body locus (e.g., head, neck, trunk, arms, legs) or (b) more specific locus (e.g., lips, nose, eyelids or lashes, ears, hands, ankles, feet, breasts, genitals).
always perceived in relation to, or potentially in relation to,
the other as a gestalt. However, we believe that accurate
identification of types of dress and their perceptually identifiable characteristics is an essential preliminary to analy- ses of dress in general and to our analysis of dress as a nonverbal means of communicating identity specifically.’ Also,
dress can be considered simultaneously from two viewpoints : as the total repertoire of body modifications and
supplements that a particular social group makes available
to its members (e.g., American dress, men’s dress, adolescents’ dress) or as a particular display of body modifications and supplements that a specific individual assembles
from an available repertoire for a particular time and place.
1We use the word dress as a gender-neutral collective noun to designate
either a social group’s body modifications and supplements (e.g., American dress, military dress, occupational dress, human dress) or those of
an individual (e.g., that boy’s dress, that girl’s dress). Colleagues have
reported concern from male students that the word dress is gender
specific. Although the word may carry either masculine or feminine
meanings depending upon certain inflections (dress es), modifiers (a
dress), or conversions to verb form (dressing to the right or left), these
usages do not conflict with the collective meaning. They are also
consistent with English usage set forth in The Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.), The Random House Dictionary of the English Language
(2nd ed.), and Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the
English Language.
Downloaded from ctr.sagepub.com at Serials Records, University of Minnesota Libraries on February 5, 2014
3
The Term Dress Versus Other Terms
We have presented our definition of dress in order to
compare the usefulness of the word dress, as a technical
term, with other terms found in literature concerned with the
social aspects of dress. We support dress as the best technical term because other terms do not identify all possible
modifications and supplements to the body that we believe the
term dress includes. In the sections that follow, we argue that
each of several terms proffered as alternates (appearance,
adornment, apparel, clothing, costume, and fashion) are neither as accurate nor as comprehensive as the term dress.
Dress Versus Appearance
In one way, dress is less than appearance because it
does not include, as appearance does, features of the undressed body, such as its shape and color as well as expression through gesture and grimace. In another way, dress is
more than appearance for it includes aspects of body modifications and supplements recorded by all the senses-not
just sight alone as the term appearance implies. The blind,
for example, though sightless, do have impressions of dress
that depend on tactile, auditory, olfactory, and gustatory
responses. Although the gustatorial experience of taste is
not generally included in discussions of dress, our reference
is not facetious. Instead it recognizes such behavior as the
daily rituals of many Americans who go through cosmetic
modification of taste as they use rinses, pastes, and gels in
oral hygiene.
Dress Versus Adornment or Ornament
Adornment and ornament fail as useful terms in explaining what the form of body modifications or supplements is and is not, because they impose restrictive value
judgments regarding aesthetic quality which the term dress
does not. Thus a modification or supplement is only eligible for classification as adornment or ornament if the
classifier assigns it some degree of positive value on the
basis of his/her own interpretation of socially acquired
cultural rules or standards for what can be considered beautiful or attractive. This restriction implies that a person who
judges certain modifications and supplements as of no aesthetic value automatically drops them from any consideration of dress.
Dress Versus Clothing
In the past, various writers have attempted to use clothing as a comprehensive term to include both body modifications and supplements. Despite these efforts to convert the
word clothing into a usable technical term for identifying
these broad categories of dress and various sub-categories
within them, a major shortcoming remains: The word clothing is most frequently used to emphasize enclosures that
cover the body and generally omits body modifications.2 In
addition, the word clothing, like adornment, almost inevitably introduces personal or social values. For example, if it
covers, it surely must protect and be good. If it does not
cover certain body parts, it may be immodest and bad, at
least to some people.
Dress Versus Apparel
The most serious limitation of the tenn apparel is that it
does not include body modifications. In this regard it is
similar to the word clothing.3 3
Dress Versus Costume
The term costume frequently identifies the body supplements and modifications that indicate the &dquo;out-of-everyday&dquo; social role or activity. Thus we propose that the word
costume be reserved for use in discussions of dress for the
theater, folk or other festivals, ceremonies, and rituals.
Dress Versus Fashion
The term fashion lacks the precision of the word dress
for it refers to many different kinds of material and nonmaterial cultural products (e.g., houses, music, automobiles, scientific theories, philosophy, recreation). Further,
like ornament, it forces positive and negative value judgments on body modifications and supplements and their
properties on the basis of their relative positions within a
fashion cycle of introduction, mass acceptance, and obsolescence. In addition, not all types of dress qualify as
fashions. For example, religious dress in many societies
resists fashion change and is, therefore, automatically excluded from a study of fashion.
The Social Perspective
Prior to the late 1940’s (Sybers & Roach, 1962), commentary on the social meaning of dress came primarily
from social philosophers and social scientists who embedded the topic of dress within general commentaries on
human behavior. In the 1950s writers from within textile
and clothing programs in home economics began to produce journal articles and pamphlets on the topic. By the
1960s and 1970s, development of formal courses and research dealing with the social significance of dress led to
publication of books by specialists in the textiles and clothing field. Launching of the Clothing and Textiles Research
Journal (CTRJ) in 1982 by the national organization
(ACPTC-now TTAA) offered a new opportunity for presentation and exchange of ideas by individuals focusing on
social aspects of dress, as well as by individuals in related
substantive fields. As we prepared this paper, we reviewed
2Although clothing is used more than any other term in the tables of
contents of the Clothing and Textiles Research Journal (CTRJ) and
books by individuals in the textiles and clothing area, its popularity may
be somewhat misleading. Especially in regard to the CTRJ, emphasis is
at least partly due to the inclusion of a number of articles on apparel
design, textiles, and retailing where a custom for designating body
enclosures that cover as clothing has been entrenched.
3DeLong (1987) uses the term apparel in her concept of ABC (Apparel/ Body/Construct). Her concept is primarily related to visual, aesthetic
responses and therefore largely excludes other senses. Although similar to the idea of appearance, the ABC focuses on the visual total of body
and dress. We refer readers to DeLong’s definition as a model in clarity.
Downloaded from ctr.sagepub.com at Serials Records, University of Minnesota Libraries on February 5, 2014
4
the content of and terminology used in the latest editions of
13 books that are concerned with social aspects of dress and
are authored by, edited by, or have major contributions
from people in the textiles and clothing field (see Appendix).~ We also examined 19 issues of the CTRJ (through
Summer 1989). One of our purposes was to ascertain
something about trends in use of terms like dress, clothing,
and costume which were discussed in the previous section.
Another was to review the degree of emphasis on various
cultural, social, and psychological factors related to dress.
Yet another was to assess directions in development of
concepts and theoretical frameworks.
The trend among our colleagues to give about equal
attention in their publications to cultural, social, and psychological factors related to dress led us at first to consider
recommending psycho-sociocultural aspects of dress as an
appropriate name for this area of academic interest. However, we modified this stand on the basis of our review of
our own work and that of others. In this review we noted a
pattern for qualifying the words psychological and cultural
with socio- or social- as prefixes. We decided, consequently, to choose social as a term that unites a social
science approach to the study of dress. Our rationale was
that only through social interaction do people, as psychologically unique individuals, learn to interpret, utilize, and
modify socially constructed meanings of dress within their
cultural settings, contemporary and historical.
We, therefore, recommend Social Aspects of Dress as
identifier of an academic field that unites a subset of scholars within ITAA. An area so-named is not the same as
sociology, psychology, or cultural anthropology. Instead,
although scholars with this focused interest share concepts,
terminology, and research methods with these and various
other disciplines, they are developing a unique approach to
theory and research. In this regard, we would like to go on
record as noting that, in each of the 13 books reviewed and
many of the CTRJ articles, we find both ,incipient and
extended theoretical frameworks. We concur with
Nagasawa, Kaiser, and Hutton (1989) that scholars emphasizing study of the social aspects of dress need not be selfconscious about the discipline of origin for a specific idea
or concept but must proceed to accumulate and organize
knowledge in an orderly and meaningful way. The framework that emerges will be unique because scholars with this
focused interest can project a holistic view of the objects
and processes of dress that others may not.
Functions of Dress: Alterant of Body Processes
and Medium for Communication
Body modifications and supplements, which constitute
dress, function as alterants of body processes or as media
for communication. Although the communicative function
is our major concern in consideration of the social aspects
of dress, we must balance this concern against the primacy
of biological existence that precedes the social. Therefore, we first discuss ways in which types of dress act as alterants
of body processes.
Body modifications may alter body processes in either
positive or negative ways. Removal of teeth or plastic
surgery for cosmetic reasons are examples of body modifications that can directly put health at risk. On the positive
side, removal of infected teeth or the use of tightly wrapped
pressure bandages over certain wounds can be supportive to
good health.
Body supplements act as alterants of body processes as they serve simultaneously as microphysical environment and as interface between body and the macrophysical environment. As a microenvironment, they interact with
the body. Woolen socks or a nylon parka may, for example, alter ambient temperature and concentration of water
vapor, hence temperature and water balance of the body, in
ways that may be either helpful or harmful in regard to
body processes. As interface, body supplements may deflect outside forces such as sunlight, the effect of cold
wind, or the thrust of weapons or be extensions of the body that help in task performance. Gloves, pockets, shoes, and
eyeglasses increase the body’s capabilities as a mechanism for grasping intractable objects, as a beast of burden, as a moving object, or as a navigator through the limits of
space provided by the macrophysical environment. Note
should be made that some body supplements have dual
usage. Tight wrappings of waist or feet are indeed enclosures, but they can also act as tools for modification of
body shape.
The list of possible meanings communicated by type of
dress is seemingly endless. Dress may, for example, make
a statement about age, gender, social class, school affiliation, or religion. Ultimately the meanings communicated
by the objectively discernible types and properties of dress
depend on each person’s subjective interpretations of them.
Further, meanings that a person attributes to various outward characteristics of dress are based on his/her socialization within a particular cultural context as well as on the
improvisations the person exercises when applying learned
meanings of dress within specific social situations. If we
refer back to some of the valuing terms mentioned earlier, we find that the naming of a type of dress as ornament or
adornment or a discussion of the aesthetic qualities of dress
belongs with discussion of the social function of dress as a
means of communicating individual and social standards
for aesthetically pleasing characteristics of dress. Likewise, designating a type of dress as protective clothing illustrates that certain examples of dress communicate that
they are likely to have positive effects on body processes.
Finally, we emphasize that meanings communicated
by dress may emanate from its basic type, one of its properties (e.g., color, shape), or a composite of its component
types and/or properties. Thus the color (a single property) of a businessman’s tie may be a more important indicator of
his identity than is his total ensemble of suit, shirt, tie,
socks, and shoes.
4We used the latest editions of the 13 books, but the dates of the first
editions are illuminating in assessing growth and development of our
academic specialization. Five books were published in the 1960s with
the first book dated 1965, four in the 1970s, and four in the 1980s.
Downloaded from ctr.sagepub.com at Serials Records, University of Minnesota Libraries on February 5, 2014
5
Dress as Communicator of Identity
Many authors cite Erikson’s paper of 1946 as the document that sparked social scientists’ interest in use of the
term identity in interpreting human behavior. Following that
time, the use of identity as a technical term has increased in the
social sciences, and it has tended to lose the psychoanalytic
orientation characteristic of Erikson’s work. By the 1960s it
was being transformed and utilized by individuals interested
in theories of symbolic interaction. Since we are using a
symbolic interactionist perspective as we present our ideas on
how dress-as a medium of communication-relates to
identity, we are particularly interested in works in which
aspects of both dress and identity have been discussed from
this perspective. Writings by Stone (1962), Goffman (1963,
1971), Stryker ( 1980), and Weigert, Teitge, and Teitge ( 1986)
fit into this category. Stone (1962) expanded the interactionist
approach beyond communication via discourse to include
communication via appearance (which he defmed to include dress as well as gesture and location) and highlighted
the fact that dress, because it may be seen in social encounters before conversation can be initiated, has a certain priority over discourse in the establishing of identity. Stryker
(1980) also incorporated the concept of identity and appearance into a conceptual perspective based on tenets of symbolic interactionism. Society and Identity, Toward a Sociological Psychology (Weigert et al., 1986) is valuable as a
resource because of its extensive review of literature on
identity as well as its appraisal of both the meaning of
identity and the relation of identity to the concept of self.
From the perspective of symbolic interaction theory,
individuals acquire identities through social interaction in
various social, physical, and biological settings. So conceptualized, identities are communicated by dress as it
announces social positions of wearer to both wearer and
observers within a particular interaction situation. Some
identities are assigned at birth. These identities include
those associated with body variations according to sex,
race, or deviations from average that a society may define
as handicaps as well as ethnic category of kinship group.
Through time the developing individual internalizes these
and many other identities, and no individual can expect to
acquire all conceivable identities. Also, no two people
encounter exactly the same environmental circumstances,
social and otherwise, for acquiring the ways of behaving
that lead to establishing of identities. Therefore, the identities for any one person, including those communicated by
dress, are uniquely personal. They are at the same time
completely social because they are socially acquired &dquo;selections&dquo; from socially constructed ways of attributing identities on the basis of social positions individuals fill. Associated with these positions are expected behaviors called
social roles, which are not elaborated upon in this paper.
Identity, Self, and Dress
We define self as a composite of an individual’s identities communicated by dress, bodily aspects of appearance,
and discourse, as well as the material and social objects
(other people) that contribute meaning to situations for
interaction. An individual can occupy a number of social
positions and hence can have a number of identities that
contribute to the total configuration of the self. The individual can reflect on these identities (self) and understand
that they both connect and separate him/her from others.
Overall, self is the cumulative result of socialization, which
includes adopting observed behavior of those who serve as
social referents (role models), following rules or directives
learned at the behest of others, and using trial and error in
social situations.
Stone (1962) elaborated on the nature of the situation
within which dress contributes to the acquisition of identities and the development of a sense of self. His position is
that a self acquires identities when &dquo;situated-that is cast in
the shape of a social object by the acknowledgement of his
[sic] participation or membership in social relations&dquo; (p.
93). Further, dress helps announce (communicate) identities for persons who are socially situated. Stone labelled
the communication of self through dress an individual’s
program. The appraisal by others of an individual’s program he called review. On the basis of their experience
through time with other people, individuals develop, in
advance of interaction, notions of how other people are
likely to react to their dress. If a person’s predictions of
reactions by others are accurate, the identity or identities
this person intends to present via dress will coincide with
that which others perceive. This coincidence in meaning is
what Stone refers to as the validation of the self that leads to
satisfactory social interaction. If, on the contrary, the meaning signalled by dress is different for presenter and reviewer, interaction may proceed with difficulty or be terminated. For example, an applicant for a white collar job who
appears for an interview in blue jeans and sweat shirt, without an explanation of extenuating circumstances that prevented presentation of self in expected white collar garb, may
be automatically deleted from consideration and have an interview cut short. In some cases, when program and review
do not coincide, the presenter may be deliberately courting a
negative review by some appraisers and positive by others.
As example, the young (e.g., punkers in the 1980s) sometimes
present programs in dress that they expect to be reviewed
negatively by their elders but positively by their age peers.
Identity, Social Structures, and Dress
An individual’s self and the identities this self incorporates are linked to positions the individual is assigned to or
achieves within social structures. Social structures typically arise within any society to integrate and direct kinship, economic, religious, and political activities.5 Dress
5In technically complex societies, social structures related to provision of education, health care, and recreation also are influential in establishing identity of an individual.
Downloaded from ctr.sagepub.com at Serials Records, University of Minnesota Libraries on February 5, 2014
6
confers identities on individuals as it communicates positions within these structures.
Within kinship groups, dress announces various identities. In many societies a wedding ring, but a small body
supplement, is sufficient to communicate identity as a
married person and to call forth expectations for behavior
appropriate to a person so identified. In America sibling
relationships, especially for twins, are sometimes indicated by identical dress. The idea of family identity is
exemplified by the design and color of Scottish tartans and
by the wearing of cloth of matching designs by members
of West African Yoruba families at weddings and birthday
celebrations.
The economic structuring of a society often calls forth
expressions of occupational identity via dress, particularly
when division of labor is complex. In mass society such
identities may be communicated by attachments as minimal
as badges or name tags or as all-encompassing as an
astronaut’s space suit. In between in volume are enclosures
such as a butcher’s apron, waitress’ uniform, mechanic’s
coveralls, or a surgeon’s gown and mask. Rank ordering of
occupational identities on the basis of their perceived social
value may also be made clear by dress, as in the case of the
hospital orderly’s white coat and pants versus the physician’s
street dress.
Political structures arise to organize and regulate power
within societies. Leaders in a political structure like a
monarchy take on public identities as representatives of
their state when they present themselves in rituals with
robes, crowns, and scepters. Political leaders in a democracy, by way of contrast, have no dress of state. Instead
they wear body supplements and modifications similar to
those of other citizens. Representatives of government in
the judicial and military realm wear special dress such as
robes and uniforms to verify their political identities in
public and to declare their right to power as allotted to them
, by the nation-state or other governmental unit. Sometimes
political affiliation may be an identity that for the most part
remains unexpressed in dress, discourse, or other behavior.
However, the fervor of a political campaign or a popular
uprising in protest of some political act or policy may result
in an individual’s flaunting of political affiliation by use of
pins, badges, armbands, unique hair arrangements, and other
forms of identifying dress. Specific examples can be found
in the dramatically changed dress that signalled and promoted the leveling of classes after the French revolution in
the 18th century and the establishing of communist regimes
in the U.S.S.R. and mainland China in the 20th.
Rules of conduct within religious groups may include
requirements for dress that clearly distinguish religious
leaders from followers. If they do, special assemblages of
body supplements and/or modifications establish identities
that set leaders apart from their followers and from nonadherents to their particular faith. Followers who have no
special dress for everyday may have dress for certain
ceremonies and rituals that declares their religious affiliation at the same time that it differentiates them from their
leaders. Among some religious groups, like the Hare
Krishna, daily dress identifies a whole community of believers, visibly setting them apart from the general society
and emphasizing the intensity of their beliefs and their
rejection of doctrines of others. Identities of a deity may
be objectified in descriptions of dress set forth in sacred
texts or in icons executed in sculpture, drawings, and
paintings. Sometimes, on being dressed in appropriate
body modifications and supplements, such as facial paint, or in enclosing robes embellished with arcane symbols, a
leader’s identity may become that of living icon, as in the
case of the Dalai Lama of Tibet.
Identity, Technology, Beliefs, and Dress
The characteristics of dress that communicate identities of an individual depend on materials available as well
as on social structuring of a more abstract sort than that
which organizes human activities related to kinship,
economy, polity, and religion. This structuring, which
tends to extend society wide, includes belief systems that
shape moral and aesthetic standards for dress and technologies used to produce body modifications and to convert
materials from the physical and biological environment
into body supplements. Human beings in every society
develop ways for designing and fabricating supplements
for the body out of materials from their environment, as
well as products and tools for modifying their bodies in
ways that identify them with or distinguish them from
others. Since dress can only exist if ways for executing
body modifications or making supplements exist, developments in technology precede placement of moral and aesthetic sanctions regarding types of dress. However, once
the products of technology are available, their use may in
turn be constrained by both moral and aesthetic beliefs of a
society. Furthermore, moral and aesthetic evaluations of
various types and properties of dress place the identities
they communicate in a hierarchy of acceptability.
As the complexity of technology used by a group of
people increases, so do alternatives for dressing their bodies and complexities in moral and aesthetic patterns that
govern use of various alternatives in establishing the &dquo;right&dquo;
identities. Moral issues regarding dress include the niceties of etiquette relating to what is considered proper and
improper to wear and display as well as severe sanctions
against breaking strongly held beliefs about covering the
body. Strong sanctions against use of certain types of
dress often relate to beliefs about modesty. What is believed to be modest dress, however, varies from society to
society and between sub-groups within a society. Similarly, beliefs about the aesthetic qualities of dress (what is
beautiful or ugly) can differ appreciably. For example, the
body can be modified in many ways (e.g., by cutting, scarring, painting, piercing), and the technology for accomplishing each type of modification may be simple or
complex. However, acceptability of cutting, scarring, painting, or piercing ranges considerably from society to society depending upon specific moral and aesthetic beliefs.
Thus our conclusion must be that relationships among the
interlinked systems of technology (involved in creating
dress) and systems of aesthetic and moral beliefs, which
limit how identities can be expressed, are both intricate
Downloaded from ctr.sagepub.com at Serials Records, University of Minnesota Libraries on February 5, 2014
7
and subject to alteration as change in one of the systems is
likely to stimulate change in the others.
Stability and Change in Dress and Identity
The variable of time must be dealt with in analyses of
relations between dress and identity for some types and
properties of dress become obsolete as communicators of
specific identities. Tendencies toward stability or change
in types and properties of dress that declare individuals’
identities vary from society to society; however, where
changes in technology and social structures are ongoing,
changes in specific characteristics of dress that declare
particular identities are likely. The changes that occur
relate to factors such as economic cycles, trade patterns,
fashion, demographic shifts in age and racial/ethnic characteristics of consumers, and societal concern for conservation of natural resources, as well as changes in technology
and beliefs. Any or all of these factors may promote or
constrain change in the particular characteristics of dress
that communicate particular identities, although a phenom- enon such as fashion more obviously stimulates change.
Consequently, for any given individual the types or properties of dress that communicate certain identities may change
in relation to changes stimulated by any of these factors.
Thus, for individuals to maintain a stable communication of
identities via dress may involve their abandoning of dress
whose characteristics no longer serve as identity markers
for positions in various social structures and making &dquo;correct&dquo; choices from among newly available options. In
contemporary Western society, for example, an individual
is expected to select from a constantly changing array of
body enclosures varying in volume, shape, and texture as
new technologies are introduced and old ones abandoned
and as moral and aesthetic standards of the past yield to
standards of the present.
Conclusions
We have formulated a conceptual definition of dress
that allows us to identify, classify, and describe both modifications of and supplements to the body, and we have
recommended that the field we have been discussing be
designated as study of the social aspects of dress. Further, we have explored the relation of dress, as a means of
communication, to the process whereby individuals establish identities and selves and attribute identities to others.
We have noted that dress has a certain priority over verbal
discourse in communicating identity since it ordinarily sets
the stage for subsequent verbal communication.
We reiterate that our defmition of dress has important
implications for study of dress and identity because it is
comprehensive, including not only body supplements but
also body modifications that many scholars omit from consideration. This importance can be illustrated in analyses of
the relation of gender to dress. Loose fitting body supplements such as jogging suits, for example, may not flaunt
gender differentiation, but gender definitions are often made
obvious by body modifications in shape and texture of hair
or by applications of cosmetics that change the color of
skin, lips, or eyebrows. Finally, we end with the observation that we must work toward a theory of dress that makes
sense because it allows us to explain ourselves and others
and because it allows us to reach beyond ourselves to
&dquo;grapple with the unknown, the wide range of social facts,
and bring order and coherence to it&dquo; (McNall, 1983, p.
485). We have taken steps to meet this challenge by
offering a comprehensive definition of dress and a conceptual perspective for interpreting its significance in conveying identity.