Discovery And WarnerMedia Merger Approved By Stockholders
In what is the final hurdle for the spinoff from AT & T , Warner Bros . Discovery , Discovery investors vote to approve WarnerMedia acquisition . 

BY BAILEY BARGER
PUBLISHED 1 DAY AGO


Discovery investors met Friday and voted to approve the merger to acquire the AT & T spinoff , WarnerMedia , in what will be known as Warner Bros . Discovery with a $43 billion price tag . The purchase of WarnerMedia has already been approved by the U . S . Department of Justice , which allowed the deal to move forward without concerns of an antitrust dispute , despite concerns voiced by several congressional representatives , such as Senator Elizabeth Warren and Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez . In December , House Democrats , including Warren and Ocasio-Cortez , sent a letter to U . S . Attorney General Merrick Garland and Justice Department antitrust chief Jonathan Kanter expressing distrust in the deal that they argued would greatly reduce competition and hurt diversity in an already consolidated entertainment industry . Warner Bros . Discovery will put AT & T ' s WarnerMedia entertainment brands – such as Warner Bros . studio and its DC Films , HBO Max , and Turner cable networks such as CNN and TBS – together with Discovery brands , which include HGTV , TLC , Animal Planet , Food Network , OWN , and Discovery Channel . 

The spinoff was initially announced in February , and it was shared last May that Discovery ' s CEO , David Zaslav , would helm what ' s now known as Warner Bros . Discovery . In addition to the U . S . Department of Justice , the deal has been approved by the board of directors for both AT & T and Discovery , as well as the European Commission . The proposed acquisition comes just a few short years after AT & T purchased Time Warner for $80 billion . In a show of commitment , Zaslav has shared plans to relocate to Los Angeles to run the company . The current WarnerMedia CEO will step down from his role amidst the formation of the new media company . 

RELATED : 
How The Warner Bros . Buyout Will Affect The DCEU

With the advent of the Discovery shareholders ' decision , The Warner Bros . Discovery deal is now projected to close in Q2 , likely between April 11-28 , according to Variety . AT & T held an investor conference simultaneous to the Discovery vote , which revealed to investors their corporate strategy following the spinoff , and stock prices are reportedly already starting to rise for the telecommunications company since the announcement . AT & T CEO John Stankey has worked to offload the company ' s debt generated by the push into entertainment initiated by his predecessor , Randall Stephenson , years ago . This decision marks the final major hurdle for Warner Bros . Discovery ' s future existence . 

ATT WarnerMedia Discovery Deal
Discovery will now take on the lion ' s share of the AT & T debt at the close of the deal , though the company ' s leadership hopes to shrink the leverage from 4 . 5 times earnings to 2 . 5-3 times earnings over the course of two years . This decision comes amidst recent decisions by both Discovery and WarnerMedia to pause business in Russia following Vladimir Putin ' s invasion of Ukraine . While leadership from both companies express a positive-looking strategy due to the split in business , AT & T ' s Stankey and future Warner Bros . Discovery Chief Zaslav are personally close friends and golfing buddies . Zaslav shared in May that the decision for him to lead the new company was born out of a two-hour text exchange between the two of them that led to a negotiation in Zaslav ' s Brownstone in New York City . 

On the corporate level , this deal will be touted as an exciting new reorganization for the entertainment market – which is vibrant with change following shocking fluctuations in viewer habits and aggressive streaming wars . All these factors , which make the entertainment sector a dynamic one , are only further influenced and exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic and its resulting shift in media consumption and business practices – notably with decisions made by new streaming arrivals such as Disney +  . With this spinoff , it ' s clear that some companies , such as AT & T , have decided to backtrack on their prior decision to play in this market in a formal sense . However , with this development , it ' s apparent that media consolidation of assets will continue to reorganize itself such that it maximizes profits and increases capital most efficiently for company shareholders – but how the decision will affect content , which remains the heartbeat of entertainment , remains to be seen . 