A Quick Guide to Professional 
Dress for Men and Women
Presented by: The Career Services Ambassadors (CSA)
Business Professional Attire
For Men
For any first meeting, business presentation, and job interview:
Full suit with matching jacket and pants with black belt
Pressed, collared shirt with plain (solid, stripe, or simple pattern) tie
Dark leather dress shoes and dark dress socks
The bottom of the tie should just barely cover the entire belt 
buckle; a tie should never be too long or too short
No cologne, visible tattoos or piercings
Light briefcase or portfolio case
*Tip: A three-piece suit is acceptable for an interview, but a suit with 
mismatched pants and jacket is not recommended. 
Business Professional Attire
For Women 
For any first meeting, business presentation, and job interview:
Black skirt or pant suit, other neutral colors (dark gray, navy, brown)
okay as long as top and bottom are matching
Skirt suits recommended; skirts should be a little below the knee 
and never shorter than above the knee
Pressed, collared button-down shirt
Nude (skin-tone) or dark-colored panty-hose and closed-toe heels
Dress shoes (pumps, flats, heels) – No platform or >2.5 inch heels
Make-up should be minimal and conservative (daytime makeup)
No visible tattoos; pale color nail polish; no perfume or body sprays
Long hair should be pulled back away from face
*Tip: Keep hair and jewelry simple (i.e. studs for earrings); remove 
all other jewelry and piercings (i.e. nose rings, etc.)
Business Professional Examples
Business Casual Attire
For Men
Pressed, collared, long-sleeved shirt with tie 
Dress slacks, socks, belt, and shoes
Shirts should always be tucked in
Jeans UNACCEPTABLE
Closed-toe shoes
For Women
Dress pants, skirt (at or below knee), or dress okay
Fitted blouses and sweaters/cardigans, scarves okay
Closed-toe shoes (pumps/heels <2.5 inches)
Avoid:
*Blingy/shiny/lacey fabric, sequins, khaki, skinny and capri pants, 
shorts, tight skirts, skirts shorter than knee length, low-cut and 
sleeveless blouses/dress, large jewelry, bulky purse, sandals, wedges, 
and heels > 2.5 inches.
*Tip: Business casual = business professional, with ONE of the 
articles substituted. (Ex: Full suit with a shell top for women or a full 
suit minus the jacket or the tie for men.)
Business Casual Examples 
Note: Each organization determines dress code conduct. Please inquire with 
your organization regarding appropriate workplace attire.
The Meaning of Color in Business
The colors you wear in professional settings and interviews can affect 
your mood, energy, and how others may perceive you. You want to 
wear colors that portray positive perceptions and exude confidence, 
sincerity, and reliability. Here are colors with their perceived meanings: 
RED  Action, powerful, passion and energetic
GREEN  Growth, ideas, vitality and sophistication
BLUE  inspires confidence, success and trust
Navy blue is best color for work/interviews – more likely to get the job.
GOLD  Wealth, prosperity, luxury
BLACK  Black looks classic and sophisticated, but perceived as 
depressing, serious or intimidating – so add a little color to black suits.
PINK  Compassion, understanding and warmth
Pink or salmon worn by men is seen as a communicator color. 
BROWN  Practical and reliable; sometimes perceived as dull
PURPLE  Inventive, creative, intuitive
Dark purple can be perceived as elegant and projects authority. 
WHITE  Clean, pure, innocent, and simple