 ‘ Government creates environment , can ’ t run film industry ’ 
Peerzada SalmanPublished June 12 , 2021 3
Senator Faisal Javed delivers the keynote speech at Frere Hall on Friday . —White Star
KARACHI : The 3rd Pakistan International Film Festival ( PIFF ) an initiative of the Karachi Film Society ( KFS ) began at Frere Hall on Friday evening . This year ’ s event is called Women ’ s Edition 2021 and will last for three days . 

Senator Faisal Javed delivered the keynote address on the occasion focusing on the topic of the day which was Pakistani films ’ growth in the international market . He said while discussing the international aspect of it we need to concentrate on the local side of things , analysing whether we ’ ve reached that level where we could talk international . Narrating a story , he told the audience that Gen Musharraf telephoned film-maker Shoaib Mansoor and urged him to make a film with the tagline ‘ revival of cinema ’  . After which Mansoor made Khuda Ke Liye with the same tagline . The film was released in 25 cinema halls . 

The senator argued that money was the number one problem as far as the growth of the industry goes . Producers don ’ t get returns for the investment they put in . Therefore their issues should be addressed .  “ The government creates an environment . It can ’ t do anything on its own ( khud se kucch nahin ker sakti )  . It can ’ t even run a state channel .  .  .  [ Channels ] are run by private groups . Governments can only create an environment .  ” 

Senator Javed said in order to sustain the [ film ] industry in Pakistan you need a minimum of 1 , 000 screens . We have hardly a little over 150 of them . In Japan there are 3 , 600 cinemas .  “ Prime Minister Imran Khan has approved an entertainment , film policy which will soon be launched . It ’ s only a matter of time .  ” 


Third Pakistan International Film Festival kicks off

He said we need to make at least 100 films a year to sustain the industry . In Hollywood they churn out 800 movies in a year . Bollywood makes 1 , 800 annually .  “ Bollywood ’ s 100 films can ’ t match even a single Pakistani film ( hamari aik film ke barabar nahin ho sakteen ) because of the kind of great talent that we have … Bollywood has a cosmetic approach to film-making .  ” 

The senator claimed after the 1960s Pakistan is again moving towards industrialisation . The film industry should also get the kind of facilities that other industries are getting . Referring to collaboration with countries such as Turkey , he pointed out ,  “ Very soon a Pakistani film , I ’ m not going to name it , will be run on a mainstream Turkish channel .  ” He cautioned Pakistani film-makers not to copy India if they want to go global because no one accepts copies .  “ Present your own stuff .  ” 

He told the audience that he , along with some other entertainment industry stakeholders , is working on a royalties ’ bill because “ creative people take the country forward .  ” Highlighting the “ power of Urdu ” he called it a weapon that film-makers can use to propagate their ideas . He was of the view that India uses the Urdu language in their films which has helped our cause . 

With reference to giving Pakistan ’ s tourism industry a boot , he said the most powerful tool that can be used for doing that is the media such as TV , film and digital platforms . He rounded off his speech by urging that all of us should take ownership of the country and adopt a practical approach to life . 

Earlier , founder of the Hum TV network Sultana Siddiqui shed light on the genesis of the festival . She said she likes to work with the youth as they are the future of the country . The festival provides the young ones with a platform to learn the finer points of film-making and showcase their talent . 

The first day of the event started off with a panel discussion moderated by M . Kamran Jawaid on the lack of growth of Pakistani films in the international market . The panellists were Amjad Rasheed , Salina Rashid , Irfan Malik and Omer Paracha . 

Mr Rasheed put it down to a “ limited ” Pakistani market . Ms Rashid believed we have not been proactive about “ branding ” our movies . Mr Paracha talked about the big language barrier that ’ s not enabling us to reach the international market . And Mr Malik spoke on the kind of market in terms of rupees Pakistani films have and how after deductions a limited amount is left to make a film . 

Misbah Khalid anchored the proceedings of day one . 

Published in Dawn , June 12th , 2021