FIXING FASHION : 
clothing consumption 
and sustainability

House of Commons
Environmental Audit Committee
Fixing fashion : clothing 
consumption and 
sustainability
Sixteenth Report of Session 2017–19
Report , together with formal minutes relating 
to the report
Ordered by the House of Commons 
to be printed 5 February 2019
HC 1952
Published on 19 February 2019
by authority of the House of Commons
Environmental Audit Committee
The Environmental Audit Committee is appointed by the House of Commons to 
consider to what extent the policies and programmes of government departments 
and non-departmental public bodies contribute to environmental protection and 
sustainable development ; to audit their performance against such targets as may be 
set for them by Her Majesty ’ s Ministers ; and to report thereon to the House . 
Current membership
Mary Creagh MP ( Labour , Wakefield )  ( Chair ) 
Colin Clark MP ( Conservative , Gordon ) 
Dr Thérèse Coffey MP ( Conservative , Suffolk Coastal ) 
Geraint Davies MP ( Labour ( Co-op )  , Swansea West ) 
Mr Philip Dunne MP ( Conservative , Ludlow ) 
Zac Goldsmith MP ( Conservative , Richmond Park ) 
Mr Robert Goodwill MP ( Conservative , Scarborough and Whitby ) 
James Gray MP ( Conservative , North Wiltshire ) 
Caroline Lucas MP ( Green Party , Brighton , Pavilion ) 
Kerry McCarthy MP ( Labour , Bristol East ) 
Anna McMorrin MP ( Labour , Cardiff North ) 
John McNally MP ( Scottish National Party , Falkirk ) 
Dr Matthew Offord MP ( Conservative , Hendon ) 
Dr Dan Poulter MP ( Conservative , Central Suffolk and North Ipswich ) 
Joan Ryan MP ( Labour , Enfield North ) 
Alex Sobel MP ( Labour ( Co-op )  , Leeds North West ) 
Powers
The constitution and powers are set out in House of Commons Standing Orders , 
principally in SO No 152A . These are available on the internet via www . parliament . uk . 
Publications
© Parliamentary Copyright House of Commons 2019 . This publication may be 
reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence , which is published at 
www . parliament . uk / copyright . 
Committee reports are published on the Committee ’ s website at www . parliament . uk / 
eacom and in print by Order of the House . 
Evidence relating to this report is published on the inquiry publications page of the 
Committee ’ s website . 
Committee staff
The current staff of the Committee are Lloyd Owen ( Clerk )  , Leoni Kurt ( Second Clerk )  , 
Ruth Cahir ( Committee Specialist )  , Nicholas Davies ( Committee Specialist )  , Laura Grant 
( Committee Specialist )  , Laura Scott ( Committee Specialist )  , Jonathan Wright ( Senior 
Committee Assistant )  , Baris Tufekci ( Committee Assistant )  , Anne Peacock ( Media 
Officer ) and Simon Horswell ( Media Officer )  . 
Contacts
All correspondence should be addressed to the Clerk of the Environmental Audit 
Committee , House of Commons , London SW1A 0AA . The telephone number for general 
enquiries is 020 7219 8890 ; the Committee ’ s email address is eacom @ parliament . uk . 
You can follow the Committee on Twitter using @ CommonsEAC . 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 1
Contents
Summary 3
1 Introduction - fashion & sustainability 5
Fashion industry 5
Fast fashion 6
Sustainability of the industry 8
Interim report - retailer engagement 8
Growth of the industry 8
The sustainability challenge 9
UK commitments on sustainability 9
Consumption levels 10
Our report 11
2 The social cost of our clothes 12
Social impact of garment production 12
Union representation Vs Corporate Social Responsibility 14
Cheap clothing 15
Reshoring production 15
Labour exploitation in UK garment factories 16
National Minimum Wage 16
Labour Market Enforcement 20
Enforcing labour market law in UK garment factories 21
Forced labour in fashion supply chains 22
Transparency 23
Modern Slavery Act 23
Due diligence law 25
3 Fashion ’ s environmental price tag 28
Environmental impact 28
Energy and climate 28
Water consumption 29
Land use 30
Natural Vs Synthetic Fibres 30
Natural fibres 30
Synthetic fibres 31
Recycled fibres 31
Microfibre shedding 32
Reducing microfibre shedding 34
Measuring impact 36
Sustainable Clothing Action Plan life cycle waste targets 37
4 Textile waste and collection 40
Repairing 40
Craft education 41
Reusing second hand clothes and upcycling 42
Pre-consumer waste 43
Textile collection 43
Stock burning 44
Take-back schemes 45
Extended Producer Responsibility for textiles 46
5 New economic models for the fashion industry 50
Levelling the playing field 50
Encouraging change 52
Sharing economy 53
6 Background & acknowledgements 55
Acknowledgements 55
Conclusions and recommendations 56
Annex 1 : Table of retailers ’ responses 61
Appendix : Research by Dr Mark Sumner , School of Design , University of Leeds 62
Formal minutes 63
Witnesses 64
Published written evidence 65
List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament 68
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 3
Summary
The way we make , use and throwaway our clothes is unsustainable . Textile production 
contributes more to climate change than international aviation and shipping combined , 
consumes lake-sized volumes of fresh water and creates chemical and plastic pollution . 
Synthetic fibres are being found in the deep sea , in Arctic sea ice , in fish and shellfish . 
Our biggest retailers have ‘ chased the cheap needle around the planet ’  , commissioning 
production in countries with low pay , little trade union representation and weak 
environmental protection . In many countries , poverty pay and conditions are standard 
for garment workers , most of whom are women . We are also concerned about the use 
of child labour , prison labour , forced labour and bonded labour in factories and the 
garment supply chain . Fast fashions ’ overproduction and overconsumption of clothing 
is based on the globalisation of indifference towards these manual workers . 
Forced labour is used to pick cotton in two of the world ’ s biggest cotton producing 
countries , Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan . Labour exploitation is also taking place in 
the UK .  ‘ Made in the UK ’ should mean workers are paid at least the minimum wage . 
But we were told it is an open secret that some garment factories in places like Leicester 
are not paying the minimum wage . This must stop . But if the risk of being caught is 
low , then the incentive to cut corners is high . The same fast fashion retailers sourcing 
from Leicester are also selling clothes so cheaply that they are being treated as single use 
items . We buy more clothes per person in the UK than any other country in Europe . A 
glut of second hand clothing swamping the market is depressing prices for used textiles . 
What can ’ t be sold is torn up and turned into insulation and mattress stuffing . Worse 
still , around 300 , 000 tonnes of textile waste ends up in household black bins every year , 
sent to landfill or incinerators . Less than 1% of material used to produce clothing is 
recycled into new clothing at the end of its life . Meanwhile , retailers are burning new 
unsold stock merely to preserve their brand . 
Fashion shouldn ’ t cost the earth . But the fashion industry has marked its own 
homework for too long . Voluntary corporate social responsibility initiatives have failed 
significantly to improve pay and working conditions or reduce waste . The scientific 
warnings are stark on sustainability . Overconsumption and climate change are driving 
mass extinction . We need a new economic model for fashion . Business as usual no 
longer works . The Government should change the law to require companies to perform 
due diligence checks across their supply chains . 
UK designers are already taking a lead on sustainable fashion . We heard from a range 
of exciting , innovative and sustainable fashion businesses and designers in the UK who 
are forging a new vision for fashion . These innovators are faced with competition from 
businesses who are focused on reducing costs and maximising profits regardless of the 
environmental or social costs . Government needs to provide clear economic incentives 
for retailers to do the right thing . We recommend that the Government reforms taxation 
to reward fashion companies that design products with lower environmental impacts 
and penalise those that do not . Moving from conventional to organic cotton and from 
virgin polyester to recycled PET ( in garments designed to minimise shedding ) would 
help to reduce the negative impact of the clothing industry . The Government should 
4 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
investigate whether its proposed tax on virgin plastics , which comes into force in 
2022 , should be applied to textile products that contain less than 50% recycled PET to 
stimulate the market for recycled fibres in the UK . 
We recognise that fast fashion has made it affordable for everyone to experience the 
pleasure of style , design and the latest trends . We were told however that the most 
sustainable garment is the one we already own and that repairing , rewearing , reusing , 
and renting are preferable to recycling or discarding clothes . 
The Government must change the system to end the throwaway society . Often it is more 
expensive to repair an item than buy a new one . Many of us also lack the skills to perform 
more than basic clothing repairs . The Government should make fashion retailers take 
responsibility for the waste they create and reward companies that take positive action 
to reduce waste . A charge of one penny per garment on producers could raise £35 
million to invest in better clothing collection and sorting in the UK . The Government ’ s 
recent pledge to review and consult on extended producer responsibility for the textile 
industry by 2025 is too slow . We need action before the end of this parliament . 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 5
1 Introduction - fashion & sustainability
Fashion industry
1 . Fashion is big business in the UK . We buy more clothes per person in the UK 
than any other country in Europe . 1 The fashion industry was worth £32 billion to the 
UK economy in 2017 . 2 This was an increase of 5 . 4% on 2016 ; a growth rate 1 . 6% higher 
than the rest of the economy . 3 The industry employs 890 , 000 people in the UK in retail , 
manufacturing , brands and fashion design businesses . 4 According to consultants 
McKinsey the global apparel , fashion and luxury industry outperformed all other market 
indexes in profitability between 2003 - 2013 ‘ outstripping even high-growth sectors like 
technology and telecommunications .  ’ 5 In recent years some UK high street retailers have 
struggled in the face of online competition , but UK manufacturing is seeing some growth 
and our fashion designers are going from ‘ strength to strength ’  , according to the British 
Fashion Council . 6
Key facts & figures on fashion and sustainability
More than $500 billion of value is lost every year due to clothing underutilisation and 
the lack of recycling , according to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation . 7
By 2030 global apparel consumption is projected to rise by 63% , from 62 million tons 
today to 102 million tons—equivalent to more than 500 billion additional T-shirts . 8
The UN says that by 2050 the equivalent of almost three planets could be required to 
provide the natural resources needed to sustain current lifestyles given the growth in 
global population . 9
In September 2015 , the UK signed up to the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals including a commitment ( SDG 12 ) to ensure sustainable consumption and 
production patterns . 10
2 . The garment industry is reportedly the world ’ s third biggest manufacturing industry 
after automotive and technology industries . 11 Our consumption creates jobs and growth 
in developing nations . It also leaves them with the bulk of the environmental and social 
costs . 12 Eco Age warned that competition between countries for inward investment was 
driving a race to the bottom in terms of standards : 
1 European Clothing Action Plan , Used Textile Collection in European Cities ( March 2018 ) 
2 British Fashion Council , London Fashion Week September 2018 Facts and Figures
3 British Fashion Council , London Fashion Week September 2018 Facts and Figures
4 British Fashion Council , London Fashion Week September 2018 Facts and Figures
5 McKinsey & Company , Creating value in fashion : How to make the dream come true ( May 2015 ) 
6 Evening Standard , The UK fashion industry is worth £32 billion to the UK economy , says British Fashion Council 
CEO ( September 2018 ) 
7 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
8 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
9 United Nations , Sustainable Development Goals , Goal 12 : Ensure sustainable consumption and production 
patterns
10 17 Goals
11 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
12 Dr Mark Sumner , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
6 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Countries have to compete against each other for inward investment and 
production in their jurisdiction . Because of this competition for lower 
wages and standards they are unable to raise their minimum wage to a level 
that provides for a decent life , that is , a living wage . There is a race to the 
bottom in terms of wages and environmental standards . 13
Fast fashion
3 . Concerns have been raised throughout the inquiry that the current ‘ fast fashion ’ 
business model is encouraging over-consumption and generating excessive waste . 14 It 
demands a high throughput of garments and is based on a linear economy , according to the 
Clothing Sustainability Research Group at Nottingham Trent University . 15 Such garments 
are relatively cheap , aimed at consumers who want to change their wardrobe on a regular , 
trend driven , basis . They are offered at pocket money prices . Short lead times means that 
wash tests and wearer trials are often not feasible , with implications for garment quality . 
Many are not made from single fibre materials and cannot be recycled . 16 This trend is 
being copied by luxury retailers such as Louis Vuitton which offers small collections every 
two weeks .  ‘ Fast luxury ’ collections are often stitched in the same factories producing 
cheap ‘ fast fashion ’  . 17
What is fast fashion ? 
 ‘ Fast fashion ’ is a term used to describe a new accelerated fashion business model that 
has evolved since the 1980s . It involves increased numbers of new fashion collections 
every year , quick turnarounds and often lower prices . Reacting rapidly to offer new 
products to meet consumer demand is crucial to this business model . 
4 . Many of our witnesses criticised the fast fashion business model for driving 
overconsumption , the production of clothes so cheap they are being treated disposably , 
and excessive waste . Stella Claxton from the Clothing Sustainability Research Group at 
Nottingham Trent University said that the value of much fast fashion clothing was low , 
not only in financial but also in emotional terms : 
… if you look at where the growth in the retail market in the UK is coming 
from , it is very much from the low value end , particularly the success of 
online retailers—such as ASOS and Boohoo—who are competing on low 
prices and fast turnaround . I saw a dress on Boohoo that retailed at full 
price for £5 at the weekend . We have a market where these garments are 
mainly aimed at young women who are … [ gaining ] pleasure from what 
they wear and expressing their identity through their clothing , but the 
actual value of the item is very low in real terms , in quality terms and in 
emotional terms to them . The incentive for them to then recycle or want 
13 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
14 Phoebe English ( SFI0055 )  ; Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 )  ; TRAID ( Textile Reuse & International Development )  
( SFI0010 )  ; Professor Tim Cooper ( SFI0049 )  ; ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
15 Professor Tim Cooper ( SFI0049 ) 
16 Professor Tim Cooper ( SFI0049 ) 
17 Clean Clothes Campaign ( 2014 ) Stitched Up : Poverty wages for garment workers in Eastern Europe and Turkey ; 
The Guardian ( 10 December 2014 )  , Luxury brands : higher standards or just a higher mark-up ? 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 7
to pass that on in some way , or even for charity shops to want that kind 
of product in their shops , is very low . The opportunity for that end of the 
market to have a second hand opportunity is quite limited . 18
5 . The fashion designer Phoebe English says that ‘ fast fashion ’ has made the sector a 
 ‘ monstrous disposable industry ’  : 
The overproduction of ‘ fast ’ fashion which will never be purchased or used 
and the insane speed which the sector churns out new designs almost every 
week means that the never-ending production of cheap fashion which is 
poorly made and will last only a few weeks and then be thrown away , has 
made our sector a monstrous disposable industry . The entire way the sector 
is structured so that the prospective sales orders are put into production 
rather than only making the production which has been actually ordered 
means that countless levels of wasted garments are produced . 19
6 . Others have hailed benefits of fast fashion . Dr Sumner of Leeds University School 
of Design said that the phenomenon was successful because it had ‘ democratised ’ the 
benefits of fashion : 
Fast fashion has allowed all segments of society , irrespective of class , income 
or background to engage in the hedonistic and psychogenic pleasures of 
fashion . At no other time in human history has fashion been so accessible 
to so many people across our society . This is the power of fast fashion . 20
7 . The British Retail Consortium suggested that fast fashion resulted in less waste at 
the store and warehouse as it is characterised by smaller quantities of each fashion line 
sourced and quickly sold . It said that fashion retailers are using insights from production 
and consumption data to streamline their products and to minimise waste throughout 
the supply chain . 21
8 . We heard some concern that social media was driving faster fashion and encouraging 
over consumption and waste . Research by the Hubbub Foundation suggested that 17% of 
young people questioned said they wouldn ’ t wear an outfit again if it had been on Instagram . 22
Online fashion companies have established relationships with online ‘ influencers ’ who 
advertise the latest fast fashion by modelling it on their Instagram and other social media 
feeds . Website cookies mean that retailers can target individuals with fast fashion adverts 
as they browse the Internet . Users now only have to tap on the photo to be told the price 
and get an online link to the clothes that influencers or reality TV stars are wearing . 23
Eco Age said that stricter regulation for online marketing should be considered , arguing 
that there are psychological issues connected with high levels of consumption , as well as 
detrimental environmental and social effects caused by overconsumption . 24
18 Q22
19 Phoebe English ( SFI0055 ) 
20 Dr Mark Sumner , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
21 British Retail Consortium ( SFI0019 ) 
22 London Waste and Recycling Board ( SFI0022 ) 
23 Where Does it Come From ( SFI0035 ) 
24 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
8 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Sustainability of the industry
9 . In 2017 , the Ellen Macarthur Foundation published a New Textiles Economy : 
Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future . The report set out how the textiles system operates in a 
linear way with large amounts of non-renewable resources extracted to produce clothes 
 ‘ that are often used for only a short time , after which the materials are mostly sent to 
landfill or incinerated .  ’ 25 It calculated that more than $500 billion of value is lost every year 
due to clothing underutilisation and the lack of recycling . 26 In the UK WRAP estimates 
that £140 million worth of clothing goes to landfill every year . 27
10 . According to research carried out by Boston Consulting Group and Global Fashion 
Agenda for the Copenhagen Fashion Summit in 2017 , the sustainability ‘ pulse ’ of the 
industry is weak . It developed a scoring system to measure the sustainability of the sector 
and gave the industry a score of 32 out of 100 saying it is ‘ not yet where it could and should 
be .  ’ 28 It noted that : 
The best performers on sustainability are the very big players as well as 
some mid-sized , family owned companies , while over half of the market , 
mainly small to medium-sized players , has shown little effort so far . The 
rest of the industry is somewhere in between . This is confirmed by the 
Pulse Survey , where two-thirds of polled fashion executives have not made 
environmental and social factors guiding principles for their companies ’ 
strategy . 29
Interim report - retailer engagement
11 . Our interim report on the sustainability of the fashion industry , published in January 
2019 , found similar results . We wrote to sixteen leading UK fashion retailers to ask what 
steps they are taking to reduce the environmental and social impact of the clothes they sell . 
As that report noted , we were impressed with the level of engagement by some retailers . 
Others expressed openness to engaging on these issues and have made some small 
steps . A few retailers , unfortunately , do not seem to consider social and environmental 
responsibility as a priority . 30 We concluded that retailers have an obligation to engage 
with these issues and recommended that they show leadership through engagement with 
industry initiatives . A table of the retailers ’ responses is reproduced at Annex 1 . This 
report will consider recommendations to Government for policies to encourage a more 
transparent , fair and sustainable fashion system . 
Growth of the industry
12 . As the world population exceeds 8 billion in the coming decade , the fashion industry 
is expected to expand further . The Pulse of Fashion report projects that by 2030 global 
apparel consumption could rise by 63% , from 62 million tons today to 102 million tons—
equivalent to more than 500 billion additional T-shirts .  ‘ Concurrently , soaring demand 
25 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
26 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
27 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
28 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
29 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
30 Environmental Audit Committee , Interim Report on the Sustainability of the Fashion Industry ( Jan 2018 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 9
for apparel—much of it from developing nations—will see the annual retail value of 
apparel and footwear reach at least €2 trillion by 2030 ( an over 30% increase of €500 
billion between now and then )  .  ’ 31
The sustainability challenge
13 . Securing a sustainable future for the planet and people is the defining challenge 
of our time . In October 2018 , the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) 
warned that the Paris Agreement target of limiting global temperature rises to 1 . 5C will be 
exceeded if we continue on our current path . Projections published in December suggest 
that global emissions from burning fossil fuels hit an all-time high in 2018–after remaining 
relatively static between 2014 to 2016 . 32 Current emission trends put us on course for a 
dramatic 3C climate shift by 2100 , which will have major consequences for wildlife and 
communities around the world . Achieving Paris Agreement temperature goals requires 
climate-changing emissions to peak as soon as possible and fall rapidly thereafter . 33
14 . Recent projections suggest the world is failing to meet most of the existing 
international targets on biodiversity - the Aichi Biodiversity Targets - to slow the rate of 
habitat and species loss by 2020 . 34 The latest Living Planet Index–published by WWF and 
the Zoological Society of London - showed a 60% fall in wildlife populations in 40 years . 35
Scientists are warning that the planet is now in the midst of a sixth mass extinction of 
species driven by human activities . 36
UK commitments on sustainability
15 . The UK has taken the crucial first step in its sustainability transition by shifting to 
cleaner sources of electricity since the Climate Change Act was passed in 2008 . 37 To meet 
our future carbon budgets and reach net zero emissions by 2050 - which the IPCC tells us 
is needed - the UK will have to go further and ensure that all industries play their part in 
reducing their carbon footprint to near zero . That will require changing our consumption 
patterns and improving our resource productivity . 
16 . In September 2015 , global agreement was reached at the United Nations on a set of 17 
Sustainable Development Goals to guide global development until 2030 . 38 In conducting 
our inquiry into the sustainability of the fashion industry we decided to focus on both 
environmental and social sustainability in line with the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals , which the UK Government signed up to in 2015 . Tackling the problems highlighted 
in this inquiry will help to achieve a range of Sustainable Development Goals , including : 
• SDG 5 : Achieve gender equality and empower all women & girls
• SDG 6 : Clean water and sanitation ; 
31 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 )  , p . 8 . 
32 Global Carbon Project , Strong growth in global CO2 emissions expected for 2018 ( November 2018 ) 
33 International Energy Agency email newsletter ‘ the energy mix : COP , CO2 & CCUS ’  ,  ( 10 Dec 2018 ) 
34 WWF and ZSL , Living Planet Report 2018
35 WWF and ZSL , Living Planet Report 2018
36 Gerardo Ceballos , Paul R . Ehrlich , and Rodolfo Dirzo , Biological annihilation via the ongoing sixth mass 
extinction signaled by vertebrate population losses and declines ( July 2017 ) 
37 Environmental Audit Committee , Green Finance : Mobilising investment in clean energy and sustainable 
development ( May 2018 ) 
38 17 Goals
10 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
• SDG 8 : Decent work and economic growth ; 
• SDG 12 : Responsible consumption and production ; 
• SDG 13 : Climate action
• SDG 14 : Life below water . 
• SDG 15 : Life on land . 
Consumption levels
17 . The clothing charity TRAID warned that ‘ the over-consumption of clothes in the 
UK plays its part in deepening the main environmental challenges that we face at national 
and global level .  ’ 39 The UN Sustainable Development Goal 12 on sustainable consumption 
and production aims to promote resource and energy efficiency . 40 At the current time , 
material consumption of natural resources is increasing . The UN says that should the 
global population reach 9 . 6 billion by 2050 , the equivalent of almost three planets could 
be required to provide the natural resources needed to sustain current lifestyles . 41 At the 
Committee ’ s V & A event , the author Lucy Siegle suggested that : 
A useful way of thinking about it is when we talk about the Paris agreement 
and carbon emissions , and we set a baseline of 1990 , whatever we need to 
get the emissions down to , we should think about this problem in that way . 
If we use 2000 as baseline , we should be doing everything we can to reduce 
consumption to 2000 levels because that would solve a lot of problems . 42
18 . Professor Tim Cooper from the Clothing Sustainability Research Group at 
Nottingham Trent University argues garments should be designed and manufactured for 
longevity , but that a more difficult problem is how to reduce consumer demand for cheap , 
short-lived garments . 43 He said : 
Sustainable consumption demands cultural change . The throwaway culture 
applies to the whole economy , not merely the clothing sector . If consumers 
are to be encouraged to buy fewer clothes there needs to be a wider public 
debate on [ the ] future of the ‘ consumer society ’  , including an evaluation of 
its benefits and costs . 44
19 . Professor Dilys Williams from the London College of Fashion echoed this , arguing 
that technocentric efficiency improvements are not sufficient to make fashion items 
sustainable if we are ‘ still producing more and more of them .  ’ 45 She suggested that society 
would have to challenge ‘ growth logic ’ and develop different business models that involve 
less material consumption : 
39 TRAID ( SFI0010 ) 
40 United Nations , Sustainable Development Goals , Goal 12 : Ensure sustainable consumption and production 
patterns
41 United Nations , Sustainable Development Goals , Goal 12 : Ensure sustainable consumption and production 
patterns
42 Q108
43 Clothing Sustainability Research Group , Nottingham Trent University ( SFI0049 ) 
44 Clothing Sustainability Research Group , Nottingham Trent University ( SFI0049 ) 
45 Q90
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 11
… technocentric approaches are not sufficient . In fact , there is evidence to 
say that efficiencies in creating one garment better have a rebound effect 
and we are actually using more resources by taking that approach .  [ … ] Do 
we want to sustain the fashion industry as it currently is or do we want to 
live within planetary boundaries and honour human equality ? If we do , we 
do need to take a more eco-centric perspective . 46
20 . The designer Phoebe English said history would look unkindly on the waste and 
exploitation involved in today ’ s fashion industry : 
I believe that we , and the waves of the new generation , will look back on the 
practices of today ’ s fashion industry in the same way we now look back at 
Victorian Workhouses , with utter incredulous horror . It is up to legislators 
and British law to keep up with the massive swing of ethical commercial 
consumer desire and how it can help form a better fashion industry and 
help obliterate its disgustingly wasteful practices . 47
Our report
21 . The way we make , use and dispose of our clothes all has an environmental impact . 
The structure of this report reflects these stages in the lifecycle . Chapters Two and Three 
will look at the social and environmental impact of how we currently make clothes . 
The amount of clothes we throwaway will be examined in chapter Four . New economic 
models that could help improve the sustainability of the fashion industry will be explored 
in chapter Five . 
22 . We want to see a thriving fashion industry in the UK that provides decent work , 
inspires creativity and contributes to the economic success of the UK . The fashion 
industry ’ s current business model is unsustainable , especially with growing populations 
and rising levels of consumption across the globe . Over-consumption and climate 
change are driving widespread environmental damage . The exploitative and linear 
business model for fashion must change . The various parts of the fashion industry 
must come together to set out their blueprint for a net zero emissions world . This will 
require reducing their carbon consumption back to 1990 levels . Given scientists ’ stark 
warnings on climate change and biodiversity loss , we need to fix fashion . 
46 Q90
47 Phoebe English ( SFI0055 ) 
12 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
2 The social cost of our clothes
Social impact of garment production
23 . Garment production is one of the world ’ s biggest and most labour-intensive 
manufacturing industries with estimates of those directly employed ranging from 25 to 
60 million people . 48 Since the 1980s many leading Western fashion retailers have been 
 ‘ chasing the cheap needle round the planet ’ 49 and sourcing their clothes from countries 
with low labour costs and poor environmental governance . This shift in production 
has been facilitated by a 90% fall in shipping costs between the late 1950s and 2015 , as 
shipping containers revolutionised trade in goods . 50 Most of the garments sold in the UK 
are produced in Asian countries . 51 In evidence , Dr Mark Sumner noted that this fashion 
model means that consumers in the UK ‘ are getting pleasure and enjoyment from fashion 
and that is coming at a cost to workers and the environment in exterritorial , overseas 
production routes as well as agriculture .  ’ 52
24 . Fashion supply chains provide a source of jobs and GDP growth for people in poorer 
countries with the garment industry providing a crucial source of foreign exchange ( when 
payments and investment are made in the local currency )  . 53 However , poor pay and 
conditions are standard in global garment supply chains according to evidence submitted 
by the global trade union IndustriALL . 54 It stated that : 
Workers work long hours , often far beyond legal limits , for poverty wages 
and in conditions that breach Occupational Health and Safety ( OHS ) 
standards . Continual downward price pressure by companies keeps wages 
low while their real value declines against inflationary increases . The wages 
of most garment workers are no higher than the level of the minimum wage 
in their country , which in many cases is well below the level of subsistence . 
Excessive working hours are a continuing and entrenched problem . 
Production peaks are managed by relying on excessive overtime . Workers 
are compelled to work extremely long hours in order to supplement their 
basic earnings towards a level where they can support themselves and 
their families . Precarious employment conditions are rife , with temporary 
contracts , agency work and sub-contracting the norm . Violations of the 
right to freedom of association are commonplace , unionization rates are 
extremely low and collective bargaining is rare . 55
25 . A 2016 report into Corporate Leadership on Modern Slavery found that of 71 leading 
retailers in the UK , 77% believed there was a likelihood of modern slavery occurring at 
some stage in their supply chains . 56 The majority of global garment workers and artisans 
are women and girls ,  ‘ the bulk of which make far less than a living wage , persistently face 
48 Sandy Black ( editor ) Sustainable Fashion Handbook ( 2013 ) 
49 Sarah O ’ Connor , Financial Times , Dark factories : labour exploitation in Britain ’ s garment industry ( 17 May 2018 ) 
50 Edwina Ehrman ( ed )  , Fashioned from Nature ( 2018 ) 
51 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
52 Q3
53 Sandy Black ( editor ) Sustainable Fashion Handbook ( 2013 ) 
54 IndustriALL
55 IndustriALL ( SFI0073 ) 
56 Hult Research and Ethical Trading Initiative ( 2016 )  , Corporate Leadership on Modern Slavery , p . 8 . 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 13
poor working conditions and live in poverty .  ’ 57 Most work long hours up to six or seven 
days a week with reports of being burnt out and physically unable to continue beyond 
their 30s . 58 We were told that women and girls face the brunt of the exploitation in the 
fashion industry , often at the bottom of the value chain working in the fields or factories . 
It is notable that the majority of fashion CEOs are men . 59 All of the Chief Executives of the 
top ten UK fashion retailers ( by market share ) are men . Sarah Ditty , who was then policy 
director of Fashion Revolution , argued that the ‘ fashion industry and all the problems that 
persist across the value chain is a huge feminist issue .  ’ 60
Key facts & figures on the social cost of our clothes
Most of the garments sold in the UK are produced in Asian countries . 61
Over 90% of workers in the global garment industry have no possibility to negotiate 
their wages and conditions , according to the global trade union IndustriALL . 62
Leicester has the second highest concentration of textile manufacturers in the country 
with 700 factories employing 10 , 000 textile workers . 63
Written evidence from HMRC shows that UK-based garment factory owners have 
been forced to pay out almost £90 , 000 to employees for non-payment of minimum 
wage . 64
26 . Poor working conditions in fashion supply chains hit the headlines on 24 April 
2013 when the Rana Plaza building in Bangladesh collapsed . The building housed five 
garment factories where 1 , 138 people died and another 2 , 500 were injured , making it one 
the largest industrial disasters in history . The victims were mostly young women . The 
Fashion Revolution campaign was founded by Carry Somers and Orsola de Castro in 
response . Fashion Revolution argue that the Rana Plaza disaster was the ‘ direct result 
of the opaque , complex and speedy way in which the industry functions today ’  . 65 The 
Bangladesh Accord on Fire and Building Safety was set up in the aftermath of the Rana 
Plaza disaster to improve factory standards through building inspections by structural 
engineers and safety training . Five years since , the vast majority of factories are behind 
schedule implementing the Accord , a cause for concern as workers continue to be put at 
risk . 66 Bangladesh saw widespread protests by garment workers over low wages in early 
January 2019 . 67
27 . The sustainability consultancy Eco Age argued that unrealistic pricing throughout 
the supply chain is a major issue ‘ from fabric buyers needing to prioritise cost targets 
over sustainability , to manufacturers being left without profit margins .  ’ 68 It says retailers 
impose ‘ unrealistic requirements on suppliers that compete to offer the lowest prices and 
57 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
58 Apparel Insider , Why garment worker burnout is bad for business
59 Mic , Here ’ s how many female CEOs actually run the biggest clothing companies ( October 2015 ) 
60 Q41
61 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
62 IndustriALL ( SFI0073 ) 
63 Letter from the Mayor of Leicester Sir Peter Soulsby to the Chair ( 21 Dec 2018 ) 
64 Environmental Audit Committee , HMRC figures reveal exploitation in UK fashion industry ( January 2019 ) 
65 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
66 Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh , Quarterly Aggregate Report ( October 2018 )  , p . 9 . 
67 Al Jazeera , Almost 5 , 000 Bangladeshi garment workers sacked over strikes ( January 2019 ) 
68 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
14 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
shortest lead times , often resulting in corner cutting , impacting both worker welfare and 
the environment .  ’ 69 Apparel supply chain consultant Olivia Windham Stewart said that 
she feared the voice of suppliers was not being heard in the debate . She said : 
While wages low and working conditions can be poor , many apparel 
companies continue to report profits in the millions or billions of dollars ; 
they continue to deliver returns to shareholders ; their owners continue to 
appear at the top of rich lists from Spain , to Sweden to Japan . Meanwhile , 
what do suppliers experience ? In the five years since the Rana Plaza incident , 
the price paid by lead firms to supplier factories in Bangladesh has declined 
by 13% , with a resulting 13 . 3% decrease in profit margins from 2011 to 2016 
. This in a context where brands are asking more of suppliers in terms of 
compliance and remediation–i . e . higher costs . A number of Bangladeshi 
suppliers told me directly , and off the record , that UK brands were not 
prepared to adjust their prices in response to exchange rate fluctuations 
after the Brexit vote . This means suppliers were being asked to produce the 
same quantity and quality of work at a significantly reduced price . 70
28 . This pressure on suppliers to offer unrealistically low prices was also recognised by 
manufacturers . UK factory owner and chairman of the Textile Manufacturer Association 
of Leicestershire , Saeed Khliji , has been quoted as saying : 
None of the retailers are giving us an ethical price . An extra £2 or £2 . 50 on 
a garment would sort everything out . Instead they squeeze us for pennies . If 
they don ’ t sell everything , they send it back and charge us for the carriage . 
If we are an hour or 30 minutes late with delivery they fine us £500 . I have 
been told of one retailer who is making £2 million a year from fines . 71
Union representation Vs Corporate Social Responsibility
29 . Garment workers ’ access to trade union representation is low according to 
IndustriALL . 72 In many garment producing countries , collective bargaining structures 
are weak or absent : over 90% of workers in the global garment industry have no possibility 
to negotiate their wages and conditions and so are not able to claim a fair share of the 
value that they generate . 73 IndustriALL argues that collective bargaining at industry level 
is ‘ the missing mechanism ’ which would enable significant progress to be made towards 
living wages for garment workers . 74 It argues that Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) 
programmes have failed to address the problems of poor working conditions and low pay 
in the garment industry . It says that CSR programs rely largely on auditing and compliance 
to attempt to improve conditions in the factories that produce for them : 
These unilateral , voluntary and nonbinding efforts have overwhelmingly 
failed to improve wages and working hours or to ensure respect for workers ’ 
right to join a union . Not only have they proved to be ineffective , but , in 
giving reassurance that something is being done , have become obstacles 
69 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
70 Olivia Windham Stewart ( SFI0092 ) 
71 Sunday Mirror ( 2018 )  , Brit sweatshop workers earning as little as £3 an hour making copycat celeb outfits . 
72 IndustriALL ( SFI0073 ) 
73 IndustriALL ( SFI0073 ) 
74 IndustriALL ( SFI0073 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 15
to finding genuine solutions to the root causes of low pay and excessive 
working hours . Where freedom of association is respected , and workers 
are allowed to organize unions and bargain collectively , workers are able 
to defend themselves from exploitation and obtain decent incomes and 
working conditions . Where these rights are denied , the CSR model is 
unable to fill the gap . 75
Cheap clothing
30 . We asked fast fashion retailers how they could pay workers decent wages while 
charging such low prices . Paul Lister of Primark said that its business model enabled it to 
sell T-shirts for £2 and still make a profit : 
That is a question that is often put to us . I think it is because our business 
model is slightly different from perhaps others . We do no advertising . You 
will have seen no billboards , no television advertising . Primark has never 
done any significant advertising at all . That can save us , in any year , £100 
million to £150 million compared to some of our larger rivals . That goes 
straight into price , so that keeps our pricing low . 
With our arrangements with our factory , we often buy on longer lead times , 
in quiet periods for the factories , and then we pay the factories early . If 
you are a factory owner , you will be able to give Primark a better price to 
reflect that . Then from the factory through to the store , we keep our costs 
to the absolute minimum and in the store our margins are very tight . Our 
published margins are between 9% and 12% . It is our business model that 
takes us to the £2 T-shirts . 76
Reshoring production
31 . After significant decline in recent decades , the UK garment manufacturing industry 
has experienced renewed growth recently as retailers have commenced or increased 
sourcing from UK suppliers . In some cases , this is for ethical reasons , such as Huit Denim 
setting up in Cardigan or Phoebe English producing her clothes where she can oversee 
production in the UK ( both of whom gave evidence at our hearing at the V & A museum )  . 
In other cases , clothing production has been ‘ reshored ’ to small garment factories in the 
UK because of their ability to rapidly supply ‘ fast fashion ’ retailers like ASOS , Boohoo and 
Missguided . This presents opportunities for regional economies as it can offer local garment 
manufacturers entry points into global value chains as well as employment opportunities 
for communities . However , we also heard concerns about working conditions and illegally 
low pay in the garment manufacturing hub of Leicester . 
75 IndustriALL ( SFI0073 ) 
76 Q152
16 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Labour exploitation in UK garment factories
32 . Leicester has the second highest concentration of textile manufacturers in the country 
with 700 factories employing 10 , 000 textile workers . 77 These workers produce around one 
million items of clothing per week for online retailers . 78 Unite the Union said that while 
the majority of the factories are compliant , there are a small number of factories which 
break the law to maximise profits . As low-end supply chains , garments have become 
marked by intense cost competition and unstable orders . 79
33 . A study by the University of Leicester in 2015 , commissioned by the Ethical 
Trading Initiative , examined concerns relating to both registered factories and smaller 
unregulated production units in Leicester . The study concluded the majority of the city ’ s 
garment workers were paid below the National Minimum Wage , do not have employment 
contracts , and are subject to intense and arbitrary work practices . 80 Workers ’ rights issues 
included excessive working hours , night shift subcontracting and poor health and safety 
conditions in the workplace . We received anonymous evidence from a former employee 
at an online retailer who visited a factory in Leicester where the fire door was padlocked 
shut . 81 Leicester has also been identified as a hotspot for human trafficking by the Stop the 
Traffick coalition ’ s Centre for Intelligence-Led Prevention ( CfILP )  . Stop the Traffick found 
abuse in the garment industry among other sectors . 82
National Minimum Wage
34 . The National Minimum Wage ( NMW ) was introduced in 1999 and is currently £7 . 83 
for workers over 25 . In April 2019 this will increase to £8 . 21 . HMRC enforces the NMW in 
line with the law and policy set out by the Department for Business , Energy and Industrial 
Strategy ( BEIS )  . In 2018 , journalist Sarah O ’ Connor carried out an investigation for the 
FT newspaper which revealed how small garment factories in Leicester supplying British 
online retailers were not paying the minimum wage . At our first hearing she told us : 
The going rate for a garment worker in lots of places in Leicester is £3 . 50 , 
£4 an hour . I was told that £5 was like a really top rate . You would walk 
out of a factory with your head held high if you were on £5 an hour . That 
shows that you are skilled . You have a lot of experience .  [ … ] The strangest 
thing about all of this is that it is a totally open secret . Central government 
knows about it ; local government knows about it . All of the retailers know 
about it .  ’  [ … ]  ‘ Enforcing the minimum wage is HMRC ’ s responsibility . I 
have some figures . HMRC in the five years to 2016–17 identified 232 , 000 
people who had been underpaid the minimum wage . Of those , only 83 were 
textile workers so , even though this is endemic in the textile sector , they are 
not looking there . 83
77 Letter from the Mayor of Leicester Sir Peter Soulsby to the Chair ( 21 Dec 2018 ) 
78 Unite ( SFI0084 ) 
79 Unite the Union ( SFI0084 ) 
80 University of Leicester , New Industry on a Skewed Playing Field : Supply Chain Relations and Working Conditions 
in UK Garment Manufacturing ( 2015 ) 
81 Communication received by a committee member from a whistle-blower , December 2018
82 Director of Labour Market Enforcement , United Kingdom Labour Market Enforcement Strategy 2018 / 19 ( May 
2018 ) 
83 Q47-Q48
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 17
35 . We heard that the buying practices of some online fashion retailers may be putting 
UK clothing manufacturers in the position where they can only afford to pay garment 
workers illegally low wages . Sarah O ’ Connor described how ‘ buyers ’ for the retailer play 
suppliers off against each other to drive down costs : 
Boohoo holds weekly meetings at its Manchester head office , where suppliers 
bring samples to the product teams in a single room with 10 to 12 large 
tables .  ‘ It ’ s like a cattle market ,  ’ says one person from a supplier who did not 
want to be named .  ‘ Say I ’ m the buyer , and [ you ’ ve ] just given me the price 
of this [ dress ] for £5 . I will literally hold it up to the next table and say ,  ‘ How 
much for that ?  ’ and he ’ ll tell you £4 . It ’ s ruthless .  ’ 84
36 . We wrote to the Chief Executives of Amazon , Boohoo , Missguided , and ASOS 
following Sarah O ’ Connor ’ s testimony at our first hearing in October . We also invited 
Chief Executives from ASOS , Boohoo and Misguided to parliament to discuss the 
situation in Leicester and concerns about the low quality of some ‘ fast fashion ’ garments 
and the excessive waste that this business model is generating . Responding to allegations 
raised at our first hearing , Boohoo Group ’ s co-founder and joint Chief Executive Carol 
Kane admitted that negotiations were carried out in front of other suppliers , but denied 
that manufacturers were played off against each other . She told us : 
The comments made on the cattle market in Manchester , we have a 
building that is currently going through renovation in the last two years . 
We have private meeting rooms upstairs as well , so suppliers who are not 
comfortable in a negotiation process next to other suppliers we do house in 
other parts of the building . That space is currently our trading floor . I do 
not know of any instances and I do not accept there are any instances where 
suppliers are played off against each other . I used to be very much a part of 
that supply chain for many years before I became a founder of Boohoo . com , 
so I do understand the sensitivity of costing from one supplier to another . 
I took that allegation on board . I have asked if that does happen . I have sat 
in meetings and I have not witnessed that ever happening on our buying 
floor . 85
37 . Boohoo denied that its buying practices and discount prices were to blame for 
illegally low wages in Leicester garment factories . The online retailer said that it lawfully 
produces affordable garments . It says that its £5 dresses are merely a ‘ marketing tool to 
attract customers to visit our website and these loss leading garments make up only 80 out 
of over 6 , 700 dress styles on the Boohoo website .  ’ 86 It said that ‘ the suppliers receive the 
full cost of making these garments and we take the loss of any margin in relation to these 
promotions ,  ’ 87 that it does not allow its buyers ‘ to order garments from suppliers at any 
price ’  ; and that it gives them training on the costing of a garment . 88
84 Sarah O ’ Connor , Financial Times , Dark factories : labour exploitation in Britain ’ s garment industry ( 17 May 2018 ) 
85 Q289
86 Boohoo response ( SFI0082 ) 
87 Boohoo response ( SFI0082 ) 
88 Boohoo response ( SFI0082 ) 
18 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
38 . Missguided said that since signing up to the Ethical Trading Initiative ( ETI ) it had 
 ‘ consolidated ’ the number of factories producing its goods in Leicester from 80 to 11 . 89 The 
budget retailer ’ s Head of Product Quality & Supply , Paul Smith , said that two members of 
the Missguided team had been threatened and physically assaulted by factory owners in 
Leicester in the past 18 months . We asked why they had been assaulted : 
Because they did not want us to enter their premises . These I must add were 
people that we were not currently manufacturing with but were scoping out , 
and they did not like the questions that we were asking . On one occasion 
a former director of Missguided was chased out of the building and one of 
my employees was gripped by the throat and pushed out the door . 90
39 . When asked what he thought they were hiding , he said : 
Underpayments of workers is usual . 91
The Ethical Trading Initiative ( ETI ) is an alliance of companies , trade unions and 
NGOs that promotes respect for workers ’ rights around the globe . 92 All corporate 
members of ETI agree to adopt the ETI Base Code of labour practice , which is based 
on the standards of the International Labour Organisation ( ILO )  . ETI works out 
the most effective steps companies can take to implement the Base Code in their 
supply chains . 93 ETI ’ s website says that member companies report annually on their 
efforts and the results they are achieving at factory level . ETI says that it expects 
companies to improve their ethical trade performance over time , and that it has ‘ a 
robust disciplinary procedure for companies that fail to make sufficient progress 
or to honour their membership obligations .  ’ 94 ETI has established a collaborative 
company-led programme to improve legal and ethical labour standards in suppliers ’ 
factories called Fast Forward , which combines auditing techniques and a worker 
helpline . 95
40 . Missguided said it recognised the importance of the issues raised by our inquiry 
and told us it had ‘ made the commitment to join , and be an active member , of the Ethical 
Trading Initiative ( ETI ) in 2017 ’  . 96 It said it was disappointed that many of its ‘ direct 
competitors ’ had not signed up ‘ because we know some of the challenges you outline need 
co-ordinated action from all retailers to be impactful .  ’ 97 Carol Kane said that Boohoo 
Group was still considering joining the ETI , but : 
… we have been struggling to see where the benefits would be to some of 
our suppliers . We are not closed to the idea . We are still considering it at 
the moment . There are a few areas where I would say within Leicester for 
sure we probably use the most factories and we probably use the most CMT 
89 Missguided ( SFI0076 ) 
90 Q313
91 Q314
92 Ethical Trading Initiative
93 Ethical Trading Initiative
94 Ethical Trading Initiative
95 Anti-Slavery and Ethical Trading Initiative , Base Code Guidance : Modern Slavery
96 Missguided ( SFI0076 ) 
97 Missguided ( SFI0076 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 19 
[ cut , make and trim ] units , all of which we have in the last couple of years 
successfully managed to get through our audit process without being a 
member of the ETI . 98
41 . When we pressed Carol Kane on why Boohoo Group would not sign up to the ETI , 
Ms Kane replied : 
… we are using all of the same standards . We are not doing anything 
differently from the ETI . All our audits and all our standards are based 
upon their code and their conduct , so we are utilising all of that . The only 
difference today is one of a commercial decision . Being members we will be 
required to publish our whole supply chain , which is currently our engine 
room . 99
42 . The ETI wrote to us following the hearing to contest Boohoo ’ s evidence . ETI said 
that Carol Kane ’ s claim that ‘ we are not doing anything differently from the ETI ’ appears 
to be ‘ based on a limited understanding of what ETI does and what we expect from our 
members .  ’ 100 ETI said that adoption of its labour standards ( the ETI Basecode ) is just 
one of the basic requirements for company membership .  ‘ We also expect our members to 
show active engagement around the core principles of ethical trade and to demonstrate 
continuous improvement in their supply chain practices .  ’ 101 ETI said it expects its members 
 ‘ to take a proactive approach to identifying and resolving issues , and to demonstrate 
clear improvement over time . As well as adopting the Base Code , they sign up to a set of 
principles outlining our approach to ethical trade . These require companies to : 
• Demonstrate a clear commitment to ethical trade ; 
• Integrate ethical trade into their core business practices ; 
• Drive year-on-year improvements in working conditions ; 
• Support suppliers to improve working conditions e . g . through advice and 
training ; 
• Provide remedy if they have caused or contributed to a breach in workers ’ rights ; 
• Report openly and accurately about their activities . 102
43 . We also asked Ms Kane whether Boohoo recognised trade unions . She told us that 
Boohoo would recognise a union ‘ if the workers would like it ’ but that ‘ there does not 
currently appear to be a demand for our workers in our Burnley warehouse to require 
a union .  ’ 103 Following the evidence session this was contradicted by written evidence 
from the union of Shop , Distributive and Allied Workers ( Usdaw )  , contesting Boohoo ’ s 
statements . This included evidence of 23 recruitment and awareness activities , dating back 
to January 2017 , for Boohoo ’ s Burnley staff and written communications from Usdaw to 
Carol Kane and Boohoo ’ s HR Director asking to secure union recognition for Boohoo 
workers : 
98 Q328
99 Q330
100 Ethical Trading Initiative ( SFI0089 ) 
101 Ethical Trading Initiative ( SFI0089 ) 
102 Ethical Trading Initiative ( SFI0089 ) 
103 Qq336–339
20 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Overall , it is clear that despite Carol Kane ’ s assertion to the committee that 
Boohoo is open to recognising a trade union to represent their workers , 
the company has , over a prolonged period of time refused even the most 
basic level of engagement with Usdaw and appears hostile to the very idea 
of recognising a trade union . 104
44 . Unite the Union provided further evidence to us on the situation in Leicester . 105 It said 
 ‘ it is not enough to simply blame unethical factory owners . Retailers purchasing practices 
create a race to the bottom culture in the industry through their demand for cheap prices , 
rapid deliveries and a punitive financial culture which imposes huge fines on producers 
[ for late production ]  .  ’ 106 This creates an environment for precarious employment shifting 
the trend from permanent workers to temporary workers through the ‘ availability ’ of a 
transient , disposable mainly migrant workforce . 107 Unite says that : 
Whenever competition has pushed down garment prices , labour costs 
have always been the first to be put under pressure . The very nature of the 
garment industry requires higher labour productivity due to the limitations 
to technology-led productivity in an industry which requires manual 
labour . Accordingly , manufacturer ’ s wages are the highest single cost , thus 
in ‘ high-wage countries ’ clothing producers continually attempt to drive 
down wages for profit . 108
Labour Market Enforcement
45 . The British Retail Consortium argued that there should be more proactive labour 
law enforcement from Government agencies in the UK garment manufacturing sector 
in order to give retailers the confidence to source more products from UK factories . It 
suggested that licensing could be used to tackle poor working conditions in UK factories . 109
46 . In May 2018 , the Director of Labour Market Enforcement , Sir David Metcalf , published 
his office ’ s first annual strategy on labour market enforcement calling for a shift to more 
proactive enforcement methods . 110 The report recommended a ‘ significant increase ’ in 
fines for non-compliance and greater use of prosecution . He argued that the current level 
of fines for non-payment of the minimum wage do not provide a strong enough incentive 
to comply - especially given the low probability of inspection and detection . For example , 
the report noted that HMRC ’ s National Minimum Wage team completed nearly 2 , 700 
investigations in 2016 / 17 . It said that with 1 . 3 million employers in the UK this suggests 
that the average employer can expect an inspection around once every 500 years . The 
report points out that for non-compliance with NMW employers only face a penalty of up 
to 200 per cent of the wage arrears–in addition to repayment of the arrears . In 2016 / 17 , the 
average wage arrears were £110 per worker , implying a fine of only £220 . Written evidence 
we received from HMRC shows that UK-based garment factory owners have been forced 
104 USDAW ( SFI0096 ) 
105 Unite the Union ( SFI0084 ) 
106 Unite ( SFI0084 ) 
107 Unite ( SFI0084 ) 
108 Unite ( SFI0084 ) 
109 British Retail Consortium ( SFI0019 ) 
110 Director of Labour Market Enforcement , United Kingdom Labour Market Enforcement Strategy 2018 / 19 ( May 
2018 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 21
to pay out almost £90 , 000 to employees for non-payment of minimum wage . Since 2012 
an average of £900 has been paid out to 126 factory workers , far exceeding the national 
average . 111
47 . Sir David Metcalf suggested that there may be a case for using fines linked to 
turnover . His report argued that there has been insufficient use of prosecutions with only 
14 minimum wage prosecutions since 1999 . 112 He also noted that more can be done to 
ensure compliance with labour rights throughout supply chains . He recommended that 
joint responsibility measures , where retailers take on a share of responsibility for any 
non-compliance with labour rights in their supply chains , should be introduced . This 
would allow for enforcement agencies to work with major retailers if non-compliance 
was identified in their supply chain , harnessing the leverage of retailers to ensure labour 
rights are upheld . 113 In December 2018 the Government published its response to Sir 
David ’ s report . It accepted his recommendation that state enforcement should shift to 
more proactive enforcement methods , but it rejected his call for increased penalties for 
non-compliance . 114 The Government said that : 
… where non-compliance is identified in a supply chain , the Government 
envisages an approach whereby the enforcement body could privately 
notify both the supplier and the head of the chain . This could enable the 
head of the chain to work with the supplier to take corrective action . The 
Government will consult on this and how to address non-compliance in 
supply chains , working with business , trade unions and the enforcement 
bodies before responding to this recommendation . 115
48 . At our hearing with Ministers , it was revealed that a ‘ week of action ’ had taken place in 
September 2018 where the Gangmasters and Labour Abuse Authority ( GLAA )  , alongside 
Leicester Police , HMRC and the Health and Safety Executive , visited 28 textile factories 
in Leicester . Kelly Tolhurst , Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Department for 
Business , Energy and Industrial Strategy , refused to give the details of the enforcement 
action that had been taken . However , Janet Alexander from HMRC confirmed that 14 
premises are under further investigation and that it is taking forward some national 
minimum wage cases . Two cases have been referred to the GLAA . 116
Enforcing labour market law in UK garment factories
49 . We were shocked by the treatment of Missguided ’ s auditors . If this is how factory 
owners treat potential customers , we dread to think of the conditions endured by their 
workers . 
50 .  ‘ Made in the UK ’ should mean workers are paid at least the minimum wage in a 
safe workspace . It is unacceptable that some workers in the UK making clothes for fast 
111 Letter from HM Revenue & Customs to the Chair ( 14 January 2019 ) 
112 Director of Labour Market Enforcement , United Kingdom Labour Market Enforcement Strategy 2018 / 19 ( May 
2018 ) 
113 Director of Labour Market Enforcement , United Kingdom Labour Market Enforcement Strategy 2018 / 19 ( May 
2018 ) 
114 BEIS & Home Office , United Kingdom Labour Market Enforcement Strategy 2018 / 19 : Government response 
( December 2018 ) 
115 BEIS & Home Office , United Kingdom Labour Market Enforcement Strategy 2018 / 19 : Government response 
( December 2018 ) 
116 Q470–478
22 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
fashion retailers are not paid the minimum wage and are suffering serious breaches of 
health and safety law in their workplaces . We support calls from the Director of Labour 
Market Enforcement for a more proactive approach to the enforcement of the national 
minimum wage . HMRC ’ s National Minimum Wage team needs greater resourcing 
in order to increase their inspection and detection work . We also recommend that 
Boohoo engage with Usdaw as a priority and recognise unions for its workers . We 
recommend that textile retailers operating internationally follow the example of Asos , 
H & M , Esprit and Inditex in signing up to Global Framework Agreements . These put 
in place the highest standards of trade union rights , health , safety and environmental 
practices , across the retailers ’ global operations , regardless of local country standards . 
Forced labour in fashion supply chains
51 . We heard disturbing evidence that forced labour is still present in fashion supply 
chains . In a practice dating from Soviet times , the repressive governments of Uzbekistan 
and Turkmenistan continue to force their own citizens to pick cotton under harsh 
conditions each harvest season . 117 Both Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are in the top ten 
cotton producers in the world . 118 There are reports that prison labour in China has been 
used to produce garments for well-known Western brands . 119
52 . Anti-Slavery International campaigner Kate Elsayed-Ali also highlighted the 
Sumangali system practiced in India to illustrate the often ‘ gendered ’ nature of forced and 
child labour in fashion supply chains : 
What I see globally is that women and girls really do comprise the majority 
of people in forced labour and slavery situations . There are particular 
vulnerabilities . There are also gendered forms of forced labour and child 
labour . If I take the example of India , a massive cotton yarn producer after 
China , there is a very specific form of forced labour within the cotton 
mills that only affects women and girls . It is called the sumangali system . 
It is pretty widespread in Tamil Nadu where most of those spinning mills 
operate . Girls are bonded to a particular mill for a period of up to three 
years . Their parents take an advance payment . The intention behind that 
is that at the end of the three-year period that would be used to arrange 
their marriage , essentially , but the girls go to the mills with an agent , will 
have signed contracts that they don ’ t have a copy of and , in most cases , they 
will not have been able to read . We are talking about quite young , 13 to 18 
year-olds working 12-hour days . They will be living in camps associated 
with that mill . They will not be able to go home and visit their parents , in 
the hope that at the end of those three years they will have this advance 
payment . It very much is bonded child labour . 120
117 Anti-Slavery , Cotton Crimes : Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan
118 The Daily Records , Top 10 Largest Cotton Producing Countries In The World ( January 2019 ) 
119 Financial Times ,  ‘ I was locked inside a steel cage ’  : Peter Humphrey on his life inside a Chinese prison ( Feb 2018 ) 
120 Q45
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 23
53 . In written evidence Burberry said that it refuses to source from countries if it considers 
labour and environmental rights to fall below Burberry ’ s standards , particularly if there 
are concerns around modern slavery . These countries include : Bangladesh , Pakistan , 
Cambodia and Myanmar . Burberry stated that the list is reviewed in collaboration with 
its supply chain team . 121
Transparency
54 . Most brands source materials and products from long , disjointed supply chains in 
the global south . The fashion industry depends on unequal power relationships and the 
 ‘ invisibilisation ’ of mostly female manual workers . We do not see the faces of the people 
who make our clothes . 122 According to lecturer in Sustainability , Retail & Fashion at the 
University of Leeds , Dr Mark Sumner ,  ‘ these brands and suppliers have little awareness of 
or understanding of each other .  ’ 123 This has led to concerns that retailers can simply pass 
the responsibility for labour exploitation down the supply chain , with no accountability . 124
Eco Age described this low cost , high volume , zero consequence production method . They 
said that : 
Because the major brands do not employ the workers directly , or own the 
factories they produce in , they are able to profit hugely , all while remaining 
free of responsibility for the effects of poverty wages , factory disasters , and 
the ongoing violent treatment of workers . 125
55 . Dr Sumner argued that legislation requiring greater transparency would have a major 
impact in driving positive change . He says : 
A very simple requirement for brands to declare the source of raw material 
used in their garments would lead to a paradigm shift in attitudes . This 
type approach would be ground breaking for the industry , setting an 
aspirational , but achievable standard that would be the envy of the rest of 
the developed world . 126
Modern Slavery Act
56 . In 2014 the Home Office introduced the Modern Slavery Strategy to tackle slavery , 
servitude , forced labour and human trafficking , and in 2015 Parliament passed the 
Modern Slavery Act . The Transparency in Supply Chains clause in the Act requires 
companies with a turnover of more than £36 million to produce a statement on slavery 
and human trafficking each year setting out the steps the organisation has taken to ensure 
that modern slavery is not taking place in their business or supply chain , including if the 
organisation has taken no steps . 127
121 Burberry ( SFI0083 ) 
122 Q86
123 Dr Mark Sumner , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
124 London Textile Forum ( SFI0044 )  ; Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 )  ; ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
125 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
126 Dr Mark Sumner , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
127 Public Accounts Committee , Reducing modern slavery ( May 2018 ) 
24 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
57 . The Government says that the Act has increased transparency in supply chains . 
However , concerns have been raised by the Public Accounts Committee ( PAC ) that the 
Government does not monitor whether statements made under the Modern Slavery Act 
comply with the legislation and has never used its powers to penalise companies that do not 
comply . 128 PAC reported that as of October 2017 , the Modern Slavery Registry ( produced 
by the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre ) held around 3 , 000 statements out 
of an estimated 9 , 000–11 , 000 businesses that the Department estimates the legislation 
applies to . 
58 . The Home Office Minister Victoria Atkins MP was unable to tell us how many of the 
UK ’ s major fashion retailers have already completed modern slavery statements : 
In terms of companies that have reported : we know that around 60% of 
businesses that we believe to be within scope have put up statements ; 60% 
of companies in total . I do not have the breakdown for fashion companies 
because one of the difficulties , and not just in this exercise—it applies to 
the exercise that required companies to issue their gender pay gap—is that 
people assume that there is some giant Government database of companies 
that fall within these scopes and there isn ’ t . There has been a great deal of 
work in the modern slavery sphere , but also in the gender pay gap sphere , 
to try to find the companies that are in scope for this legislation and from 
there make it clear that they should comply . 
We were concerned that only 60%—although it is more than half ; frankly , it 
should be 100%—have complied with their requirements under section 54 . 
Last month my Department wrote to around 17 , 000 businesses to ask them , 
first , to confirm that they are in scope under section 54 and secondly , if 
they have not already put up statements that they should do so by 31 March 
next year , and then also inviting them to sign up to a database whereby we 
can share information and guidance as to good practice . I am pleased to 
say , around 2 , 500 businesses that we have written to have signed up to that 
database . 129
The Companies Act 2006 requires that a statement be made on human rights issues in a 
company ’ s Annual Report only ‘ where necessary for an understanding of the development , 
performance or position of the company ’ s business .  ’ 130 The Companies Act 2006 does not 
mention supply chains or modern slavery . This means it is the choice of the business what 
policies are relevant and what detail necessary when reporting on human rights issues 
within its operations . This system lacks accountability and places too much reliance on 
companies to self-disclose . 
59 . Ongoing research at Leeds University by Dr Mark Sumner has identified 24 leading 
retailers , including Foot Locker and Valentino , who are non-compliant with the Modern 
Slavery Act by not making available their modern slavery statements as of December 2018 
( see Appendix 1 )  . Such wide non-compliance with the de minimis reporting requirements 
shows that many household names have failed utterly to engage with this legislation . 
128 Public Accounts Committee , Reducing modern slavery ( May 2018 ) 
129 Q466
130 Home Office ( 2017 )  , p . 25 . 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 25
Due diligence law
60 . We heard a number of calls for the Modern Slavery Act to be strengthened to introduce 
mandatory due diligence for companies . 131 Anti-Slavery International campaigner Kate 
Elsayed-Ali told us that the Modern Slavery Act was an ‘ important step forwards ’ but that 
it had limitations that needed to be addressed . She said that : 
Businesses are required to publish a statement saying what they are doing 
to address slavery in their supply chains , but technically a business could 
publish a slavery statement saying ,  “ We are not doing anything ” and they 
would still be compliant with the transparency in supply chains clause of 
that Act . I think we need to look beyond compliance . What my organisation 
is calling for is mandatory supply chains transparency but also mandatory 
due diligence . That is businesses looking proactively at the entirety of their 
supply chains to establish what are their forced labour risks , what are their 
child labour risks , how can we address those ? 132
61 . In the absence of supply chain traceability standards , concerns have been raised 
by Fashion Revolution and the London Textile Forum that brands can simply pass the 
responsibility down the supply chain , with no accountability . 133 A Behind the Barcode 
report in 2015 found that of 219 retailers surveyed , 91% did not have full knowledge of 
where their cotton comes from , 75% did not know the source of all their fabrics , and 
only half could trace where their products are cut and sewn . 134 Fashion Revolution also 
called for the Government to pass mandatory ‘ due diligence ’ laws , and pointed to recent 
regulatory examples in France and Switzerland . It said that introducing such a law would 
require companies to identify , prevent , mitigate and account for how they address their 
actual and potential adverse social and environmental impacts . 135 Fashion Revolution 
recommended that the Modern Slavery Act be strengthened with further transparency 
requirements : 
• Extending the legislation to cover public procurement ; 
• Establishing , maintaining and monitoring an easily searchable public database 
of companies that are required to comply , including a copy of their annual MSA 
statements ; 
• Require common , robust and comparable standards for reporting transparency 
information ; 
• Establish and enforce penalties for companies that do not comply . 136
131 Anti-Slavery International ( SFI0071 )  ; Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 )  ; Labour Behind the Label ( SFI0067 ) 
132 Q43
133 London Textile Forum ( SFI0044 ) 
134 Baptist World Aid Australia ( 2015 )  , The Truth Behind the Barcode : Australian Fashion Report 2015 . 
135 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
136 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
26 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
The French Corporate Duty of Vigilance Law passed in 2017 requires all French 
companies that have more than 5 , 000 employees domestically , or employ 10 , 000 
employees or more worldwide , to implement an effective ‘ vigilance ’ plan to address 
environmental , health and safety and human rights both in their own operations 
and at their suppliers and sub-contractors . 137 This is stronger than the UK ’ s Modern 
Slavery Act and California ’ s Transparency in Supply Chains Act , which only require 
firms to report on any efforts they have taken to identify human rights ’ risks . 138
62 . In August the Government announced a review of the operation and effectiveness 
the Modern Slavery Act 2015 to identify potential improvements . The review will consider 
how to ensure compliance and drive up the quality of statements produced by eligible 
companies . 139 The review aims to report to the Home Secretary before the end of March 
2019 . 
63 . There must be more transparency in supply chains and there is a strong case for 
the Modern Slavery Act to be strengthened . The current requirement to produce a 
statement does not ensure that action is taken by big retailers and even this is not 
adequately monitored . The Government should publish a publicly accessible list of all 
those retailers required to release a modern slavery statement . This should be supported 
by an appropriate penalty for those companies who fail to report and comply with the 
Modern Slavery Act . This will increase transparency and require the establishment of 
formal monitoring of whether statements comply with legislation . 
64 . The Companies Act 2006 requires that a statement be made on human rights issues 
in a company ’ s Annual Report only ‘ where necessary ’  . This system lacks accountability 
and places too much reliance on companies to self-disclose . We recommend that the 
Companies Act 2006 be updated to include explicit reference to ‘ modern slavery ’ and 
 ‘ supply chains ’  . Statements on a business ’ approach to human rights in its supply chain 
should be mandatory as part of the Annual Report . The Financial Reporting Council ’ s 
( FRC ) Corporate Governance Code and UK Stewardship Code , and the Financial 
Conduct Authority ’ s ( FCA ) listing rules should likewise be amended to require modern 
slavery disclosures on a comply or explain basis by 2022 . If this is not possible then a 
Corporate Duty of Vigilance Law , as in France , should be considered . Fashion retailers 
must not be allowed to turn a blind eye to labour and environmental abuses in their 
supply chains . Retailers should be investing in technology that allows them - and their 
customers - to track where their materials and products are sourced and made . We 
recommend that the Government strengthen the Modern Slavery Act to require large 
companies to perform due diligence checks across their supply chains to ensure their 
materials and products are being produced without forced or child labour . We also 
recommend that Government procurement should be covered by the Modern Slavery 
Act . 
65 . We recommend that the Government works with industry to trace the source of raw 
material in garments to tackle social and environmental abuses in their supply chains . 
Digital technology is widely used in other supply chains . We do not understand why a 
modern high-tech industry like fashion does not have these systems already in place . 
137 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
138 Corporate Social Responsibility and the law , The French Duty of Vigilance Law : What You Need to Know ( August 
2017 ) 
139 Home Office , Review of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 : terms of reference ( August 2018 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 27
Some companies told us they can trace their materials down to Tier 4 suppliers . This 
begs the question - if one can do it , why can ’ t all ? This first step is essential if fashion 
is to tackle its waste , water , chemical and carbon footprint . This also reduces the 
opportunities for sub-contractors to take their cut along the supply chain . 
28 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
3 Fashion ’ s environmental price tag
Environmental impact
66 . Everything we wear has an embedded environmental cost in terms of energy , water , 
land and chemicals used . This depends on multiple factors . The fibres that are used 
and whether they were grown or made , the production methods used , how they are 
processed into yarn , transported , dyed , printed and made into clothes . We heard that 
the environmental price tag for our clothes is largely determined during the design and 
production phase : 
• Production of fibres by polymer extrusion or agriculture makes the largest 
contribution to the carbon footprint of clothing ; 140
• The greatest quantity of water is used during the growing and production of 
fibres ; 141
• Choice of synthetic fibre and design of garments can result in significant 
differences in the emission of plastic microfibres to the environment ; 142
• The best opportunity within the clothing lifecycle to increase longevity is at the 
design stage , as changes to design practices can have a significant impact on how 
long items remain wearable . 143
Key facts & figures on the carbon , water and land-use footprint of textiles
A polyester shirt has more than double the carbon footprint of a cotton shirt ( 5 . 5 kg 
CO2e vs . 2 . 1 kg CO2e )  . 144
One kilogram of cotton - equivalent to the weight of a shirt and pair of jeans - can 
take as much as 10 , 000–20 , 000 litres of water to produce . 145
The fashion industry is projected to use 35% more land for fibre production by 2030—
an extra 115 million hectares that could be left for biodiversity or used to grow crops 
to feed an expanding population . 146
Energy and climate
67 . Textile production is a major contributor to climate change . It produces an estimated 
1 . 2 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent ( CO2e ) per year - more than international flights and 
maritime shipping combined . 147 It is estimated that across the full lifecycle of clothing 
globally , the industry has an annual carbon footprint of 3 . 3 billion tonnes CO2e . 148 That 
figure is close to the combined carbon footprint of all 28 current members of the EU ( 3 . 5 
140 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
141 WRAP ( the Waste & Resources Action Programme )  ( SFI0050 ) 
142 Professor Richard Thompson ( SFI0007 ) 
143 Clothing Sustainability Research Group , Nottingham Trent University ( SFI0049 ) 
144 Kirchain , R .  , Olivetti , E .  , Reed Miller , T .  & Greene , S . Sustainable Apparel Materials ( Materials Systems 
Laboratory , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 2015 )  . 
145 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
146 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
147 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
148 School of Design , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 29
billion tonnes )  . 149 The total carbon footprint of clothing in the UK is growing - rising from 
24 million tonnes to 26 . 2 million tonnes per year in 2016 , according to WRAP . 150 If fashion 
continues on its current path , it could use more than 26% of the global carbon budget 
associated with a 2°C pathway by 2050 , according to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation . 151
Water consumption
68 . Large quantities of water are also used . In 2016 , WRAP estimated that the water 
footprint of clothes used in the UK was 8 billion cubic metres . 152 Globally , the fashion 
industry consumes an estimated 79 billion cubic metres of fresh water annually . The 
growing and production of fibres consumes the greatest quantity of water . Water is also 
used when dyeing , finishing and washing clothes . 153 Adding rips and tears to jeans by the 
application of chemicals is harmful to workers and the environment . 154 Textile production 
is responsible for high volumes of water containing hazardous chemicals being discharged 
into rivers and water courses . 155 Twenty per cent of industrial water pollution globally is 
attributable to the dyeing and treatment of textiles , according to the Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation . 156 Reliance on chemicals in the cotton production process is linked to high 
rates of water use - with up to one fifth of water use related to diluting chemicals according 
to the Soil Association . 157
69 . Cotton is one of the thirstiest fibres in fashion . According to WRAP , cotton production 
accounts for 69% of the water footprint of fibre production for textiles . 158 One kilogram 
of cotton - equivalent to the weight of a shirt and pair of jeans - can take as much as 
10 , 000–20 , 000 litres to produce , depending on where in the world it is grown . 159 The Aral 
Sea , formerly one of the four largest lakes in the world , has almost entirely dried up , in 
large part due to intensive industrial cotton farming in Central Asia . 160 It is now called the 
Aralkum Desert . 161 This is an ecological , economic and social disaster . 
70 . The water scarcity exacerbated by cotton production in arid regions has an impact 
on local communities - especially in low income countries . 162 Major cotton producing 
countries such as China and India are already suffering from medium to high levels of 
water stress in certain areas . 163 The Pulse of Fashion report warns that as water scarcity 
worsens in the future some cotton growing nations ‘ may face the dilemma of choosing 
between cotton production and securing clean drinking water ’  . 164
149 Global Carbon Atlas - CO2 Emissions
150 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
151 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
152 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
153 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
154 Heddels , The environmental benefits of raw denim ( June 2014 ) 
155 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
156 Ellen Macarthur Foundation , a New Textiles Economy : Redesigning Fashion ’ s Future ( 2017 ) 
157 Soil Association ( SFI0011 ) 
158 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
159 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
160 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
161 Euronews , Facing up to the challenges of the fast disappearing Aral Sea ( August 2018 ) 
162 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
163 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
164 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
30 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Land use
71 . The use of land for the production of natural fibres can also be a cause of deforestation 
and biodiversity loss . 165 The fashion industry is projected to use 35% more land for fibre 
production by 2030—an extra 115 million hectares that could be used to grow crops for 
an increasing population or preserve forest to store carbon . 166
72 . We are unwittingly wearing the fresh water supply of central Asia and destroying 
fragile ecosystems . Consumers can play their part by avoiding products with premade rips and tears and seeking sustainable or organic cotton wherever possible . 
Governments should oblige retailers to ensure full traceability in their supply chains 
to prove decent livelihoods and sustainably sourced materials . 
Natural Vs Synthetic Fibres
73 . There are ethical and environmental problems associated with both natural and 
synthetic fibres used in clothing production . To produce natural fibres like cotton , wool , 
leather , cashmere and silk , it requires the use of land , water , animals , feed and chemicals . 
Synthetic fibres like polyester , are made from petroleum , a non-renewable resource , and 
require an energy intensive production process . 
Natural fibres
74 . Cotton is the most widely used natural fibre in the world . It is a global commodity and 
hard to trace . It uses land , large quantities of water and is often grown using insecticides . 
Nitrogen rich fertilisers are used in cotton agriculture which increase soil acidity . 167
The Soil Association argued that increasing organic cotton production could make a 
significant contribution to minimising the environmental impact of the fashion industry . 168
It would reduce the use of chemical fertilisers , pesticides , and associated water use . At our 
hearing with fashion retailers , Primark ’ s Paul Lister cited a project that Primark had been 
involved in , where better irrigation and organic pest control methods had reduced water 
use , increased yield by 6% and doubled farmers ’ income . 169
75 . There are also ethical concerns around the use of some natural fibres . Animal 
welfare is of increasing concern to consumers and a number of companies have recently 
announced that they are abandoning the use of fur . Stella McCartney ’ s Sustainability and 
Innovation Director Claire Bergkamp told us : 
More and more people are recognising that we do not have to kill animals 
for the sake of fashion , that it is not necessary and you can have beautiful 
products that do not involve slaughter . The movement towards companies 
going fur free has been very exciting to see . We do not need fur anymore . 
It is really an archaic fabric and is not something that is necessary . The UK 
banned the manufacturing of fur and there is a possibility for the UK to 
ban the sale of fur , which is of course something we support at Stella . 170
165 Carbon Trust , Three sustainability trends shaping the future of the fashion industry ( March 2018 ) 
166 Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion Industry ( 2017 ) 
167 London Textile Forum ( SFI0044 ) 
168 Soil Association ( SFI0011 ) 
169 Q222
170 Q91
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 31
76 . The International Fur Federation ( IFF ) contends , however , that fur should be 
considered as a more sustainable fibre than fake fur , as it is biodegradable and does not 
contribute to microplastic pollution . The IFF claims that ‘ animal welfare is the uppermost 
priority for the fur industry and across the globe a number of programs are in place to 
ensure that fur derived from farms or from Government authorised conservation programs 
are subject to rigorous inspection and certification ’  . It says that from 2020 the sector will 
be launching FURMARK ,  ‘ a global certification and traceability system that brings these 
various programs together under an umbrella system ’  . 171 Animal welfare campaigners 
question whether these standards go far enough . Our colleagues on the Environment 
Food and Rural Affairs Committee recently recommended that the Government holds a 
public consultation to consider whether to ban fur altogether . 172
Synthetic fibres
77 . Synthetic textiles can either be made from plastics , such as polyester , polyamide and 
acrylic , or from plant materials that are chemically dissolved and then spun into fibres , such 
as rayon , viscose , lyocell , modal and cupro . The plastic most commonly used in textiles 
is polyethylene terephthalate ( PET ) or polyester . 173 Most synthetic fibres ( approximately 
70% ) are made from polyester and it is now used in around 60% of our garments . 174 This 
quantity has doubled since 2000 , according to the London Textile Forum . 175 The vast 
majority of synthetic fibres come from virgin plastics . One problem preventing greater 
uptake of recycled polyester is that low oil prices make new virgin plastics cheaper than 
recycled PET . 176
78 . Petroleum based synthetic fibres like polyester have less impact on water and land 
than cotton , but they emit more greenhouse gasses per kilogram . According to one 
academic analysis , a polyester shirt has more than double the carbon footprint of a cotton 
shirt ( 5 . 5 kg CO2e vs . 2 . 1 kg CO2e )  . 177 The London Textile Forum says that bio-based 
synthetic polymers made from renewable crops such as corn and sugar cane require less 
energy . It claims that these release ‘ up to 60% less carbon emissions , partly due to the 
crops creating carbon sinks ’  . 178
Recycled fibres
79 . Developing the technology and market for recycled fibres is a key challenge in the 
move to a more circular fashion system . The Director of the Textile Recycling Association 
Alan Wheeler told us that there is interesting R & D work going on to develop ‘ new 
techniques to recycle post-consumer polyester and cotton waste , and it is already possible 
to produce a wool yarn from recycled fibres that performs as well as one made from virgin 
fibres .  ’ 179 However , he noted that : 
171 International Fur Federation ( SFI0045 ) 
172 Environment Food and Rural Affairs , Fur Trade in the UK ( July 2018 ) 
173 O ECOTEXTILES , Why is recycled polyester considered a sustainable textile ? 
174 London Textile Forum ( SFI0044 ) 
175 London Textile Forum ( SFI0044 ) 
176 Environmental Audit Committee , Plastic Bottles : Turning Back the Plastic Tide ( Dec 2017 ) 
177 Kirchain , R .  , Olivetti , E .  , Reed Miller , T .  & Greene , S . Sustainable Apparel Materials ( Materials Systems 
Laboratory , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 2015 )  . 
178 London Textile Forum ( SFI0044 ) 
179 Recycling & Waste World , A stitch in time ( May 2017 ) 
32 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
… ability for our sector to recycle fibres is the Achilles heel of our industry 
and is perhaps the biggest stumbling block that the fashion industry will 
need to overcome if it is to achieve actual circularity and not merely an 
improvement of the current linear industry . 180
80 . The ability to recycle textiles into high value new products is limited . Current 
mechanical recycling processes damage the original fibre and shorten the fibre length . 181
This limits the options and range of markets for recycled fibres and in most cases they can 
only be recycled once . Demand from existing markets is low and hence the value that can 
be achieved for recycled textiles are low . 182
81 . There are some moves within industry to use more recycled fibres . The Textile 
Exchange has brought together fifty nine major textile , apparel and retailers - including 
adidas , Dibella , Eileen Fisher , Gap Inc .  , H & M , IKEA , Lindex , MetaWear , Target and 
Timberland—to aim to increase their use of Recycled Polyester ( rPET ) by at least 25% by 
2020 . 183 At the moment most plastic recycling infrastructure is set up for PET bottles and 
the technology for recycling old synthetic fabrics into new ones is in its infancy . 184 The 
fashion label Christopher Raeburn suggested that the Government reduce VAT based ‘ on 
proven recycled content garments ; this could be on a sliding scale , to encourage migration 
to entirely circular materials .  ’ 185
Microfibre shedding
82 . In 2016 , our predecessor Committee highlighted how trillions of tiny pieces of plastic 
are accumulating in the world ’ s oceans , harming marine life and entering the food chain . 186
Research has shown that marine habitats worldwide including shorelines , sea surface , deep 
sea and arctic sea ice are polluted with small plastic pieces less than five millimetres long . 
Synthetic fibres are common in most samples and have also been detected in commercially 
important fish and shellfish . 187 Laboratory studies have demonstrated the potential for 
microplastics to have harmful effects on marine life when ingested , although most of this 
research has focused on spherical microplastics . 188
180 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
181 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
182 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
183 Textile Exchange , Recycled Polyester Commitment
184 Time to Sew , Recycled polyester – a sustainable solution ?  ( December 2017 ) 
185 Christopher Raeburn ( SFI0095 ) 
186 Environmental Audit Committee , Environmental impact of microplastics ( August 2016 ) 
187 Professor Richard Thompson ( SFI0007 ) 
188 Professor Richard Thompson ( SFI0007 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 33
Key facts & figures on microplastic shedding
As much as 20% to 35% of all primary source microplastics in the marine environment 
are from synthetic clothing , according to academic estimates . 189
A single 6kg domestic wash has the potential to release as many as 700 , 000 fibres . 190
Over nine trillion fibres could be released per week in the UK , according to figures 
cited in the National Federation of Women ’ s Institutes ( NFWI ) In a Spin report . 191
83 . Textiles are estimated to be the largest source of synthetic fibres in the oceans with 
microplastics shedding into the water system every time garments are washed . A single 
6kg domestic wash has the potential to release as many as 700 , 000 fibres . 192 Evidence 
suggests that when synthetic textiles are landfilled or incinerated they can also leach 
microfibres into the environment . 193 Synthetic cellulosic fibres - made from plant matter 
rather than plastic - are sometimes said to be biodegradable , but Friends of the Earth 
warned that there is also evidence that they persist in the environment . 194 It said rayon has 
also been found in the digestive tracts of commercial fish species . 
84 . Fashion ’ s microplastic pollution probably begins during the manufacturing phase . 
When synthetic fibres are produced , combined into yarn and woven into fabrics , it is 
possible that fibres are released into the air and environment . 195 There is emerging evidence 
that this may pose a health and safety risk for textile factory workers . According to a 
recent academic study :  ‘ interstitial lung disease is a work-related condition that induces 
coughing , dyspnoea ( breathlessness )  , and reduced lung capacity in workers processing 
either para-aramid , polyester , and / or nylon fibers .  [ … ] Whilst these effects are distinct 
from those seen after asbestos exposure , the legacy of asbestos toxicology can in-part help 
predict health effects of fibrous microplastics .  ’ 196 The blog and shop Amberoot said that 
synthetic plastic fibres should be classified as a health hazard because they are ending 
up in our ‘ soil , food and the air we breathe ’  . 197 Natural fibres have also been linked to 
occupational health hazards . Byssinosis , also called brown lung disease , is caused by 
exposure to cotton dust in poorly ventilated workspaces . 198
189 Kirsi Laitala , Ingun Grimstad Klepp and Beverley Henry , Does Use Matter ? Comparison of Environmental Impacts 
of Clothing Based on Fiber Type ( July 2018 ) 
190 Professor Richard Thompson ( SFI0007 ) 
191 National Federation of Women ’ s Institutes , In a Spin : How our laundry is contributing to plastic pollution 
( October 2018 ) 
192 Professor Richard Thompson ( SFI0007 ) 
193 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 ) 
194 Friends of the Earth ( SFI
195 Friends of the Earth ( SFI0069 ) 
196 Gasperi et al in Current Opinion in Environmental Science & Health , Microplastics in air : Are we breathing it in ?  
( Volume 1 , February 2018 ) 
197 Amberoot ( SFI0023 ) 
198 American Lung Association , Lung Health & Diseases : Byssinosis
34 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
85 . There are three points where interventions could be made to reduce the number of 
synthetic fibres finding their way into our waters : 
• Changes in the type of yarn and garment design / construction ; 
• Modification of laundering processes , for example capture via filters in washing 
machines ; 
• Better filters to capture fibres in wastewater treatment . 199
86 . Significant numbers of synthetic micro-fibres are already intercepted in wastewater 
treatment , according to evidence we received from Plymouth University . Given the 
considerable volumes of textiles in use , however , even relatively high capture rates in 
wastewater treatment may still result in substantial emissions . 200 When fibres are captured 
in wastewater treatment they may still be returned to the environment when sewage sludge 
is spread on the land as fertiliser . 201
87 . The National Federation of Women ’ s Institutes ( NFWI ) carried out consumer 
research on day-to-day washing habits and the types of fibres people are washing on a 
regular basis . Its In a Spin report estimated that : 
• Nearly half of respondents ’ most washed items contained more than 30% 
synthetic fibres
• Respondents were doing 2 . 5 loads of washing per week per household on average , 
equating to 68 million loads of laundry per week in the UK
• At least 9 . 4 trillion fibres could be released per week in the UK ( based on 2016 
Napper and Thompson results of a 6kg polyester-cotton wash ) 202
Reducing microfibre shedding
88 . Research by the marine biologist Professor Richard Thompson suggests that there 
are considerable variations ( over 70–80% in some cases ) in the quantity of fibres released 
from different types of synthetic garment . For example , preliminary trials suggest that 
acrylic garments release more fibres then polyester . This suggests that interventions by 
brands at the design stage may be the most effective way to reduce synthetic microfibre 
pollution . 203 The length of the yarn , type of weave , and method for finishing seams may 
all be factors that could affect shedding rates . 204
89 . Professor Thompson argued that changes at the design stage were the most effective 
way to tackle the problem : 
 ‘ I think it is important to look at how easy is it to fix . If I take some of the 
work that we have done in our own labs—I am a marine biologist , I am not 
a textile designer—with a range of products that I have bought in a local 
high street supermarket and I wash them , I find that some are shedding 
199 Professor Richard C Thompson , University of Plymouth ( SFI0007 ) 
200 Professor Thompson , University of Plymouth ( SFI0007 ) 
201 Professor Richard Thompson ( SFI0007 ) 
202 National Federation of Women ’ s Institutes ( SFI0068 ) 
203 Professor Richard C Thompson , University of Plymouth ( SFI0007 ) 
204 Friends of the Earth ( SFI0069 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 35
fibres four or five times more quickly than others and these are identical 
looking , fleece-like garments . It is saying to me that there are things that 
we have not needed to think about historically at the design stage about 
life in service and fibres that are shed . It is not about not using clothing , it 
is not about eliminating fibres , but if we have identical looking garments 
and some of them are shedding fibres four times faster than others , it is 
suggesting to me that it has not been in the design brief to consider that . 
Some of those fibres will be intercepted by waste waster treatment but a 
good number of them will escape and because of the volumes of fibres and 
clothing that are used , even a relatively efficient waste water treatment plant 
can end up with a fairly substantial emission . My plea would be , as you 
are starting to consider sustainability right from the material source to the 
end of life recycling , is also to factor in at the design stage what is the wear , 
what is the life in service going to be like and is there a way we can design 
clothing to minimise those emissions . 205
90 . Multiple stakeholders have a role to play in solving the problem of microplastic fibre 
pollution from fashion brands to washing machine manufacturers and water companies . 
The NFWI said that it would like to see a collaborative cross-sector group of retailers , 
washing machine manufacturers , water industry , and Defra assembled to discuss how 
best to tackle the issue . 206
91 . The British Retail Consortium called for ‘ comprehensive research ’ to establish all 
the sources of marine microplastics to inform a multi industry approach . It argued 
that ‘ research into microfibres is still in its early stages and there are a number of other 
potential sources of microplastics in ocean ecosystems , including vehicle tyre dust , fishing 
net debris , and plastic pellet spillages .  ’ 207
92 . The Government should facilitate collaboration between fashion retailers , water 
companies and washing machine manufacturers and take a lead on solving the problem 
of microfibre pollution . Ultimate responsibility for stopping this pollution , however , 
must lie with the companies making the products that are shedding the fibres . Further 
research needs to be carried out into how design can be used to limit emissions of 
synthetic fibres and the lessons applied quickly . The need for more research should not 
be used as an excuse for inaction by retailers . Fashion retailers should be testing new 
synthetic garments for fibre release and publishing figures . 
93 . More research also needs to be carried out urgently into the occupational health 
risks of working with synthetic fibres . The Government should ask the Health and Safety 
Executive to review the evidence and take action accordingly . Manufacturers must 
be mindful of potential risks now and should seek to reduce the exposure of garment 
workers to airborne synthetic fibres . 
205 Q5
206 National Federation of Women ’ s Institutes ( SFI0068 ) 
207 British Retail Consortium ( SFI0019 ) 
36 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Measuring impact
94 . In our first hearing we heard how important full life cycle analysis is to avoid 
unintended consequences in policy decisions about clothes . For example , we were told that 
some durable garments made with synthetic fibres may be less environmentally harmful 
across their whole life cycle than some clothes produced with natural fibres–even though 
synthetic fibres are polluting marine habitats worldwide . Dr Mark Sumner from Leeds 
University argued that : 
The life cycle analysis data tell us that the fibres that have the biggest 
environmental impact , because of the way they are grown , are cotton fibres , 
cellulosic fibres . There are significant challenges in the use of highly toxic 
pesticides and overuse of fertilisers . There are issues of health and safety 
for workers , water consumption , carbon footprints .  [ … ] A direct switch 
across to natural fibres has all sorts of unintended consequences . We don ’ t 
know about the microfibre impacts because we don ’ t fully understand the 
biodegradability of cotton in the system . We also don ’ t know what happens 
to the chemicals that we apply to the cotton . All of us are wearing cotton 
now , it is by far the most common fibre , but all of the cotton we are wearing 
now has some sort of chemical applied to it . It might be a cross link resin , 
a colour , a performance chemical . That will be carried down through to 
the ocean on the fibre and we don ’ t know what happens to that .  [ When 
we talk about microplastic pollution ] we are talking about very miniscule 
amounts of release per garment . In some of the work that we have looked at 
we are talking about 0 . 04% of the weight of garment may be flushed out in a 
washing machine . I am not saying that we have to ignore it ; we have to bear 
in mind how many garments are in the world and being washed . It is trying 
to understand the unintended consequences of taking a kneejerk reaction . 208
95 . A number of tools have been developed to compare the environmental costs of 
different textiles , such as the Higg Materials Sustainability Index ( MSI ) and MADEBY Fiber Benchmark . 209 Textile Exchange has developed a number of global standards 
 ‘ to assure and verify sustainability claims .  ’ 210 For example , the Higg MSI , developed by 
the Sustainable Apparel Coalition , is a suite of self-assessment tools that enable brands , 
retailers and suppliers compare and understand environmental and social trade-offs 
between different materials and identify areas for improvement . 211
96 . In the Higg MSI , silk , cotton and wool are given high environmental impact scores of 
128 , 98 and 82 respectively , while fossil fuel based fibres like nylon , acrylic and polyester 
are rated as lower impact at 60 , 52 and 44 . 212 Some academics and industry bodies have 
raised concerns about what the metrics do and do not include . 213 The International Wool 
Textile Organisation complained that the Higg MSI costed nature ’ s carbon cycle ‘ for 
208 Q8
209 Kirsi Laitala , Ingun Grimstad Klepp and Beverley Henry , Does Use Matter ? Comparison of Environmental Impacts 
of Clothing Based on Fiber Type ( July 2018 ) 
210 Textile Exchange ( SFI0046 ) 
211 Higg MSI Materials Sustainability Index ; Global Fashion Agenda & Boston Consulting Group , Pulse of the Fashion 
Industry ( 2017 ) 
212 Higg MSI Materials Sustainability Index
213 Kirsi Laitala , Ingun Grimstad Klepp and Beverley Henry , Does Use Matter ? Comparison of Environmental Impacts 
of Clothing Based on Fiber Type ( July 2018 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 37
natural fibres , but not for fossil fuel-based fibres .  ’ 214 It also argued that the index does not 
 ‘ adequately assess end-of-life impacts .  ’ 215 Others have argued that the tools often neglect 
to include the use phase , where washing can increase the carbon and water footprint 
depending on the fibres . 216
Sustainable Clothing Action Plan life cycle waste targets
97 . The Sustainable Clothing Action Plan ( SCAP ) was launched by WRAP in 2012 to 
provide a collaborative voluntary framework for fashion companies to reduce their carbon , 
water , and waste impacts . Arcadia Group , ASOS , Primark , and M & S are all signatories 
and have agreed voluntary targets to reduce the carbon and water footprints of clothing 
by 15% and reduce waste by 3 . 5% by 2020 compared with 2012 . 217
98 . Dr Mark Sumner noted that the use of Best Available Technologies ( BAT ) offers a 
wide range of measures to help minimise the water and carbon footprints in the textile 
industry . The use of such BAT by retailers signed up to SCAP has supported significant 
progress against their carbon and water targets . SCAP signatories report an 11 . 9% 
reduction in the carbon footprint per tonne of garments and a 17 . 7% reduction in the 
water footprint per tonne of garments ( exceeding target )  . 218 However , they are failing to 
make significant reductions to the waste produced across the product life cycle of their 
products with a reduction of just 1 . 1% per tonne of clothing since 2012 . 219 Dr Sumner 
warned that many retailers not signed up to SCAP are not making use of BAT suggesting 
 ‘ there is a lack of policy pressure to incentivise best practice ’  . 220 Furthermore the impact 
of the increased volumes of clothing being sold in the UK outweigh the efficiency savings 
that have been made on carbon and water . 221
99 . The Soil Association said that SCAP is too focused on end of life issues rather than 
on production and supply chains . It says that it ‘ would like to see the SCAP do more on 
fibre selection , as even though this is taken into account in the tool that retailers use , it is 
not a major focus .  ’ 222 Some of the retailers we heard from who are signed up to SCAP are 
setting targets in this area . ASOS told us that : 
We ’ ve committed to 60% of raw materials for ASOS brands to be sustainably 
sourced by 2020 and our goal is to work towards 100% by 2025 . 100% of 
our ASOS Design cotton-based jeans will be made from sustainable cotton 
from Jan 2019 . 223
214 International Wool Textile Organisation ( IWTO )  ( SFI0054 ) 
215 International Wool Textile Organisation ( IWTO )  ( SFI0054 ) 
216 Kirsi Laitala , Ingun Grimstad Klepp and Beverley Henry , Does Use Matter ? Comparison of Environmental Impacts 
of Clothing Based on Fiber Type ( July 2018 ) 
217 WRAP , Sustainable Clothing Action Plan ( SCAP ) Signatories ; WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion 
( July 2017 ) 
218 WRAP SCAP 2020 progress 2012–2017 ( December 2018 ) 
219 WRAP , Sustainable Clothing Action Plan 2020 Commitment : progress against footprint reduction targets 
2012–2017 ,  ( 18 Dec 2018 ) 
220 School of Design , University of Leeds ( SF10026 ) 
221 WRAP ( SFI0050 ) 
222 Soil Association ( SFI0011 ) 
223 ASOS ( SFI0080 ) 
38 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
100 . The British Retail Consortium called for Government funding to support the 
Sustainable Clothing Action Plan . It said that companies used to be able to participate in 
the SCAP without a fee , but that WRAP had introduced a charge for business participation 
when the high street faces a challenging economic climate . 224 It argued that ‘ public 
funding for SCAP could make the initiative much more accessible for a wider range of 
fashion businesses , and therefore more impactful in addressing the environmental and 
social issues of the industry .  ’ 225
EU Ecodesign Directive
To date the EU Ecodesign Directive and accompanying Energy Labelling Regulation 
have focused on ensuring more energy-efficient products are placed on the EU market 
and consumers are sufficiently informed to purchase the most efficient products . 226
Proposals in the Ecodesign Working Plan 2016–2019 aim to use ecodesign to 
contribute to the circular economy by ‘ more systematically tackling material efficiency 
issues such as durability and recyclability ’  . 227 This includes considering the repair , 
remanufacture and recyclability of a product in the initial design and exploring 
specific requirements in areas such as durability , reparability , upgradeability and 
design for disassembly . 228
101 . Gaining a full picture of the impact of different fibres is important so that 
businesses , consumers and policymakers can decide on the most effective solutions . 
The work that WRAP has done to document the impact of fashion consumption and 
bring businesses together to share best practice and facilitate change is commendable . 
However , WRAP has faced significant funding cuts , with budget allocation reducing 
from £56 million in 2009 / 10 to less than £10 million for 2017 / 18 . 229 The Government 
must ensure that WRAP ’ s Sustainable Clothing Action Plan ( SCAP ) is adequately 
funded to provide its services to any retailer that wants to improve its sustainability 
performance - regardless of its size . Post 2020 , SCAP target ambitions must increase . 
To ensure the scheme continues we recommend that retailers pay for the funding 
of SCAP . This should ideally be included in the Extended Producer Responsibility 
Scheme . This should happen whether or not an EPR scheme is introduced . This could 
be set relative to revenue with discounts available for SMEs . SCAP does not currently 
include any commitments to reduce microplastic pollution from synthetic garments . 
Post 2020 SCAP should include new targets following the Ecodesign Directive , including 
reducing microplastic shedding . 
102 . Members of SCAP have made some progress in reducing their carbon and 
water consumption , but action has not been swift enough on reducing waste . We are 
disappointed that just 11 fashion retailers are signatories . 230 These improvements 
have been outweighed by the increased volumes of clothing being sold . A voluntary 
approach has failed . A retailers ’ commitment to SCAP targets should be seen as a 
 ‘ licence to practice ’  . We recommend that compliance with SCAP targets should be made 
mandatory for all retailers with a turnover of more than £36 million–a threshold in 
224 British Retail Consortium ( SFI0019 ) 
225 British Retail Consortium ( SFI0019 ) 
226 European Commission ( 2016 )  , Ecodesign Working Plan 2016–2019 , p . 2 . 
227 European Commission ( 2016 )  , Ecodesign Working Plan 2016–2019 , p . 3 . 
228 European Commission ( 2016 )  , Ecodesign Working Plan 2016–2019 , pp 8–9 . 
229 Resource ( January 2018 )  , WRAP funding issues to lead to the loss of 25 jobs . 
230 WRAP , Sustainable Clothing Action Plan ( SCAP ) Signatories . 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 39
line with the Modern Slavery Act . This should be done under a new Extended Producer 
Responsibility Scheme . The Government needs to provide clear economic incentives 
for retailers to minimise their environmental footprint . It should implement the EU ’ s 
Ecodesign Directive in the Circular Economy Package into UK law in its Resources 
and Waste Strategy and upcoming Environment Act . 
103 . A kneejerk switch from synthetic to natural fibres in response to the problem of 
ocean microfibre pollution would result in greater pressures on land and water use - 
given current consumption rates . Encouraging a move from conventional to organic 
cotton and from virgin polyester to recycled PET ( in garments designed to minimise 
shedding ) could help to reduce the impact of the clothing industry . We recommend that 
the Government reforms taxation to reward fashion companies that design products 
with lower environmental impacts and penalise those that do not . The Government 
should investigate whether its proposed tax on virgin plastics , which comes into force 
in 2022 , should be applied to textile products that contain less than 50% recycled PET 
to stimulate the market for recycled fibres in the UK . As part of the new EPR scheme , 
Government and industry should accelerate research into the relative environmental 
performance of different materials , particularly with respect to measures to reduce 
microfibre pollution . 
40 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
4 Textile waste and collection
104 . Our fashion consumption is causing a waste problem in the UK and other countries . 
The sector is becoming more resource efficient , as we discussed in Chapter two , but it still 
operates on a linear model of ‘ make , use , dispose ’  . 231 We buy more clothes per person 
in the UK than any other country in Europe , 232 five times what we bought in the 1980s , 
according to some estimates . 233 UK citizens discard around a million tonnes of textiles 
per year . 234 Charity shop donation rates are high , but around three hundred thousand 
tonnes of clothing still ends up in household bins every year with around 20% of this 
going to landfill and 80% incinerated . 235 Clothing that enters the municipal waste stream 
generally becomes contaminated or damaged , losing its reuse or recycling value . 236
Key facts & figures on textile consumption and waste
Consumption of new clothing is estimated to be higher in the UK than any other 
European country–26 . 7kg per capita . This compares to 16 . 7kg in Germany , 16kg in 
Denmark , 14 . 5kg in Italy , 14kg in the Netherlands and 12 . 6kg in Sweden . 237
Using HMRC figures , it has been estimated that 1 , 130 , 000 tonnes of clothing was 
purchased in the UK in 2016 , an increase of almost 200 , 000 tonnes since 2012 . 238
A one pence levy on garments produced for sale in the UK could raise around £35 
million for investment in clothing collection points , sorting and recycling . 239
Repairing
105 . Increasing garment lifetimes is one of the most effective means of reducing their 
environmental footprint . Extending the life of clothing by an extra nine months could 
reduce carbon , waste and water footprints by around 20–30% each . 240 Academics at the 
Centre for Sustainable Fashion at the London College of Fashion argue that carbon emissions 
and demand for water can be reduced through developing clothing maintenance skills , 
enhancing an appreciation of material qualities , and a ‘ habit of mind ’ that prefers existing 
items to new ones which then acts to slow cycles and volumes of consumption ( Craft 
of Use )  . 241 Professor Dilys Williams says that the practical skills associated with repair , 
including of clothes , should be mandated as part of the national curriculum at Key Stage 
1 , 2 and 3 . 242 The Centre also recommends increasing opportunities for apprenticeships 
and training in technical and craft skills for textile and garment production . 243
231 WRAP ( SFI0050 ) 
232 European Clothing Action Plan , Used Textile Collection in European Cities ( March 2018 ) 
233 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
234 WRAP , Time to unlock the value of household textile waste , says WRAP ( September 2012 ) 
235 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 )  ; Defra , Statistics on waste managed by local 
authorities in England in 2017 / 18 ,  ( Dec 2018 ) 
236 Dr Mark Sumner , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
237 European Clothing Action Plan , Used Textile Collection in European Cities ( March 2018 ) 
238 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
239 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
240 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
241 Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion ( SFI0034 ) 
242 Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion ( SFI0034 ) 
243 Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion ( SFI0034 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 41
Craft education
106 . The role that schools and colleges could play , both raising sustainability awareness 
and fostering the skills and habits necessary to create , mend and care for clothes was 
highlighted by many of the contributors to the inquiry . 244 Many people currently lack 
the skills , ability or confidence to create , repair or alter clothing and want to gain them , 
according to Professor Tim Cooper . 245 We heard anecdotal evidence about the prevailing 
throwaway culture . Dr Sumner recalled a conversation he had overhead amongst his 
fashion students : 
They are designers who spend all of their time working in the design studio 
with a sewing machine and a needle and thread and everything . One of the 
students said to her friend ,  ‘ I have to go down to Trinity Shopping Centre 
to buy a new coat . A button has fallen off my coat ’  . That is one example , 
and it is a very bad example but there are real challenges around that whole 
thing about repair . There is definitely a niche where repair and making your 
own garment is important . I suggest it is quite a small niche in relation to 
mainstream , and what we are seeing is more and more people just thinking , 
 ‘ You know what , I am going to buy a new outfit because I can ’ t be bothered 
to fix it ’ or ,  ‘ It is so cheap to buy the outfit I am going to do that ’  . 
107 . The Clothing Sustainability Research Group at Nottingham Trent University argued 
that policy measures were needed to encourage routine clothing maintenance and fabric 
reuse . It recommended that : 
• Fiscal reform should be used to encourage the repair and maintenance of 
clothing by phasing out employers ’ national insurance contributions and zerorating VAT . 
• There should be government support for community initiatives such as Repair 
Cafés , 
• The Government should support the provision of relevant courses in local 
colleges and take action to reverse the declining number of design and technology 
courses in schools . 246
108 . TRAID argues that social responsibility should be encouraged through sustainable 
education initiatives which give the public the information and skills to understand the 
real social and environmental cost of consumption of cheap clothes . TRAID has been 
helping local authorities deliver educational activities to thousands of residents , as well as 
teaching practical repair skills . 247 The up-cyclers collective Waste Not Want Not warned 
that textile education was being neglected in schools : 
244 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 )  ; TRAID ( Textile Reuse & International Development )  ( SFI0010 )  ; WASTE NOT WANT NOT - 
Artisans and Crafters Facebook group ( SFI0014 )  ; Professor Tim Cooper ( SFI0049 )  ; Centre for Sustainable Fashion , 
London College of Fashion ( SFI0058 ) 
245 Professor Tim Cooper ( SFI0049 ) 
246 Clothing Sustainability Research Group , Nottingham Trent University ( SFI0049 ) 
247 TRAID ( SFI0010 ) 
42 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
UK undergraduate and postgraduate fashion and textile education is 
recognised as being the best in the world , yet these subjects are not really 
valued in schools . This needs to change and alongside that sustainability 
and waste issues need to be covered at all levels to raise awareness . 248
Reusing second hand clothes and upcycling
109 . An increase of 10% in second-hand sales could deliver environmental benefits , cutting 
carbon emissions per tonne of clothing by 3% and water use by 4% water , WRAP estimates , 
if it extends garment life by 50% . 249 The charity suggests that providing opportunities for 
resale in places where new sales take place can make it easier for customers to extend the 
life of their unwanted garments . However , it warns that the scope to increase second hand 
sales is limited . Although more take back schemes and availability of second hand clothes 
in mainstream stores could increase second hand sales , WRAP warns that the ‘ number 
of new garments that they are expected to displace is limited and so the savings potential 
is low ’  . 250
110 . The UK has a growing community of artisans , crafters and micro-businesses who 
 ‘ up-cycle ’ old , damaged and discarded textiles . Jane Grice created the Waste Not Want 
Not Facebook group as a networking platform for upcyclers . It now has around 7 , 500 
members of whom 3 , 270 are resident in the UK . She surveyed its members in August 2018 
and submitted their views to our inquiry . Their submission describes the barriers that 
upcyclers face when trying to access waste clothing from charity shops : 
Many [ up-cyclers ] source materials from charity shops and a few have 
succeeded in persuading charity shops to set aside damaged or lightly soiled 
items for them rather than automatically sending them to the ‘ ragman ’  . 
However often such items are never made available to the up-cycling 
community . Instead they are bagged up and reserved for textile reprocessing 
( the ‘ ragman ’  )  , which usually means wearable clothing is sent abroad to be 
sold in developing countries and the rest is shredded or incinerated . 251
111 . Members of the group said there should be a new approach to dealing with postconsumer fashion . They argued for ‘ regular kerbside collection of clothing waste 
( nationwide , co-ordinated with councils )  , which could be operated by local charities or 
textile recyclers ’ 252 and called for the creation of Regional Textile Sorting Centres . At these 
centres items would be graded according to their resale potential . They wanted more tip 
shops and scrap stores to allow upcyclers more access to used fabrics . 
112 . Oxfam said that some Local Authorities have encouraged the establishment of 
recycling centres , for example at supermarket car parks and operate kerbside collection 
schemes to make disposal of clothing easier . It said that the availability of kerbside 
collection of clothing doubled since 2002 to over 30% of households , but is still less than 
half of that for other recyclables such as glass and plastics . 253 In London only 11 of the 33 
248 Waste Not Want Not ( SFI0014 ) 
249 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
250 WRAP , Valuing Our Clothes : the cost of UK fashion ( July 2017 ) 
251 WASTE NOT WANT NOT ( SFI0014 ) 
252 Waste Not Want Not ( SFI0014 ) 
253 Oxfam ( SFI0087 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 43
boroughs offer kerbside textile collection for recycling and reuse . 254 The Textile Recycling 
Association estimate that there are approximately 15 , 000 kerbside clothing banks for the 
whole of the UK . 255
Pre-consumer waste
113 . Hundreds of thousands of tonnes of fabric are wasted at the design and production 
stage before clothing reaches the customer . When garments are cut out as patterns , for 
instance , as much as 15% of the fabric can end up on the cutting room floor . 256 The 
designer Phoebe English explained : 
For those of you who are not familiar with the production process of a 
garment , you have your flat fabric laid out on the table , you have your 
pattern pieces—your sleeve piece , your front piece and your back piece—
you lay them on the fabric , you cut around your pattern piece , you get 
your garment pieces and you put them together , but you are left with waste 
fabric . If you imagine every shop on Oxford Street and every garment that is 
hanging on a hanger in those shops … then imagine that the space around 
that garment , every single garment , is waste . 257
114 . In 2016 , this supply chain waste for clothing in active use in the UK was estimated 
at over 800 , 000 tonnes compared to just under 700 , 000 tonnes in 2012 . 258 This increase 
is driven primarily by the increase in clothing consumption . Around 440 , 000 tonnes of 
supply chain waste arises during preparation of fibres to make yarn and during garment 
production , most notably in China and India . The amount of waste varies by fabric and 
fibre type . 259 Some designers , such as Mark Liu and Phoebe English , are experimenting 
with zero waste pattern cutting techniques in which the garment pieces are designed to fit 
together like a jigsaw so that nothing is wasted when they are cut . 260
115 . Phoebe English highlighted legislation in New York State as an example of how to deal 
with pre-consumer waste . 261 Businesses there are required by law to separate and recycle 
or repurpose all textile waste including fabric scraps , clothing , belts , bags , and shoes if 
textiles make up more than 10% of their waste during any month . 262 This has led to the 
creation of organisations like FABSCRAP and HELPSY which collects bags of excess 
fabrics and scrap fabrics directly from fashion studios on a weekly basis around New York . 
Textile collection
116 . Charity shops are currently the UK ’ s main clothing collection infrastructure . The 
UK has one of the highest collection rates of used clothes in the world ( per head of 
population ) according to the Textile Recycling Association . 263 Around 650 , 000 tonnes 
of unwanted clothing is collected annually from charity shop donations , door-to-door 
254 London Waste and Recycling Board ( SFI0022 ) 
255 Email from the Director of the Textile Recycling Association to committee staff ( 10 Jan 2019 ) 
256 TED Research , TED ’ s Ten : 1 - Design to Minimise Waste
257 Q87
258 Defra ( SFI0047 ) 
259 Defra ( SFI0047 ) 
260 Black , Sandy ( editor ) Sustainable Fashion Handbook ( 2013 ) 
261 Phoebe English ,  ( SFI0055 ) 
262 New York City Department of Sanitation , Recycling for Businesses : Special Cases
263 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
44 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
charity collections , car park clothing banks , school collections , high street take-back 
schemes and kerbside collection . TRAID said that the UK ’ s 11 , 000 charity shops diverted 
over 330 , 000 tonnes of textiles from landfill in 2017 and helped reduce carbon emissions 
by millions of tonnes a year by reusing and recycling second-hand clothes . 264
117 . The supply of clothing entering the used market has increased in recent years , 
according to Dr Sumner . However , this is not being matched by an increase in demand . 
Of the volume collected , about 30% is sold in the UK ( e . g . through charity shops , online 
sales , vintage shops , etc )  . 265 The majority of the remainder is exported for re-use either in 
Africa or Eastern Europe . 266
118 . A handful of countries currently account for the majority of all used textiles collected . 
The USA is the biggest exporter , accounting for approximately 15% of all exports , followed 
by the UK and Germany , which both export around 10% of all used clothing . 267 Existing 
markets would not be able to cope with the increase in supply of used clothing that would 
result from countries like China matching the consumption , disposal and collection rates 
seen in the UK . The Director of the Textiles Recycling Association Alan Wheeler told us 
that : 
We are seeing China move really rapidly into this market . In 2010 it 
accounted for something like 0 . 88% of all global exports of used clothing . It 
now accounts for 6% and is the fourth largest exporter in the world . There 
is only one thing that is going to happen to the Chinese market and that is it 
is going to become the dominant factor .  [ … ] My estimate is that if China in , 
say , 20 years down the line were to be collecting half as much as the average 
British person does , the entire size of that market from China would be the 
same size as the current global market . We have to start seriously planning 
what to do with the stuff that is coming on to the market . 268
119 . The oversupply of used textiles has already devalued the used garment market , 
helping to push some textile recyclers into bankruptcy . 269 It has also lead to an increase in 
clothing waste exports to developing nations . There may be negative long- term impacts 
of this on the cultures and textile industries of these nations . 270
Stock burning
120 . In 2018 , the British luxury brand Burberry faced a storm of criticism when it revealed 
in its Annual Report for 2017 / 2018 that : 
The cost of finished goods physically destroyed in the year was £28 . 6m 
( 2017 : £26 . 9m )  , including £10 . 4m of destruction for Beauty inventory . 271
264 TRAID ( SFI0010 ) 
265 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
266 BBC News , Where do your old clothes go ?  ( February 2015 ) 
267 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
268 Q4
269 Lets Recycle , Six textile recyclers close with more to come ( June 2013 ) 
270 Clothing Sustainability Research Group , Nottingham Trent University ( SFI0049 ) 
271 Burberry , Annual Report 2017 / 18 , p . 165 . 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 45
This led to it being reported in July that the retailer had incinerated unsold clothes , 
accessories and perfume to protect its brand and prevent unwanted stock from being sold 
cheaply . The BBC reported that the total value of goods it had destroyed over the past five 
years was more than £90m . 272 Burberry initially defended the practice saying that the 
energy generated from burning its products was captured , making it environmentally 
friendly . However , in September , Burberry pledged to end the practice and said it will 
reuse , repair , donate or recycle all excess stock . 273
121 . The journalist and author Lucy Siegle wrote at the time the story broke : 
… there are 101 processes that go into making a garment , from harvesting 
plants for raw fibre , to the processing and finishing of textile yarns involving 
thousands of litres of water . There are hundreds of hours of human labour 
too . Similarly , high-end cosmetics are a drain on resources in terms of both 
raw ingredients from the natural world and processing . To input all of these 
resources and then to squander them by burning ( recovering only a tiny 
proportion of that energy ) is pure madness given the backdrop of ecological 
emergency that we face . 274
122 . While incineration of unsold stock ‘ recovers ’ some energy from the products , 
it multiplies the climate impact of the product by generating further emissions 
and air pollutants that can harm human health . Incineration of clothes made from 
synthetic fibres may release plastic microfibres into the atmosphere . Climate changing 
emissions will have been generated when the products were created and more CO2 
will be produced when they are burnt . The waste hierarchy suggests that reuse and 
recycling comes first . This should be a priority means of dealing with unsold stock . 
Incineration should only be used as a last resort where there is a health and safety case 
for destroying the stock . The Government should ban incinerating or landfilling unsold 
stock that can be reused or recycled . 
Take-back schemes
123 . Clothing companies are not yet required by legislation to take responsibility for 
end of life recovery of the products they put on the market place , unlike electrical and 
electronic goods . 275 There have been a number of voluntary garment recovery initiatives . 
Some brands have used passive approaches to encourage recycling by providing garment 
recycling bins in their car parks and stores . Others have employed proactive clothing takeback schemes . These schemes encourage consumers to deposit old clothing in the brand ’ s 
stores , which is then donated to a charity or sold to recyclers . For example , Marks and 
Spencer and Oxfam launched a ‘ shwopping ’ take back scheme which has collected some 
20 million items since 2008 . Other companies , including H & M , Zara and John Lewis , 
have started or are planning garment recovery schemes . Financial incentives have been 
used to encourage donations , through cashback vouchers , and these have been relatively 
successful . 276
272 BBC News , Burberry burns bags , clothes and perfume worth millions ( 19 July 2018 ) 
273 The Guardian , Burberry to stop burning unsold items after green criticism ( September 2018 ) 
274 The Guardian , Burberry ’ s bonfire of the vanities is brazen and ecologically reckless ( July 2018 ) 
275 Clothing Sustainability Research Group , Nottingham Trent University ( SFI0049 ) 
276 Dr Mark Sumner , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
46 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Extended Producer Responsibility for textiles
124 . During the inquiry we heard a number of calls for clothing producers to take 
responsibility for fabric waste . 277 WRAP says there needs to be more leadership from the 
UK Government to achieve a step change in the sustainability of the clothing sector . It 
says the Government should consider an Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ) scheme 
for clothing in the published Resources and Waste Strategy . 278
Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ) is a policy approach where producers are 
given responsibility–be it financial and / or physical–for the treatment or disposal of 
products they put on the market . Assigning such responsibility provide incentives to 
prevent waste at source , promote eco-design and support the achievement of public 
recycling and materials management goals . 279 In the case of clothing , a levy on 
clothing sales as part of an EPR could be used to support UK collection , sorting and 
processing of clothing , R & D into new recycling processes . 280
125 . France introduced an EPR scheme for clothing in 2007 making clothing , linen and 
footwear companies responsible for the management of their end of life products . 281 The 
scheme has nearly trebled clothing collection points from 15 , 621 in 2011 to nearly 42 , 000 
by 2016 and collection rates have increased by more than 50% . 282 In 2009 , France was 
collecting 1 . 9 kg of discarded clothing , linen and footwear per person per year . By 2016 
this had climbed to 3 . 2kg . 283 Over 90% of the items collected are reused ( 59 . 4% ) or recycled 
( 31 . 8% ) and 97% of retailers in France are legally compliant . 284 The new sorting centres 
created by the scheme have provided 1 , 400 full time jobs , with 49% going to people facing 
employment difficulties . 285
126 . Dr Sumner expressed scepticism about the French EPR , saying : 
… it is a tax on the retail and brand environment , and I think before EPR is 
considered we need to be thinking about the consequences of it . It does bring 
in income , but one of the things that the Government should be thinking 
about is more municipal waste and kerbside collections . Should there be 
more work done in terms of providing the systems and the infrastructure 
for recycling of textiles and other materials ? 
127 . The textile recycling company Parker Lane Group argued that an EPR would have a 
number of benefits : 
• Encouraging sustainable production and consumption of products within an 
industry
277 Fashion Revolution ( SFI0056 )  ; Parker Lane Group ( SFI0094 )  ; Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 )  ; WRAP ( the 
Waste & Resources Action Programme )  ( SFI0050 ) 
278 WRAP ( SFI0050 ) 
279 OECD , Extended producer responsibility
280 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
281 Eco-TLC , 2016 at a Glance : Half-way results from the 2014–2019 accreditation agreement ( 2017 ) 
282 Textile Recycling Association ( SFI0013 ) 
283 Eco-TLC , 2016 at a Glance : Half-way results from the 2014–2019 accreditation agreement ( 2017 ) 
284 Eco-TLC , 2016 at a Glance : Half-way results from the 2014–2019 accreditation agreement ( 2017 )  ; Textile Recycling 
Association ( SFI0013 ) 
285 Eco-TLC , 2016 at a Glance : Half-way results from the 2014–2019 accreditation agreement ( 2017 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 47
• Aligning incentives to allow intelligent design of products to make the easy to 
recycle at end-of-life
• To reduce landfill and encourage recycling of products , and to help create a 
revenue framework to help investment into recycling286
It estimates than an ERP levy of 1p per garment could raise over £35 million in a year to 
improve textile reuse and recycling in the UK : 
Levy on goods produced : 
Clothing created 
for UK sale per 
year
Tonnes Kgs Pieces 1p per garment 5p per garment
Amount of 
clothing sold
1130000 1130000000 390000000 £33 , 900 , 000 . 00 £169 , 500 , 000 . 00
amount made 
nut not retailed 
5% * 
56500 56500000 169500000 £1 , 695 , 000 . 00 £8 , 475 , 000 . 00
Total Revenue £35 , 595 , 000 . 00 £177 , 975 , 000 . 00 
* Doesn ’ t include shoes287
New Resources and Waste strategy
128 . The Government published Our Waste , Our Resources : A Strategy for England , on 18 
December 2018 , its ‘ blueprint for eliminating avoidable plastic waste over the lifetime of 
the 25 Year Plan , doubling resource productivity , and eliminating avoidable waste of all 
kinds by 2050 ’  . 288 The Government says that packaging reform is its immediate priority 
and the key measure announced in the strategy is a proposal to make manufacturers and 
businesses pay the full cost of recycling or disposing of their packaging waste through an 
Extended Producer Responsibility ( EPR ) scheme . The new resources and waste strategy 
also promises to review and consult on measures , such as EPR and product standards , for 
five other waste streams - including textiles - by the end of 2025 : 
• Textiles ( clothing + other household and commercial textiles ) 
• Bulky waste–including mattresses , furniture and carpets
• Certain construction and demolition materials
• Vehicle tyres
• Fishing gear
286 The Parker Lane Group ( SFI0070 ) 
287 Parker Lane Group ( SFI0094 ) 
288 Defra , Our Waste Our Resources : A Strategy for England ( 18 Dec 2018 ) 
48 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Defra says that it plans to complete two of these by 2022 but it does not specify which 
two . 289 The strategy also promises to review whether Local Authority run Household 
Waste Recycling Centres could have their role extended to support textile collection 
by 2025 . However , the strategy also notes that Local Authorities are ‘ under pressure to 
make savings to their waste management budget , and many are looking to achieve this by 
reducing opening times of Household Waste Recycling Centres or by introducing charges 
for non-household waste items ’  . 290
129 . The Government ’ s previous waste and resources review published in 2011 , Government 
Review of Waste Policy , stated that ‘ we will review the case for restrictions on sending 
other materials to landfill over the course of the Parliament , including looking specifically 
at textiles and biodegradable waste .  ’ 291 This review does not appear to have ever been 
completed and no restrictions are in place to prevent textiles ending up in landfill . When 
we asked the Minister about it she had no awareness of the previous strategy regarding 
textiles and was not sure whether the review had been carried out . She said : 
Q483 : Kerry McCarthy : …can I ask about the 2011 Waste Strategy ? That 
promised that a review would be carried out into whether restrictions 
should be placed on textiles going to landfill . Did that review ever happen ? 
Dr Thérèse Coffey : Not to my knowledge . I am not aware that it has been 
brought to my attention . 
Q . 484 : Kerry McCarthy : Isn ’ t it normal practice , when you come up with 
the latest strategy , to look at the last one and see what was done and what 
was not done as part of that ? 
Dr Thérèse Coffey : I am aware that the amount going to residual house waste 
is falling in terms of tonnage and the amount that is collected for reuse or 
recycling is increasing . We do have set aside , as part of one of the areas 
we are going to investigate , extending the extended producer responsibility 
regime . 292
130 . Our desire for fast fashion , fuelled by advertising , social media and a supply of 
cheap garments , means we are disposing of over a million tonnes of clothes every year 
in the UK . Under the UN Sustainable Development Goals , the UK is committed to ‘ to 
ensure sustainable consumption and production ’  . We need to reduce the environmental 
footprint of the UK ’ s textile production and consumption . To do that , we need to 
reduce textile waste , improve resource efficiency and reduce the carbon emissions and 
water footprint of the clothes we buy . We need to simply buy less , mend , rent and share 
more . To support this we recommend that lessons on designing , creating , mending and 
repairing clothes be included in schools at Key stage 2 and 3 . The creative satisfaction 
of designing and repairing clothing can offer an antidote to the growing anxiety 
and mental health issues amongst teenagers . As well as providing a space to promote 
creative expression , the skills learnt can also provide a potential pathway towards job 
opportunities . 
289 Defra , Our Waste Our Resources : A Strategy for England ( 18 Dec 2018 ) 
290 Defra , Our Waste Our Resources : A Strategy for England ( 18 Dec 2018 )  , p . 74
291 Defra Government Review of Waste Policy in England ( 2011 )  , p . 9
292 Q483-Q484
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 49
131 . T﻿he Government must end the era of throwaway fashion . It should make fashion 
retailers take responsibility for the waste they create by introducing an Extended 
Producer Responsibility scheme for textiles and reward companies that take positive 
action to reduce waste . A charge of one penny per garment on producers could raise 
£35 million for investment in better clothing collection and sorting in the UK . This 
could create new ‘ green ’ jobs in the sorting sector , particularly in areas where textile 
recycling is already a specialist industry such as Huddersfield , Batley , Dewsbury and 
Wakefield in West Yorkshire . The Government ’ s recent pledge to review and consult 
on how to deal with textile waste by 2025 is too little too late . We need action before the 
end of this parliament ( 2022 )  . 
132 . T﻿he Resources and Waste strategy should incorporate eco-design principles and 
offer incentives for design for recycling , design for disassembly and design for durability . 
It should also set up a new investment fund to stimulate markets for recycled fibres . 
50 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
5 New economic models for the fashion 
industry
133 . Given the stark scientific warnings we face on climate change and biodiversity loss , 
we must reinvent fashion . Fashion that saves resources and energy , minimises plastic 
pollution , reduces waste and thrives uses a more circular business model . New economic 
models that rely on sharing or renting rather than ownership are emerging . From clothing 
libraries to baby clothes subscription services , upcycling and repair cafes and peer-topeer vintage sales on sites like Depop and peer-to-peer clothes sharing on apps like 
MyWardrobe HQ , there are many new circular business models . Retailers could look to 
implement these , boosting the second hand market and helping increase the opportunities 
for extending the useful life of clothing . Action could include : 
• Recovering and reselling items customers no longer want
• Hiring or renting clothing to customers so they can be used by multiple people
• Developing ‘ subscription ’ models , which enable customers to swap clothes but 
also incentivise retailers to use garments many times before disposing of them . 293
134 . The UK has an exciting ecosystem of sustainable fashion businesses , researchers and 
designers who are already forging a new vision for fashion . The value of the ethical clothing 
market increased by 19 . 9% in 2018 , according to Ethical Consumer magazine . 294 In Autumn 
2018 we teamed up with the Victoria and Albert ( V & A ) Museum to hold a hearing at the 
museum highlighting innovators and leaders in the field . At its Fashioned From Nature 
exhibition we saw a range of textile technologies that could reduce environmental impacts 
- such as apparel made from mycelium ( mushroom roots )  , beautiful gowns made out of 
old plastic bottles , dresses made from reused army surplus , low-impact disposable paper 
dresses , and leather like materials made from pineapple leaves . 
Levelling the playing field
135 . We heard concerns about the extra costs and barriers that the UK ’ s sustainable 
fashion businesses face . Innovators are faced with competition from businesses who 
are focused on reducing costs and maximising profits regardless of the environmental 
or social costs . Christopher Raeburn said that the ‘ current system favours brands that 
are located offshore , utilise unsustainable or environmentally unsound fabrics , and are 
unaccountable for the product at end of life .  ’ 295 Our inquiry heard calls for policy and 
incentives to level the playing field . Eco Age said that : 
One of the greatest difficulties for companies is that the ones that aspire 
to respect human rights and environmental standards , are faced with 
competition from those that do not . 296
293 QSA Partners LLP ( SFI0039 ) 
294 Ethical Consumer , The UK Ethical Market ( December 2018 ) 
295 Christopher Raeburn ( SFI0095 ) 
296 ECO AGE LTD ( SFI0075 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 51
136 . Similarly , Kate Osborne , from shoe brand Po-Zu commented : 
Sustainable fashion is competing on a completely unlevel playing field and 
this is especially apparent during the Black Friday / Cyber Monday holiday 
season . The reason fast fashion businesses can afford to discount so heavily 
is that somewhere along the supply chain , someone has paid the price–be it 
environmentally or through sweatshop labour . 297
137 . The fashion designer Katherine Hamnett called for radical changes to trade policy to 
level the playing field between outsourcers and domestic producers : 
For the clothing industry to survive in the UK and EU , we need new 
legislation that only allows goods into our Economic Blocks that are made 
to the same Labour , Human Rights , Health and Safety and Environmental 
standards , outside as inside . This would raise the cost of outsourced 
goods and make domestic manufacturing ( i . e . manufactured within our 
Economic Blocks ) more competitive and viable . It levels the playing field 
between outsourced and domestically produced goods , as it costs more if 
you actually have pay and treat the people who make your clothes properly 
and respect the environment . It would improve the lives of all garment 
workers in the outsourced sector due to better pay , better and safer working 
conditions ( a true living wage ) and a safer and better environment . 298
138 . The designer Christopher Raeburn started his eponymous label in 2008 and became 
famous for remaking army surplus fabrics into imaginative new clothing . All of their 
products embody the ethos of the brand : remade , reduced , recycled - utilising surplus , 
recycled or renewable fabrics . Christopher Raeburn has recently been appointed as global 
creative director for major US brand Timberland . Christopher ’ s brother Graeme who is 
the performance director for Raeburn joined us at the V & A to discuss their vision for a 
sustainable fashion system . He suggested that the Government should tax materials with 
high CO2 emissions and reward the utilisation and upcycling of waste and deadstock . 299
He said ‘ there is opportunity here to stimulate industry and growth , and place the UK 
at the forefront of responsible , innovative and - most importantly - desirable and stylish 
fashion .  ’ 300
139 . Leading sustainable fashion brands like Hiut Denim and Christopher Raeburn and 
heritage brands like John Smedley and Churches Shoes offer lifetime repair services 
for their products , but these services are not offered widely . Some smaller companies 
produce garments entirely made in England . Phoebe English says her pieces are made 
 ‘ from initial sketch to final stich [ in England ] in order to limit carbon and how much our 
product travels .  ’ 301 The clothing charity TRAID called on the Government to address 
 ‘ the structural causes of a throwaway society by promoting the repair and second-hand 
industry .  ’ 302 Professor Dilys Williams argued that we had to make it ‘ viable economically 
for people , for businesses and customers ’ to repair and reuse textiles . She said that 
297 Fantha Tracks , Ethical footwear brand Po-Zu calls for consumers to ‘ Champion an Alternative Black Friday ’  
( November 2018 ) 
298 Katherine Hamnett ( SFI0093 ) 
299 Christopher Raeburn ( SFI0095 ) 
300 Christopher Raeburn ( SFI0095 ) 
301 Phoebe English ( SF10055 ) 
302 TRAID ( SFI0010 ) 
52 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
repairing an item can often be more expensive than buying a new one , because we do 
not fully cost the environmental and social impacts of clothing production . 303 Graeme 
Raeburn suggested the UK should follow Sweden ’ s lead , where the government is reducing 
VAT rates on repairs to bicycles , clothes and shoes from 25% to 12% to encourage repair 
rather than disposal . 304 He also called on the Government to incentivise retailers to offer 
free repairs as part of the initial product purchase . The extra resources and wages it would 
cost to perform these repairs should be compensated with a tax break . 305
Encouraging change
140 . Dr Sumner from Leeds University School of Design warned that for policy 
interventions to be successful , we first have to understand the many positive benefits 
that fashion brings for society and individuals . Fashion allows people to identify and 
express themselves within their group and in society . It also provides excitement , fun and 
hedonistic pleasure : 
Importantly , fashion satisfies consumers ’ psychogenic needs ; what we wear 
communicates who we are and our status . The non-verbal communication 
about ourselves through the clothes we wear is a vital part of society . This has 
been the basis for fashion for thousands of years , and our modern culture 
is no different . But fast fashion is so successful because it has democratised 
fashion and the benefits of fashion , especially through the omnipresence 
impact of social media . Fast fashion has allowed all segments of society , 
irrespective of class , income or background to engage in the hedonistic and 
psychogenic pleasures of fashion . At no other time in human history has 
fashion been so accessible to so many people across our society . This is the 
power of fast fashion . 306
141 . Any solutions have to recognise and maintain these benefits . 307 Dr Sumner says 
more circular models need to be developed for the industry that ‘ incorporate the need for 
business growth , that recognise the desires of consumers and that retain the value of the 
industry to workers in the supply chain .  ’ 308 He cautioned us that incentives will be more 
effective if they do not compromise the ‘ powerful hedonistic and psychogenic pleasures 
derived from fashion ’  . 309
142 . Researchers from Exeter University and the University of Wolverhampton contend 
that ‘ the interests of the fast fashion industry , and the environmental need to reduce 
clothing consumption are not mutually exclusive , but contain marketable opportunities 
for the fashion industry to shift attitudes toward a more sustainable approach to clothing .  ’ 310
Their qualitative research findings suggest that ‘ embedding pro-environmental behavioural 
change into clothing practices ’ requires availability of long-term spaces in the community , 
where individuals can share knowledge and skills about making and modifying clothing . 
 ‘ This enables new ‘ meanings ’ to be generated about personal relationships with , and 
303 Q96
304 Traid ( SFI0010 )  ; Q96 ; The Guardian Waste not want not : Sweden to give tax breaks for repairs ( September 2016 ) 
305 Christopher Raeburn ( SFI0095 ) 
306 School of Design , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
307 School of Design , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 ) 
308 School of Design , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 )  ) 
309 School oF Design , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 )  ) 
310 School oF Design , University of Leeds ( SFI0026 )  ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 53
attitudes towards clothing .  ’ 311 They recommend incentivising high street clothing retailers 
to provide creative making spaces for customers to mend and modify clothing to provide 
a long-term , sustained service . 312
Sharing economy
143 . Many of the evidence submissions we received suggested that new ‘ sharing economy ’ 
business models for the fashion industry that involve hiring , swapping or subscribing to 
clothes services could be part of the solution . 313 At our V & A event Graeme Raeburn said 
that ‘ we have too much stuff already ’ and that new loaning and sharing economic models 
could replicate the buzz of a purchase without the material costs . 314 Phoebe English 
told us that the sharing economy would not only ‘ make a huge difference to how we are 
consuming clothes but is also a really exciting business model .  ’ 315 She said that : 
Trying to sell someone a hessian sack is not going to work . People want to 
wear exciting clothes ; they want to be inspired . If you are not doing that 
then you are not serving the industry and you are certainly not serving 
sustainability . It is a case of really exploring ways where you can perpetuate 
the excitement of purchasing . If you look at psychological charts , the 
endorphin high that you get from purchasing something begins to wane 
considerably by the third day .  [ … ] With hiring you get that endorphin high 
constantly because you can have a new thing within your purchasing power , 
which can help transform you as a person and make you feel better and 
make you look stronger and more positive , and you can do it more regularly . 
If you look at it within that construct , it is a really exciting business plan 
that could absolutely be implicated within the high street and it definitely 
should be . 316
144 . Clothing rental services that offer one time or subscription-based rentals are usually 
internet based , offer womenswear , and focus on renting high-end pieces for a fraction of 
the cost . 317 They offer consumers novelty without the need to purchase . 318 In the US , the 
hiring service Rent the Runway was launched in 2009 , offering designer clothes to hire for 
weddings , graduations or other occasions and now has six million members . 319 On this 
side of the Atlantic , Bundlee was launched in 2017 as the UK ’ s first baby clothing rental 
subscription . Its founder Eve Kekeh said that she had researched the environmental and 
social effects of the baby clothing industry and saw the rental model as a way to extend the 
lifespan of baby clothes . 320 She said : 
Recently a shift towards the ‘ access economy ’ has begun . The relationship 
between physical products and individual ownership has been undergoing 
a profound evolution , as sections of society do not want the physical items , 
311 Sensibility 4 Sustainability ( University of Exeter and Wolverhampton )  ( SFI0018 ) 
312 Sensibility 4 Sustainability ( University of Exeter and Wolverhampton )  ( SFI0018 ) 
313 Phoebe English ( SFI0055 )  , QSA Partners ( SFI0039 )  , Clothing Sustainability Research Group ( SFI0049 )  ; Professor 
Tim Cooper ( SFI0049 )  ; mywardrobeHQ ( SFI0020 ) 
314 Q93
315 Q93
316 Q93
317 London Waste and Recycling Board ( SFI0022 ) 
318 Bundlee ( SFI0021 ) 
319 Financial Times , Retailers respond to rise in renting clothes and goods ( December 2017 ) 
320 Bundlee Ltd ( SFI0021 ) 
54 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
but instead want the needs or experiences they fulfil .  [ … ] The potential to 
combine clothing products with a rental service holds much promise as both 
a commercially viable business model and a route to achieving sustainable 
clothing consumption . 321
145 . We need new economic models for fashion which are based on reducing the 
material consumption associated with growth . The Government should explore how 
it can support the sharing economy . T﻿﻿he Chancellor should use the tax system to shift 
the balance of incentives in favour of reuse , repair and recycling to support responsible 
companies . The Government should follow Sweden ’ s lead and reduce VAT on repair 
services . 
146 . Retailers must take responsibility for the social and environmental cost of clothes . 
They should use their market power to demand higher environmental and labour 
standards from suppliers . Offering rental schemes , lifetime repair and providing 
the consumer with more information about the sourcing and true cost of clothing 
are all measures that can be more widely adopted . Shifting business practice in this 
way can not only improve a business ’ s environmental and social impact but also offer 
market advantage as they respond to the growing consumer demand for responsible , 
sustainable clothing . 
321 Bundlee Ltd ( SFI0021 ) 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 55
6 Background & acknowledgements
147 . The Environmental Audit Committee ( EAC ) is a cross-party committee of backbench 
MPs that is formed by the House of Commons after each general election to scrutinise the 
environmental performance and policies of the Government and its public bodies . We 
launched our inquiry in June 2018 to examine concerns about the waste and environmental 
impact of the fashion industry . There has been a phenomenal response to the inquiry . 
Over the course of the inquiry we received over 90 submissions of written evidence . We 
held four days of hearings in the inquiry , one at the Victoria and Albert Museum . 
148 . Of the UK ’ s major fashion retailers only Primark initially provided evidence . We 
then wrote to the top ten fashion retailers request information about their efforts to 
reduce their environmental and social impact . 322 We are grateful to all of the retailers 
for responding . The British Fashion Council did not submit any evidence to the inquiry . 
Among the questions fashion retailers were asked to respond to where : 
• whether they pay the living wage to garment workers and how they ensure child 
labour is not used in their supply chains ; 
• whether they use recycled materials ; 
• how long their clothes last and how they encourage recycling ; 
• whether they incinerate unsold or returned stock ; 
• what steps they are taking to reduce the risk of microplastics contaminating the 
ocean ; and
• what other steps they are taking to reduce the environmental impact of their 
clothing ranges and how they audit success . 323
We analysed the retailers ’ responses and published an interim report on this on 31 
January . 324
Acknowledgements
149 . We would like to thank Catie Poust from the V & A who worked tirelessly to make 
our event a success and Edwina Ehrman for her expert tour of the Fashioned From Nature
exhibition which she curated . 
322 Environmental Audit Committee , Fashion bosses asked to reveal environmental record ( October 2018 ) 
323 Environmental Audit Committee , Fashion bosses asked to reveal environmental record ( October 2018 ) 
324 Environmental Audit Committee , Interim Report on the Sustainability of the Fashion Industry ( January 2019 ) 
56 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
Conclusions and recommendations
Introduction - fashion & sustainability
1 . We want to see a thriving fashion industry in the UK that provides decent work , 
inspires creativity and contributes to the economic success of the UK . The fashion 
industry ’ s current business model is unsustainable , especially with growing 
populations and rising levels of consumption across the globe . Over-consumption 
and climate change are driving widespread environmental damage . The exploitative 
and linear business model for fashion must change . The various parts of the fashion 
industry must come together to set out their blueprint for a net zero emissions 
world . This will require reducing their carbon consumption back to 1990 levels . 
Given scientists ’ stark warnings on climate change and biodiversity loss , we need to 
fix fashion .  ( Paragraph 22 ) 
The social cost of our clothes
2 . We were shocked by the treatment of Missguided ’ s auditors . If this is how factory 
owners treat potential customers , we dread to think of the conditions endured by 
their workers .  ( Paragraph 49 ) 
3 .  ‘ Made in the UK ’ should mean workers are paid at least the minimum wage in a safe 
workspace . It is unacceptable that some workers in the UK making clothes for fast 
fashion retailers are not paid the minimum wage and are suffering serious breaches 
of health and safety law in their workplaces . We support calls from the Director 
of Labour Market Enforcement for a more proactive approach to the enforcement 
of the national minimum wage . HMRC ’ s National Minimum Wage team needs 
greater resourcing in order to increase their inspection and detection work . We also 
recommend that Boohoo engage with Usdaw as a priority and recognise unions for 
its workers . We recommend that textile retailers operating internationally follow 
the example of Asos , H & M , Esprit and Inditex in signing up to Global Framework 
Agreements . These put in place the highest standards of trade union rights , health , 
safety and environmental practices , across the retailers ’ global operations , regardless 
of local country standards .  ( Paragraph 50 ) 
4 . There must be more transparency in supply chains and there is a strong case for 
the Modern Slavery Act to be strengthened . The current requirement to produce 
a statement does not ensure that action is taken by big retailers and even this is 
not adequately monitored . The Government should publish a publicly accessible 
list of all those retailers required to release a modern slavery statement . This should 
be supported by an appropriate penalty for those companies who fail to report and 
comply with the Modern Slavery Act . This will increase transparency and require the 
establishment of formal monitoring of whether statements comply with legislation .  
( Paragraph 63 ) 
5 . The Companies Act 2006 requires that a statement be made on human rights issues in 
a company ’ s Annual Report only ‘ where necessary ’  . This system lacks accountability 
and places too much reliance on companies to self-disclose . We recommend that the 
Companies Act 2006 be updated to include explicit reference to ‘ modern slavery ’ and 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 57
 ‘ supply chains ’  . Statements on a business ’ approach to human rights in its supply chain 
should be mandatory as part of the Annual Report . The Financial Reporting Council ’ s 
( FRC ) Corporate Governance Code and UK Stewardship Code , and the Financial 
Conduct Authority ’ s ( FCA ) listing rules should likewise be amended to require 
modern slavery disclosures on a comply or explain basis by 2022 . If this is not possible 
then a Corporate Duty of Vigilance Law , as in France , should be considered . Fashion 
retailers must not be allowed to turn a blind eye to labour and environmental abuses 
in their supply chains . Retailers should be investing in technology that allows them 
- and their customers - to track where their materials and products are sourced and 
made . We recommend that the Government strengthen the Modern Slavery Act to 
require large companies to perform due diligence checks across their supply chains 
to ensure their materials and products are being produced without forced or child 
labour . We also recommend that Government procurement should be covered by the 
Modern Slavery Act .  ( Paragraph 64 ) 
6 . We recommend that the Government works with industry to trace the source of raw 
material in garments to tackle social and environmental abuses in their supply chains . 
Digital technology is widely used in other supply chains . We do not understand 
why a modern high-tech industry like fashion does not have these systems already 
in place . Some companies told us they can trace their materials down to Tier 4 
suppliers . This begs the question - if one can do it , why can ’ t all ? This first step is 
essential if fashion is to tackle its waste , water , chemical and carbon footprint . This 
also reduces the opportunities for sub-contractors to take their cut along the supply 
chain .  ( Paragraph 65 ) 
Fashion ’ s environmental price tag
7 . We are unwittingly wearing the fresh water supply of central Asia and destroying 
fragile ecosystems . Consumers can play their part by avoiding products with premade rips and tears and seeking sustainable or organic cotton wherever possible . 
Governments should oblige retailers to ensure full traceability in their supply chains 
to prove decent livelihoods and sustainably sourced materials .  ( Paragraph 72 ) 
8 . The Government should facilitate collaboration between fashion retailers , water 
companies and washing machine manufacturers and take a lead on solving the 
problem of microfibre pollution . Ultimate responsibility for stopping this pollution , 
however , must lie with the companies making the products that are shedding the 
fibres . Further research needs to be carried out into how design can be used to limit 
emissions of synthetic fibres and the lessons applied quickly . The need for more 
research should not be used as an excuse for inaction by retailers . Fashion retailers 
should be testing new synthetic garments for fibre release and publishing figures .  
( Paragraph 92 ) 
9 . More research also needs to be carried out urgently into the occupational health 
risks of working with synthetic fibres . The Government should ask the Health and 
Safety Executive to review the evidence and take action accordingly . Manufacturers 
must be mindful of potential risks now and should seek to reduce the exposure of 
garment workers to airborne synthetic fibres .  ( Paragraph 93 ) 
58 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
10 . Gaining a full picture of the impact of different fibres is important so that businesses , 
consumers and policymakers can decide on the most effective solutions . The work 
that WRAP has done to document the impact of fashion consumption and bring 
businesses together to share best practice and facilitate change is commendable . 
However , WRAP has faced significant funding cuts , with budget allocation reducing 
from £56 million in 2009 / 10 to less than £10 million for 2017 / 18 . The Government 
must ensure that WRAP ’ s Sustainable Clothing Action Plan ( SCAP ) is adequately 
funded to provide its services to any retailer that wants to improve its sustainability 
performance - regardless of its size . Post 2020 , SCAP target ambitions must increase . 
To ensure the scheme continues we recommend that retailers pay for the funding 
of SCAP . This should ideally be included in the Extended Producer Responsibility 
Scheme . This should happen whether or not an EPR scheme is introduced . This 
could be set relative to revenue with discounts available for SMEs . SCAP does not 
currently include any commitments to reduce microplastic pollution from synthetic 
garments . Post 2020 SCAP should include new targets following the Ecodesign 
Directive , including reducing microplastic shedding .  ( Paragraph 101 ) 
11 . Members of SCAP have made some progress in reducing their carbon and water 
consumption , but action has not been swift enough on reducing waste . We are 
disappointed that just 11 fashion retailers are signatories . These improvements 
have been outweighed by the increased volumes of clothing being sold . A voluntary 
approach has failed . A retailers ’ commitment to SCAP targets should be seen as 
a ‘ licence to practice ’  . We recommend that compliance with SCAP targets should 
be made mandatory for all retailers with a turnover of more than £36 million–a 
threshold in line with the Modern Slavery Act . This should be done under a new 
Extended Producer Responsibility Scheme . The Government needs to provide clear 
economic incentives for retailers to minimise their environmental footprint . It 
should implement the EU ’ s Ecodesign Directive in the Circular Economy Package 
into UK law in its Resources and Waste Strategy and upcoming Environment Act .  
( Paragraph 102 ) 
12 . A kneejerk switch from synthetic to natural fibres in response to the problem of 
ocean microfibre pollution would result in greater pressures on land and water 
use - given current consumption rates . Encouraging a move from conventional to 
organic cotton and from virgin polyester to recycled PET ( in garments designed to 
minimise shedding ) could help to reduce the impact of the clothing industry . We 
recommend that the Government reforms taxation to reward fashion companies that 
design products with lower environmental impacts and penalise those that do not . 
The Government should investigate whether its proposed tax on virgin plastics , which 
comes into force in 2022 , should be applied to textile products that contain less than 
50% recycled PET to stimulate the market for recycled fibres in the UK . As part of 
the new EPR scheme , Government and industry should accelerate research into the 
relative environmental performance of different materials , particularly with respect 
to measures to reduce microfibre pollution .  ( Paragraph 103 ) 
Textile waste and collection
13 . While incineration of unsold stock ‘ recovers ’ some energy from the products , it 
multiplies the climate impact of the product by generating further emissions and 
Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability 59
air pollutants that can harm human health . Incineration of clothes made from 
synthetic fibres may release plastic microfibres into the atmosphere . Climate 
changing emissions will have been generated when the products were created and 
more CO2 will be produced when they are burnt . The waste hierarchy suggests that 
reuse and recycling comes first . This should be a priority means of dealing with 
unsold stock . Incineration should only be used as a last resort where there is a health 
and safety case for destroying the stock . The Government should ban incinerating or 
landfilling unsold stock that can be reused or recycled .  ( Paragraph 122 ) 
14 . Our desire for fast fashion , fuelled by advertising , social media and a supply of cheap 
garments , means we are disposing of over a million tonnes of clothes every year 
in the UK . Under the UN Sustainable Development Goals , the UK is committed 
to ‘ to ensure sustainable consumption and production ’  . We need to reduce the 
environmental footprint of the UK ’ s textile production and consumption . To do 
that , we need to reduce textile waste , improve resource efficiency and reduce the 
carbon emissions and water footprint of the clothes we buy . We need to simply 
buy less , mend , rent and share more . To support this we recommend that lessons on 
designing , creating , mending and repairing clothes be included in schools at Key stage 
2 and 3 . The creative satisfaction of designing and repairing clothing can offer an 
antidote to the growing anxiety and mental health issues amongst teenagers . As 
well as providing a space to promote creative expression , the skills learnt can also 
provide a potential pathway towards job opportunities .  ( Paragraph 130 ) 
15 . The Government must end the era of throwaway fashion . It should make fashion 
retailers take responsibility for the waste they create by introducing an Extended 
Producer Responsibility scheme for textiles and reward companies that take positive 
action to reduce waste . A charge of one penny per garment on producers could raise 
£35 million for investment in better clothing collection and sorting in the UK . This 
could create new ‘ green ’ jobs in the sorting sector , particularly in areas where textile 
recycling is already a specialist industry such as Huddersfield , Batley , Dewsbury and 
Wakefield in West Yorkshire . The Government ’ s recent pledge to review and consult 
on how to deal with textile waste by 2025 is too little too late . We need action before 
the end of this parliament ( 2022 )  .  ( Paragraph 131 ) 
16 . The Resources and Waste strategy should incorporate eco-design principles and offer 
incentives for design for recycling , design for disassembly and design for durability . 
It should also set up a new investment fund to stimulate markets for recycled fibres .  
( Paragraph 132 ) 
New economic models for the fashion industry
17 . We need new economic models for fashion which are based on reducing the material 
consumption associated with growth . The Government should explore how it can 
support the sharing economy . The Chancellor should use the tax system to shift the 
balance of incentives in favour of reuse , repair and recycling to support responsible 
companies . The Government should follow Sweden ’ s lead and reduce VAT on repair 
services .  ( Paragraph 145 ) 
18 . Retailers must take responsibility for the social and environmental cost of clothes . 
They should use their market power to demand higher environmental and labour 
60 Fixing fashion : clothing consumption and sustainability
standards from suppliers . Offering rental schemes , lifetime repair and providing 
the consumer with more information about the sourcing and true cost of clothing 
are all measures that can be more widely adopted . Shifting business practice in 
this way can not only improve a business ’ s environmental and social impact but 
also offer market advantage as they respond to the growing consumer demand for 
responsible , sustainable clothing .  ( Paragraph 146 ) 
