 ‘ It ’ s time to flip the script ’  : Riz Ahmed talks about poor Muslim representation in the film industry
UPDATED 20 OCT , 2021 02 : 38PM

IMAGES STAFF

DESK REPORT

The actor expressed frustration over the underrepresentation and false depiction of Muslims in Hollywood films . 

British-Pakistani actor Riz Ahmed recently slammed the depiction of Muslims in the global media , tracing the structure of minority representation in the film industry and highlighting how powerful the painted picture can be .  
 
 “ The stories we tell about communities affect the laws that get passed , the people that get attacked , the countries that get invaded ,  ” he said in an interview to Muslim , a YouTube channel and media outlet that makes content for young Muslims to connect with and empower each other , amplify their faith , and share their lifestyles and views . 

He pointed out the very real and damaging effects a certain portrayal of a community can have , rightfully calling it " dangerous " seeing as hate crimes are often based on misunderstandings and stereotypes . The Tillman Story ( 2010 )  , a film on war in Afghanistan , is an example of a purely American narrative used to glorify their side while reducing the other to nothing but violence . 

Ahmed went on to define the image that Muslims are assigned , establishing its two poles — “ We ’ re either invisible or villainized .  ” 

The Sound of Metal star spoke about the lack of depth a Muslim character has on screen and said they are often shown in an Islamophobic light . He asserted that such a depiction must be met with the same level of disgust as films featuring blackface and discrimination against indigenous people . Tropic Thunder starring Robert Downey Jr has been criticised many times for its depiction of blackface and Disney has faced backlash for its misconstructed and toxic portrayal of indigenous people . 

He also critiqued scenes from American Sniper and his own movie Mogul Mowgli and categorised minority community representation into several groups . The range goes from the very common terrorist stereotype to the last and ideal stage where a Muslim guy is " just a guy — not about any agendas we ’ ve set or are forced to respond to .  " 

The activist also highlighted a very skewed ratio and said under 2% of speaking roles in the top 200 films in the last few years have been played by Muslims despite them being a " quarter of the world ’ s population "  . He said we ’ ve " got to bridge that gap "  . 

Ahmed shared his own experiences with discrimination and said ,  “ Individual experiences of success don ’ t change how an entire community is viewed .  ” Examples of Muslims who have succeeded in the West are Muhammad Ali and Kareem Abdul Jabbar , two athletes whose names are known the world over . However , these success stories are just a fraction of true Muslim representation . For the most part , the Islamophobic lens prevails . 

Ahmed is also the first Muslim to be nominated for a Best Actor award at the Oscars and while it ' s a great achievement , the fact that it only happened in 2021 is sad . 

In general , we need to change the way Muslims are viewed in the global media . We can do this by , as Ahmed said ,  “ showing a diverse Muslim community — racially , geographically , we need more women , different sexualities , abilities .  ” 

He ended the interview with an example of minorities bending over backwards to make acceptance easier — Muslims altering their names not out of choice but to fit in because people struggle with pronouncing their names . Some examples of brown people who ’ ve had to morph their names to make it easier for people to pronounce are Mindy Kaling , whose full name is Vera Mindy Chokalingam , and Hasan Minhaj , who now uses the pronunciation hass-ahn rather than hass-un because it ' s easier for American people to understand . There ’ s also Kumail Nanjiani at the opposite end of the spectrum , who commendably continues to use his full name and refuses to change it for the comfort of other people .  
 
 “ I ask myself the same question — I have kind of censored my own name ,  ” Ahmed said . He uses Riz instead of Rizwan . 

He concluded with a statement quoting a Sweatshirt Boys ’ lyric saying instead of editing the self , we must get the others to stretch and shared his step forward declaring he ’ s begun introducing himself as Rizwan . 