Sustainability means to sustain life, all life, 
human, animal, vegetable & planetary. 
A self-sustaining system is a system 
that doesn’t take more 
from the environment 
than it gives back; 
it is not depleting 
 but sustain 
 itself. 
So what is sustainable design? 
“Business is the largest, wealthiest, most pervasive 
institution on the Earth… and it’s responsible for most 
of the damage to the environment. 
We’re a major part of the problem, and unless we 
become part of the solution, it’s over…” 
Ray Anderson – CEO of Interface Inc 
This is no longer a mess ‘our generation’ is leaving for 
the next, but one that necessitates immediate action by 
everyone, or we will all feel the ramifications. 
Famine, wars, water shortages, disease & enforced 
migrations are all forecast as the result of global 
warming. 
As Vivienne Westwood so eloquently said in a recent 
interview with Jonathan Ross, this is: 
“a price just too steep to pay.”
The idea of the artist as an activist is not a new 
one. Whether fine artists, musicians, writers, 
architects or designers; artists have always used 
their ‘art’ as a means of expression. 
Art & design has expressed political, cultural & 
social movements in all cultures across the 
centuries.. 
The coming of age of ethical fashion has been a long 
time coming, and the road is littered with well 
intentioned monstrosities, plain and boring, and often 
downright ugly clothing, and only recently have 
fashion & ethics been able to coexist in the same 
sentence relatively comfortably. 
The growth of the ecological fashion fabric industry has 
finally expanded to a state where a designer doesn’t 
need to feel unduly restricted in their fabric choices. 
Ecological Fabrications & Slow Design 
The history of ecological & organic fabrication is multiple ranges of 
beige un-dyed T-shirts with political & socially aware slogans, developed 
mostly by activists not aesthetes. 
Slow design and a return to traditional craft techniques are experiencing a 
Renaissance in light of their minimal impact on the environment, as well as 
valuing of tradition and history. 
Linda Loudermilk
“All that vastness, all those numberless small symmetries, all the brutality & fragility 
Nature may be beautiful, but nature is not pretty. Nature is the original punk.”
Emily Katz 

Enamore 
“Our collections are currently produced in the UK from the finest organic hemp, 
soya, cotton, silk and hand selected vintage fabrics.”
Ciel 
“We aim to create a 100% ethical product base and probably currently sit 
at around 80-90%.”
“We make beautiful stylish clothes that don’t sacrifice style for content, that give 
the satisfaction of knowing that you have made a difference whilst still looking & 
feeling great!”
Alexandra Faro 
“I like to offer liberating, fun, out of the ordinary clothes to my clients 
so they can feel distant from social criticism and be themselves.”
YOJ 
Christine Birkle 
"Felt is very flexible. You can produce any form with it. It can keep you 
cool as well as warm, and it's substantial, soft, and decorative.
The old stereotype of a crude material no longer makes sense 
today.”
Camilla Norrback 
“Modern luxury is as much about the inside as it is about the outside,
giving yourself that which is good for both body & conscience.”
Celine Faizant 
“Allow a responsible consumption by offering transparency on manufacture networks. 
For a "new luxury" to participate in controlled channels in terms of ecology and human 
rights.”
Samant Chauhan 
“Silk is a metaphor for me, an indirect way of going back to my roots 
& bringing to the present the essence of my past, & transplanting it 
into Bhagalpur soil.”
FIN 
“On our path, towards unique results, every step is of equally importance. 
We carefully select our materials, to achieve the finest expression.”
The concept that second hand and recycled, redesigned items 
pass on their life experiences is what imbues redesigned 
clothing with its sense of value. 
Recycle, Reuse & Redesign
Having grown out of the “make do” culture of our grandparents, of mending and 
repairing, at least in part, redesign has moved well beyond its historic roots, to 
make use of otherwise un-wearable items of clothing by cutting, piecing and 
embellishing them into entirely new pieces of clothing, in many cases more 
desirable than the original. 
The average American throws away about sixty-eight 
pounds of clothing and textiles per year, with about eighty 
five percent destined for landfills, while over 900,000 million 
items of clothing are thrown away each year in the UK. 
Angela Johnson 
Josh Jakus 
“The thickness of the felt makes it difficult to sew together, but attaching a 
zipper was comparatively easy and offered an excellent mechanism for 
transforming the shape. From there, it was just a matter of finessing the 
form to create objects that are as practical as they are pleasing.”
Rebound Design 
“I select each lining fabric individually for each cover, to match not only in color 
 but whenever possible also in theme, pattern, time period etc. 
My goal is to choose a fabric that looks as if it grew out of the book.”
TradeRemade 
“The problems with cheap chic & throwaway fashion are complex. 
There are already hundreds of millions of items of clothing that are being 
thrown away year after year in the UK. 
Much of the older clothing is of high quality & very durable. 
Why not reuse this clothing again & again?”
Suitcase 
“The ecologically sound aspect of this did not so much come from a highly developed 
philosophical or political position, rather because re-using and saving were natural 
behavior based on good sense, good economics and on the dislike of waste.”
From Somewhere 
“We used to have to really convince the manufacturers to give us their leftovers, but now we are 
approached by companies wanting to achieve a creative waste management as part of their 
greenification."
Geoffrey B Small 
"Fashion is an art, and must be used to raise design quality, not lower it, 
speak the truth about the world--not lie about it, 
and do its best to make life better for everyone, not just an elite few.”
Riedizioni 
“I love waste, working with waste.”
Frau Wagner 
“I process clothing with a distinctive social code, for example uniforms, 
sportswear or gentlemen's shirts and look for an antithetic context.”
E2 
“Just as new can become old, vintage can become new.”
Preloved 
“Our passion is design and our philosophy is sustainability.”
Community & Fair Trade 
Social capitalism is the outgrowth of NGO’s around the world utilizing the cultural a 
historic skill sets of communities in developing nations, as a means of building 
sustainable employment. 
Fashion has often taken its inspiration from different countries 
and distinct communities around the world that use craft as a 
recognizable element of their aesthetic. 
With the eradication of traditional craft skills in the developed nations 
of North America & Western Europe, a greater appreciation has 
developed for the indigenous and inherited craft skills of communities 
around the world, leading to their incorporation into high-end design. 
“Most of the techniques are based on the quilting & embroidery techniques of the 
Depression-era South, & others have been practiced by artisans for hundreds of years.
I have borrowed this knowledge & made it the foundation of most of my designs.”
Alabama Chanin
“Living arts are an essential 
part of the social fabric of our 
communities, like planting 
seeds, reaping the fruits of our 
labors, and preserving our 
food.
Such traditions are the 
backbone of what makes a 
community a home, and 
preserving them ensures that 
future generations can enjoy 
the same quality of life
with the same attention to 
detail, function and beauty. “
Taller Flora 
“only radical contemporary design will prevent the extinction of craftsmanship” 
Elena Garcia 
“As creators - as designers - as business owners we have a responsibility to do what we can 
to preserve our world, so we source locally whenever possible, and we only use fabrics that 
are rapidly renewable and pesticide-free.”

“A collection where the customer can trust that from the cotton farmers to the finishing 
stitches, every effort has been made to respect the people involved & the ecosystem. “
Amana 
“It is essential to train and support the women who lost so much through 
twenty-three years of war.” 
Royah
Van Markoviec
“ModaFusion aims to promote the idea that future creation lies in disfavored communities. 
The slum’s genuine creation constitutes an identity of strong potential for Brazilian fashion 
and a source of uncommon inspiration for Western fashion.”
Moda Fusion 
Les Fees de Bengale
“Bringing a touch of femininity in fair-trade, as well as a touch of humanity in fashion.”
Leila Hafzi
“For me it is a balance between creating works in developing countries, establishing a 
long term market position and then step by step making fully ecological collections.” 
“Realizing the effect of product development in the third world made me passionate 
about the work, proving that ethical & ecological trade is possible in high-end fashion.” 
Noir 
“I totally respect what everyone is doing for ethical clothing, but at the same time I don’t want to 
be lumped as that ethical clothes label. Our garments look like normal, stylish clothes, made from 
luxurious fabrics and unless you knew about us, you’d never guess the organic provenance.”
“First, it’s the most beautiful collection and second, it has the 
finest cotton in the world, and it may justify peoples spending, 
knowing that a certain amount will go back to the people who 
helped pick the cotton.”
We are currently in the midst of a major shift in worldview, a cultural shift that accounts for the 
mainstreaming of ecological & social consciousness. The major motivation for this global cultural 
movement, Is the need to take personal responsibility for ecological & social change in the midst 
of global warming & climate crisis. 
New Models
The term “Cultural Creative” was coined by Paul Ray and Sherry Anderson in their 
seminal book “The Cultural Creatives”, which documents the predominately 
creatively led movement that is forging a shift in worldview towards a more ethical 
and ecological future in all aspects of life, including business. 
“We cannot solve the problems we have created with the same 
thinking that created them.”
Albert Einstein
Nau
“We’re a small group of people, 
committed to the power of business as 
a force for change. Defined by what 
we love, and how we work and play, 
we’re looking to do more than make 
clothes; We’re seeking to redefine 
what it means to be successful.”
Andrea Zittel
“Now I am finally beginning to make the most direct form of clothing possible by hand-felting wool 
directly into the shape of a garment.”
Mark Lui
“Wasted materials are bad for the environment and a loss in potential profits.”
Twice Upcycled Shirts 
“By imagining and designing-in multiple life-cycles at the outset, a designer can 
maximize the potential of ‘borrowed’ materials which, are designed to go back into 
the melting pot and emerge again when needed.”
Bless 
BLESS is a project that presents ideal and artistic values by products to the public.”
Collection of Hope 
“Lets make a collection together. 
Let’s make it further & set up an independent company which both the 
helpers 
& the supported profit from.
A collection to inspire hope. 
The Collection of Hope.”
Aforest
“The aforest brand stands for passion, for small & big-time events.
Artists and dreamers that are politically or socially aware. For juveniles, no matter what age.”
“This is something important about aforest-design; it’s not a limited brand 
defined by a market, its free to say what it believes in.”
Holly McQuillan
“How can an industry be considered sustainable when its primary concern is the 
propagation of the next new thing at the expense of perfectly functional existing products?”
“I feel that when 
designing for an 
uncertain world it 
could make sense 
to use a process 
which mimics the 
level of risk 
inherent in living 
on our planet.” 
“The driving force 
of my design 
practice is the 
embracing & 
development of 
an ease of risk 
while designing.” 
Designer Initiatives 
Some corporate partnerships have led to some “uncomfortable 
bedfellows” as Bono has described the RED campaign partners. 
“There are no easy good or bad guys” 
Nike, now a bastion of ethical and community support, who never the less 
were spurred by their highly publicized use of underage labor in overseas 
production back in the nineties. 
Yoehlee Teng
"One of the most ingenious makers of clothing today."
Vivienne Westwood 
“Don’t spend money, just take what you can find, take your old things, 
keep on wearing them. Don’t buy much fashion anymore but if you do 
buy It, choose really well, wear it for a long time.”

Phillipe Starck
"The public will take maybe three years to understand the concept. It's 
not fashion. But intelligent people will know to discover us.