This publication has been produced with the financial assistance of the European Union and the
Department for International Development . The contents of this publication are the sole responsibility
of Labour Behind the Label and in no way reflect the position of the European Union or the Department
For International Development . 
To be kept informed about new teaching activities , join the Fashioning an Ethical Industry mailing list by
visiting 
Sustainable Fashion : A Handbook for Educators
Edited by Liz Parker on behalf of Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK , and Marsha A . Dickson on behalf of
Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business , USA . 
Copyright and licence
Copyright lies with the contributing author , or with the author ’ s institution if applicable . 
The contributions included in this publication are almost exclusively licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-Non-Commercial-Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported License . To view a copy of this license , 
visit . 
Where an author has explicitly stated that work cannot be altered , this has been clearly indicated . You
must request permission from the author in these instances . 
Publishers
Published in 2009 in the UK by Labour Behind the Label on behalf of Polish Humanitarian Organisation 
( Poland )  , Südwind Agentur ( Austria )  , Schone Kleren Campagne ( Netherlands ) and Educators for Socially
Responsible Apparel Business ( USA )  . 
Labour Behind the Label is a not for profit company registered in England . No . 4173634 at
10-12 Picton Street , Bristol , BS6 5QA , UK . 
Design and layout by : Nick Ellis , Halo Media
www . halomedia . co . uk
Download the complete Handbook , chapters or individual contributions from

If you would like to order hard copies , please contact Fashioning an Ethical Industry by email : 
info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
The views expressed by individual authors do not necessarily reflect those of the editors and no
responsibility can be taken for inaccuracies made by individual authors . 
1
02 Introduction
04 Explaining National Fashion Related Courses and Qualifications
08 Fashioning an Ethical Industry across Europe
11	DESIGN
55 BUSINESS
95 MARKETING
115	CROSS CURRICULAR
145 INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
207	PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
251 FULL LIST OF CONTRIBUTIONS
Contents
CONTENTS
Educators of fashion related courses will be inspired
by this Handbook to bring sustainability and ethics
into their teaching and , by doing so , motivate students
to consider the people and environment when
making decisions in their future careers . We have an
opportunity to create a fashion industry we are proud
of , and we hope this Handbook can contribute to the
journey towards a sustainable industry . 
This Handbook is divided into six chapters : Design , 
Marketing , Business , Cross-curricular , Pedagogy and
Institutional Approaches , and Interactive Activities . 
Educators of any fashion related course will be able to
draw inspiration from the contributions by educators
from around the world who have shared their
experience of teaching on sustainability and ethics . 
Download this Handbook from 
2
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Poor working conditions are endemic in the industry , and
the environmental impact throughout the product lifecycle
is high . Students pursuing fashion related courses will go
on to fill decision-making roles in the industry . If they are
to make decisions that move the industry towards social , 
environmental and economic sustainability , it is important
that they are informed to understand and critically assess
it ’ s impact on people and the planet , and the initiatives that
are taking place to address this impact . 
Through the work of the Labour Behind the Label
educational project , Fashioning an Ethical Industry in the
UK , and that of Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel
Business in the USA , it has become apparent that many
educators around the world are teaching about the
social and environmental issues in creative ways in their
classrooms , lecture theatres and studios . 
While a significant number of resources about the social
and environmental impact of the fashion industry are
available , there is only a small and emerging body of
materials exploring how to teach on the issues . Sustainable
Fashion : A Handbook for Educators aims to fill that gap . 
We circulated an international call for papers and were
impressed with the response from educators and training
providers . The Handbook contains 45 contributions , 
mainly from the USA , UK and Austria , but also from
Poland , The Netherlands and Australia . We hope that any
future editions will include papers from producer country
educators . Sadly , time and resources meant we were
unable to actively seek papers from these countries . 
This Handbook brings together practical ideas on how to
teach about social and environmental responsibility in the
fashion industry , rather than being a series of papers about
the issues . The Handbook contains ideas for assignments , 
class based interactive activities , project briefs , course
outlines , case studies , teaching experiences and reading lists . 
The Handbook does not aspire to be a comprehensive
teaching guide with a beginning , middle and end . Our
aim is more modest : to draw together examples of the
work already being carried out by educators around the
world and to inspire others to include topics of social
responsibility in their teaching . On this note , it is important
to state that the views expressed by the authors do
not necessarily reflect the views of the editors or their
organisations . 
We have divided the Handbook into six chapters : 
The Design section includes essays , teaching activities and
•
design ideas aimed at design , garment technology and
product development courses . 
The Business section includes teaching materials for
•
business , sourcing , retail management , buying , socially
responsible business and merchandising courses . 
The Marketing section includes teaching activities
•
for marketing , visual merchandising , promotion , 
consumer behaviour , strategic fashion management and
communications courses . 
The Cross-curricular section includes reading lists and
•
teaching ideas for use within all fashion disciplines
including theory and contextual studies . 
The Interactive Activities section is relevant to all courses . 
•
The Pedagogy and Institutional Approaches section
•
includes summaries of various approaches taken to
teaching sustainable fashion , including development of
new courses and curricula , case studies and the role of
placements . 
You will find a summary of each paper in the introductory
sections to each chapter . We have also included
information about further reading and resources . 
The Handbook is available to download from www . 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org in three formats : the entire
publication , by chapter and by individual contribution . 
In the process of publishing this Handbook , it became
clear that the terminology used on fashion related courses
is different in different countries . Therefore , we have a
Introduction
3
paper in this section about fashion related courses in
the UK , USA , Austria , Poland and the Netherlands to
facilitate understanding of the different terminology used
by contributing authors . We have also maintained USA / UK
spellings and grammar where appropriate throughout the
handbook . 
The target audience for the Handbook is mainly educators
on fashion related courses at the higher education level , 
although a number of activities are targeted specifically
at teaching pre-16 and further education students – and
many of the activities can be adapted for use by educators
at any level . 
We hope that the contributions presented here will inspire
you with ideas for your own teaching . We would be very
interested in receiving images and descriptions of students ’ 
work produced as a result of these activities , with an aim
of sharing these through Fashioning an Ethical Industry ’ s
website : www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org . We also
welcome new ideas or your comments on those presented
in this Handbook . 
Acknowledgements
Liz Parker and Marsha A . Dickson for the compiling
and editing of the Handbook . Bee Hayes from Labour
Behind the Label for design inspiration . Emma McGinn for
finding some excellent photographs . Andrea Hernández
Valderrama for research . Hannah Higginson for providing
support in a multitude of ways . Sarah Gann for editing and
proof-reading , and Nick Ellis for design and layout . The final
thank you goes to all the contributors . 
INTRODUCTION
1 . Level
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge
required by educators
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge
required by students
4 . Number of students
5 . Length of time required
6 . Type of activity
7 . Discipline
8 . Topics covered
Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG
A . No background knowledge required . B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment industry required . 
C . Some knowledge of discipline required . D . Specific knowledge required ( specified )  . 
A . No background knowledge required . B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment industry required . 
C . Some knowledge of discipline required . D . Specific knowledge required ( specified )  . 
Specified / Any number
XXX to XXX minutes / hours / days / weeks
Adjustable
Individual work , Group work , Student presentations , Course outlines and learning goals , Interactive activities , 
Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , Book related , Film related , Image related , Article
Discussion and debate , Institutional approach , Research related , Practical , Placement related
Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Pedagogy , Interactive
Agriculture , Animal welfare , All , Branding , Campaigns , Care and repair , Child labour , Companies , Consumers , 
Corporate social responsibility , Empathy , Entrepreneurship , Environment , Fair trade , Ethical initiatives / brands , 
Gender , Globalisation , Health and safety , History , Home-based workers , Informal work , Legal initiatives , Multi-
stakeholder initiatives , Migrant workers , Organic , Pedagogy , Poverty , Prices , Purchasing practices , Second hand
clothes , Slow Fashion , Student / educator defined , Supply chains , Technology , Textiles , Trade , Trade unions , Wages , 
Workers ’ rights , Working conditions
Key
At the beginning of each contribution , you will find a table summarising key information about the piece , based on the
key below , to guide you to its contents : 
4
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Introduction
Fashion education around the world uses different
terminology to describe teaching staff and the institutions
where courses are taught . The length and types of courses
and qualifications also vary and not all countries offer the
same subjects within fashion education . These variations
have meant that it is impossible to use consistent language
throughout this fashion educators ’ manual . To compensate , 
this article compiled by experts in each country , is intended
to distinguish the different terminology and clarify the
systems . 
a . 
What is the common term used by educational
institutions in your country for teaching professionals 
( e . g . lecturer , tutor , teacher , educator , etc .  )  ? Please state
at which level of education these terms are commonly
used . 
In the United Kingdom ( UK )  , teacher is used in schools and
lecturer and tutor are both terms commonly used in Further
Education ( FE ) and Higher Education ( HE )  . Educator is
usually only used in abstract or theoretical texts . 
In the United States , individuals in charge of instruction
at colleges and universities are generally referred to as
instructors or professors , depending on their educational
achievements and / or relationship with the institution . 
Instructors are assigned to teach certain classes and their
primary role is teaching . Instructors may or may not have
education beyond the undergraduate / baccalaureate degree
level , but increasingly they do hold a master ’ s degree
at minimum . They may be hired to teach one class or a
number of classes . Professors teach but typically have
additional responsibilities , including research or other
forms of scholarship where new knowledge is created
and disseminated , as well as services that contribute to
governing their unit or university . Professors almost always
hold a terminal degree , which for the apparel / fashion field
is a Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) degree . Some may hold
a terminal degree from another field ( e . g . some apparel
design faculty hold the Master of Fine Arts degree , some
professors may hold a Doctor of Education ( EdD ) degree . 
In Dutch HBO ( Hoger Beroeps Onderwijs ) schools , which
teach at the polytechnic level , the term lecturer is used for
teaching professionals . 
In Austria , the terms lecturers and teachers are used at
school level . Professors , lecturers , visiting professors at
university level ( baccalaureate )  . 
In Polish vocational schools and technical schools , the term
teacher is used . In universities and colleges it ’ s lecturer and
tutor ( but not often )  . The distinction between universities , 
colleges and other schools offering higher education is a bit
more complicated in Poland , but for all of them we usually
say lecturer . Educator is not used very much . It relates
mostly to teacher trainers ( people who train teachers )  . 
b . 
What terms are used to describe the educational
institutions that offer fashion related courses ( e . g . 
university , college , etc .  )  ? 
In the UK , there are no rules to this nomenclature : fashion
related courses can exist at both further education and
higher education levels . Most institutions at HE level are
called universities , but there are some art and design
specific centres that are called Specialist Arts Institutions . 
Some of these Specialist Arts Institutions are HEI ’ s ( higher
education institutions )  , e . g . Arts Institute Bournemouth ; and
some are FEIs ( FE institutions )  , e . g . Cleveland College of
Art and Design , Leeds College of Art and Design . Most FE
institutions are called colleges .  [ Editor ’ s note : Some further
educational institutions offer higher education .  ] 
In the United States , many fashion related degrees are
obtained through universities , which prioritize both
research and teaching , and offer degrees in a broad range
of disciplines and at varied levels ( e . g . bachelor ’ s ( BA )  , 
master ’ s ( MA )  , and doctorate )  . Universities are comprised
of colleges that focus on a narrower range of disciplines . 
For example , the University of Delaware is comprised
of seven colleges ( e . g . College of Arts and Sciences , 
Lerner College of Business )  . A college that is not part
of a university generally focuses on a narrower range of
Explaining National Fashion Related
Courses and Qualifications
5
disciplines than a university ( e . g . a liberal arts college )  . 
Universities tend to have larger enrolments than colleges . 
Community colleges are more vocational in nature and
offer two-year degrees . 
Dutch educational institutions at HBO-level with fashion
related courses are called institute , academy , college of
higher education , university of applied science , etc . 
For terms used in Austria , see question c . 
In Poland , the following educational institutions offer fashion
related courses : university , various schools ( non-university
schools offering both BA and MA courses )  , technical
college , vocational school , academy , technical university . 
Some fine art schools offer fashion related courses too . 
c . 
What types of qualification can students attain on
a fashion related course ( e . g . BA , MA , vocational
qualification , etc .  )  ? Please give a description of these
types of qualifications . 
UK : 

•
• Fashion Foundation : one year pre-degree qualification
that is very general . 

BTEC Higher National Diploma ( HND )  : two year
•
•
qualification intended to be equivalent to A ( Advanced ) 
level ( usually two years full-time study , pre-university ) 
plus level one degree . 

Foundation Degree : two year industry focussed higher
•
•
education qualification that should allow access to final
level of Degree Programme . 

BA : three or four year ( sandwich , i . e : with work
•
•
placements ) qualification . 
BA ( top-up )  : one year fast-track qualification . 
•
•
MA : one to two year post-graduate qualification . 
•
•

MPhil and PhD : up to 5 year doctorate research
•
•
qualification . 

•
• Graduate Diploma : one year post-degree / pre-MA
level qualification . 
Graduate Certificate : 15 week post-degree qualification . 
•
•
USA : 
Students interested in fashion can study for a wide variety
of degrees in the United States . 
There are associates ’ degrees that are generally earned in
•
•
two years and have a vocational emphasis . 
Bachelors ’ degrees in apparel design and fashion 		
•
•
merchandising are prevalent . 
Students can also earn masters and doctorate degrees
•
•
with fashion related foci . Whether the degree is
considered an “ Arts ” or a “ Science ” degree depends
on the varied emphasis on humanities type ( e . g . English , 
history )  , physical and social science courses ( e . g . 
chemistry , math , psychology )  , and discipline-specific
requirements . In theory , the Bachelor of Arts degree
has somewhat more flexibility in courses students are
allowed to take , whereas the Bachelor of Science degree
is more defined and specialized . However , there are
no hard rules for this distinction and each university or
college approves its own degree programs . 
The Netherlands
A student is awarded a BA after 4 years HBO . 
•
•
An MA can be obtained by taking a special masters
•
•
programme ( normally an additional one to two years )  . 
AUSTRIA : 

•
• Ten vocational schools of fashion technology offer
three year practice related vocational courses for 14 to
18 year olds . 

Following this , the Institute of Higher Education of
•
•
FashionTechnology offers an advanced three year A level
course ( age 17 +  )  . 

There are fourteen institutes of higher education in
•
•
fashion technology offering five year A level courses for
14 to 19 year olds . 

Two colleges offer two year ‘ higher ’ A level professional
•
•
qualification courses and an additional college offers a
three year course from the Institute of Higher Education
of FashionTechnology . 

The Fashion School Hetzendorf offers a six semester
•
•
Baccalureate BA course . 
University education : 
•
•

Fashion Design at the Institute of Design / University of
•
•
Applied Arts inVienna . 
- Duration : 8 semesters
- Level : Master of Arts . 

Textile / Art & Design at the Institute of Art and Design / 
•
•
University of Arts in Linz . 
- Level : Bachelor of Arts
- Duration 6 semesters ; following this . 
- Level : Master of Arts
- Duration : 4 semesters . 
COURSES AND QUALIFICATIONS
6
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Poland : 

•
• Vocational school diploma , e . g . in textile design , typically
for two years . 

Technical diploma , e . g . in costume design , textile
•
•
technician ( three or four years , ending with baccalaureate
and technical school diploma )  . 
Post-graduate diploma , e . g . in fashion and design . 
•
•
BA , e . g . in marketing , design . 
•
•
MA , e . g . in marketing , design . 
•
•
In general , fashion related courses are offered at all levels : 
at vocational schools , technical colleges , universities , 
technical universities , academies of beaux arts , etc . all kinds
of qualifications are therefore available . 
d . 
What fashion related subjects can students take in
your country ( e . g . design , business , marketing , etc .  ) at
what level ? 
In the UK , fashion related subjects are many and varied and
include : Fashion Design ; Textile Design ; Fashion Knitwear
Design ; KnittedTextiles ; Fashion & Textile Management ; 
Fashion Marketing & Branding ; Fashion Communication & 
Promotion ; International Fashion Business ; Fashion History 
& Theory ; Costume ; Fashion andTextile Buying ; and Retail
Management .  [ Editor ’ s note : For a list of fashion related
courses available at bachelor ’ s level in the UK , please search
by course at .  ] 
In the United States fashion merchandising and apparel
design are the most common bachelors ’ degrees . 
The fashion merchandising degree prepares students
for a broad range of careers in merchandising , buying , 
retail management , promotions and advertising , visual
merchandising , etc . There are a few programs in production
management , fiber / textile science , and textiles engineering
that carry over from when apparel and textile production
was more prevalent in the United States . Masters ’ and
doctorate degrees have more variation in the subjects they
cover and / or what they are “ named ”  . Masters ’ degrees
over the years have tended to broadly cover the apparel
and textile fields with classes incorporating such subjects
as textile science , textile / costume history , social psychology
of dress , and others . More recently , masters ’ degrees have
been developed or redesigned to address a more defined
specialization such as Masters in Retail Merchandising or
Textile Products Design and Marketing . Doctorate degrees
tend to be focused and require students to conduct
original research in a specialized area . However , the names
of these doctorate degrees generally do not reflect this
specialization ( e . g . PhD inTextiles and Clothing )  . 
InThe Netherlands , Amsterdam Fashion Institute ( AMFI ) 
for example , offers Fashion and Branding , Fashion
and Design , and Fashion and Management . TheTMO
Hogeschool voor Modemanagement in Doorn offers
training for buyers , entrepreneurs , retail sales managers , 
sales managers in the distributive trades , and production
managers . The fashion design & strategy department at
ArtEZ ( Academy of Art and Design ) in Arnhem offers a
master ’ s programme in vision and concept development . 
In Austria , depending on the type of school , the following
fashion related subjects are more or less prominent , but
available in all of them : Production Planning and Work
Organisation , TextileTechnology , Design and Fashion
Illustration , Pattern Cutting , Grading , Modelling with
CAD , Technology and Clothing Machines , Workshop
and ManufacturingTechnology , Fashion Design , Fashion
Technology , TextileTesting , Cutting lllustration , and Exercise
and Catwalk . 
Poland : 

Design ( costume , fashion , shoes , textiles , etc .  ) 
•
•
– master ’ s , bachelor ’ s , technical college diploma . 
Business – MBA . 
•
•
Marketing – MA , BA , MBA . 
•
•
Textiles – MA , BA , technical college diploma . 
•
•
e . 
How many years do students usually take to attain the
different qualifications on a fashion related course in
your country ? 
In the UK , the most common length of time for a fashion
related bachelor ’ s degree is three years ( and most
design students will have undertaken a one year general
foundation year after completing their A levels and before
doing a degree )  . Some British fashion related degrees are
four years long and include a year working in industry 
( between end of second year and beginning of final year )  . 
There are other routes though - please see answers to
question c . 
7
In the United States , the number of years students take to
attain the different qualifications are generally as follows : 
Degree Years to Completion
Associate ’ s Two years
Bachelor ’ s Four years
Master ’ s Two years beyond the
bachelor ’ s degree
Doctorate Three years beyond the
master ’ s degree
In the Netherlands , Bachelors ’ degrees are 3-4 years and
Masters ’ 1-2 years . 
Austria : See answer to question c . 
In Poland , students take courses for 3 to 5 years in
technical schools , 2 years in vocational schools , 3 years for
a BA and 5 for an MA . 
  
f . How is that time divided up ( e . g . semesters , terms )  ? 
Most universities and colleges in the United States , The
Netherlands , Austria and Poland use semesters . 
In the United States , these are 15 or 16 weeks long and
the primary teaching semesters are Fall and Spring , though
some courses are often available in shorter 4 to 8 week
sessions in the summer . A few universities and colleges
offer a 4 to 5 week winter session as well . 
In Austria , the winter semester runs from the beginning of
September to the beginning of February , and the summer
semester from the beginning of February to the beginning
of July . 
In the UK , this depends on the institution . Some have three
terms per year , some have two semesters . Most British
degrees work on three terms . 
Some Dutch institutions use trimesters . 
g . 
What terms are used to describe the activities
students engage in for learning ( e . g . assignments , 
essays , projects , etc .  )  ? 
There is no set answer in any country . Terms used in
many of the countries include assignments , essays , design
projects and collections , homework , research projects , 
journals , critiques , debates . Other terms / activities include
modules , theses , production schedules , business plans , 
presentations…even examinations ! 
Contributors
United States : Marsha Dickson , Professor and Chairperson
of Fashion & Apparel Studies , University of Delaware ; 
President and Founder of Educators for Socially
Responsible Apparel Business . 
UK : The steering group of the Association of Fashion and
Textile Courses - Contact : Brenda Sparkes M ( Des ) RCA , 
Chair of the Association of Fashion andTextile Courses , 
and AcademicTeam Leader , Applied Design , Nottingham
Trent University School of Art and Design . 
The Netherlands : Jan Piscaer , Lecturer at Amsterdam
Fashion Institute . 
Austria : Ruth Buchauer , Südwind Austria . 
Poland : Kasia Szeniawska and Anna Paluszek , Coordinators , 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , www . modnieietycznie . pl . 
COURSES AND QUALIFICATIONS
8
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Between June 2008 and May 2010 , the European Union
are funding a European Fashioning an Ethical Industry
project run by project partners in the UK , Poland , Austria
andThe Netherlands . The partners are also working to
share their learning across other European countries during
the course of the project . The project aims to support
university , college and high school educators on fashion
related courses to incorporate social responsibility issues
into their teaching – so that their students develop a sense
of social responsibility towards garment workers and
are equipped to contribute to more socially responsible
policies and practices in the industry . 
The project partners are Südwind Agentur ( Austria )  , 
Schone Kleren Campagne ( Netherlands )  , Polish
Humanitarian Organisation ( Poland ) and Labour Behind
the Label ( UK )  . 
European-wide Fashioning an Ethical Industry website : 
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . eu
Austria : My Design . My Responsiblity . 
- Südwind Agentur
Südwind Agentur coordinate the Clean Clothes Campaign 
( CCC ) in Austria , which focuses on improving working
conditions in the global garment and sportswear industry
and empowering the workers in it . The Südwind Agentur
project ,  ‘ Mein Design . MeineVerantwortung ’  ( My design . My
responsibility .  )  , builds on the aims of the CCC by working
with fashion schools and fashion educators on social and
environmental responsibility in the clothing industry . The
project provides a variety of opportunities for educators and
students . Together with fashion educators , we develop new
study units and run training sessions for educators about
social responsibility and methods of teaching . We support
fashion educators with their projects , give lectures and
run workshops in schools . We also produce regular email-
newsletters and provide a web-page to disseminate news
and information about teaching materials and projects . 
As well as participating in the European Fashioning an
Ethical Industry project , Südwind Agentur coordinates
global education centres and activities across Austria , 
produces international development media , and lobbies
decision-makers on a variety of global justice issues . 
www . mode . cleanclothes . at
The Netherlands : Fair Fashion
- Schone Kleren Campagne
Fair Fashion : naar een eerlijke kledingindustrie ( Fair Fashion : 
towards a fair garment industry ) is a Schone Kleren
Campagne ( Clean Clothes Campaign ) project designed
for students at fashion colleges inThe Netherlands . In all
our activities , we focus on the social aspects of garment
production and , by doing so , contribute to fairer working
conditions for the workers that stitch our clothes . Fashion
students have the opportunity and responsibility to design
and do business in a fair way . We provide them with the
tools and knowledge they need in order to locate their
role in cleaning up the international fashion industry . Hence
our slogan : Upgrade your ethical fashion skills ! 
Fair Fashion works mostly with colleges that provide
undergraduate and postgraduate courses at a polytechnic
level , such as fashion branding , fashion management and
fashion design . In the coming period , we are looking to
expand our activities to the different art academies and
other educational institutions that offer fashion related
courses , and the community colleges ( MBOs )  . 
Our website , www . fairfashion . org , is designed to be a
starting point for all students interested in fair fashion . 
Another important tool in the project is a publication , Fair
Fashion Files , a practical manual about what students can
do while at university and college , to engage with ethical
issues in the fashion industry so that they – as the next
generation of industry players – can fashion a more ethical
industry in the future . The manual is accompanied by a cd-
rom for educators , containing a PowerPoint presentation , 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry across Europe
9
images and other resources they can use and adapt in their
classes . The project also runs tutor training and tours by
speakers with expertise on workers ’ rights . 
The reaction to the project so far has been very positive , 
both from students and educators . Our past work has
built a solid base for our future activities . The number of 
 ‘ Fair Fashion Fans ’  , active students who guide the project , 
is growing , and we keep exploring and expanding the
network of groups and individuals who want to contribute
to our different activities . Fair Fashion has high hopes for
the fair future of fashion ! 
www . fairfashion . org
Poland : Fashioning an Ethical Industry
- Polish Humanitarian Organisation
Raising awareness of the global dimension of our
everyday purchases is a new approach in Poland , and the
Fashioning an Ethical Industry project in Poland has given
us the opportunity to focus on workers ’ rights and the
interdependency between countries of the North and
South . Being part of a European project means we can
learn from other organisations with more experience in
the field , we can adapt materials , utilise resources such as
a photo database , and gain from the knowledge of these
other organisations . 
As social and environmental responsibility in the garment
sector is a new subject within Poland , the project has
focused on developing a website in Polish , creating Polish
versions of teaching materials from partner organisations , 
and publishing translated reports , articles and factsheets . 
We run training sessions for educators , students and
volunteer trainers , and give presentations at conferences . 
The volunteer trainers act as multipliers for the project
by running their own workshops . We also coordinated an
exhibition , which travelled to educational institutions and
student societies , about working conditions in the garment
industry , environmental impact , and ways to take action , 
with the aim of mobilising students and other interested
persons to engage in the project . A workers ’ rights activist
from China also toured the country to talk to students and
educators . 
During the first year of the project , social responsibility
issues in the garment sector have risen in prominence
in public debate and received widespread interest from
media , educators , NGOs and young people . We have
worked with a number of Polish organisations ( KARAT
Coalition , Grupa eFTe , Polish Green Network , Against
Gravity )  , who have also added the global dimension to
their educational programs and thus increased the impact
of the project . 
www . modnieietycznie . pl
UK : Fashioning an Ethical Industry
- Labour Behind the Label
Fashioning an Ethical Industry in the UK was established
as a result of requests for support and information from
students and educators on UK fashion related courses at
higher and further education levels . Teaching about socially
responsible fashion in the UK has changed dramatically
since the start of the project in 2005 . Well over 20
universities are teaching about the issues , specialist courses
have been set up and research positions have been
established . 
Students and educators use our website to find out
more about workers ’ rights in the fashion industry . It
includes over 20 factsheets and links to films , reports
and images . Educators can explore information about
teaching resources , our student workshop programme
and tutor training events , and students can find out about
opportunities such as internships and competitions . We
have also produced a student magazine , Sense , that covers
everything from business ethics to sourcing fair trade
fabrics , and is packed full of industry tips and profiles
of students designing an ethical industry . Sense offers
inspiration and ideas for students wanting to learn about
ethics in fashion and get involved in creating change while
at university or college . 
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org
FASHIONING AN ETHICAL INDUSTRY ACROSS EUROPE
10
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Other Useful Organisations
The Higher Education Academy - Education for
Sustainable Development Project

The purpose of the Higher Education Academy ’ s Education
for Sustainable Development ( ESD ) project is to help
institutions and subject communities develop curricula and
pedagogy that will give students the skills and knowledge to
live and work sustainably . They are working to the following
aims : 

to research and support the development of ESD in the
•
•
HE sector , particularly within subject communities ; 

to build capacity amongst individuals , subject communities
•
•
and institutions to embed ESD in curricula and pedagogy ; 
and

to assist the coordination and dissemination of policy , 
•
•
research and practice relating to ESD in institutions , the
Higher Education Academy and the wider field . 
Higher Education Funding Council for England

The Higher Education Funding Council for England 
( HEFCE ) has produced a database , Sustainable
Development in Higher Education Resource Guide , to
support the sustainable development work of universities
and colleges in the UK . The database covers the following
topics : Strategy , Biodiversity , Transport , Financial , Curriculum , 
Construction , Community , Water , Waste , Procurement , 
Carbon and Management . 
Practical Action

Practical Action have developed a comprehensive database
of activities for design and technology , including issues
around garment production . The resource is mainly aimed
at pre-16 and further education instructors . Resources
include design tasks , inspirational products , materials
information , case studies , key issues and further information . 
The Environmental Association for Universities and
Colleges ( EAUC ) 

The EAUC seeks to work with members and partners
to drive sustainability to the heart of further and higher
education . The organisation shares information and best
practice within its membership , and works within the
sector to drive sustainability deeper into all aspects of
universities and colleges . 
11
12
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Design Contents
12
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
13
13
DESIGN
14 Introduction
16	
Further information
Teaching materials
Publications
18	On teaching empathy		
SueThomas , RMIT University , Australia
23 Slow fashion			
Kate Fletcher , London College of Fashion , UK
26 Designing slow fashion
Kate Fletcher , London College of Fashion , UK
29 The elephant in the room : Contextualising the
ethical within fashion excellence
MoTomaney , Central St Martins and UCA , UK
33 Collaborating with fair trade producers : Design
and trends
Toni Hicks , University of Brighton , UK
36 Customised denim project with further education
students studying BTEC National Diploma Art & 
Design ( Fashion & Clothing ) 
Maria Skoyles , Oxford and CherwellValley College , 		
UK
38 Clothing care calculator : An interactive tool to
evaluate environmental impact
Katie Dombek-Keith and Suzanne Loker , 
Cornell University , USA
41 Style showdown
Sara B . Marcketti and Sara J . Kadolph , Iowa State
University , USA
45 Design piracy : A constructive controversy
Sara B . Marcketti , Iowa State University , USA		
					
49 Cotton Cultivation and Sustainability
Südwind Agentur , Austria
53 Ideas for design briefs
Fashioning an Ethical Industry and
Abbie Price , R . A . J . E , UK
14
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Designers have a key role in creating more opportunities
for sustainable consumption and production . This collection
of essays and teaching activities for design related courses , 
including garment technology and product development , 
will inspire you with ideas you can use in your own studio . 
For further ideas for teaching sustainable design , we
recommend the Teaching Guide for the Designer ’ s Atlas of
Sustainability by AnnThorpe ( seeTeaching Materials section
below )  . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry displays examples of students ’ 
work relating to sustainability on its website at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / studentwork /  . Your own
students may find inspiration in these pages . We would also
be very happy to receive images and information about
students ’ work in your own university , college or school for
consideration for the website . 
About the contributions in the design chapter
In her essay , On Teaching Empathy , SueThomas from Royal
Melbourne Institute ofTechnology , Australia , introduces
the importance of empathy in design for sustainability and
gives ideas for encouraging students ’ empathy in the design
process . Thomas writes ,  “ If we are to engage our students
in preparing themselves to work ethically in our industry , they
need to be able to personally and professionally empathise .  ” 
Dr . Kate Fletcher from the London College of Fashion , 
UK , describes the emerging idea of slow fashion in her
essay Slow Fashion . In this essay students are challenged
to consider the implications of fast economic speed on
workers and to appreciate the existence of other types
of speed on fashion production and consumption . Dr . 
Fletcher discusses how ‘ slow is about a shift from quantity
to quality . In melding the “ slow movement ’ s ideas with the
global clothing industry , we build a new vision for fashion in
the era of sustainability : where pleasure and fashion is linked
with awareness and responsibility .  ” The essay is provided as
background reading for students and educators , and links
directly with Dr . Fletcher ’ s second contribution , Designing
Slow Fashion . 
In the tasks suggested in Designing Slow Fashion , Dr . Kate
Fletcher encourages students to explore a range of themes
and rhythms present in fashion and through this to build
insight and understanding about the impact of today ’ s
predominant “ fast ” fashion speed . Using this understanding , 
students can begin to develop design outcomes relating to
speeds other than just fast economic speeds . 
In her essay , The Elephant in the Room : Contextualising
the Ethical within Fashion Excellence , MoTomaney , 
Central St . Martins and UCA , UK , challenges us to explore
the relationship between teaching about the social and
environmental impact of the fashion industry and the
teaching of creative excellence in fashion design courses . 
Toni Hicks , from the University of Brighton in the UK , 
describes the results of teaming up with members of the
World FairTrade Organisation ( IFAT ) in Collaborating
with Fair Trade Producers : Design and Trends . Students
produced designs based on an understanding of producers
in the alpaca-producing regions of Latin America and
workshops held in the communities . Samples were
produced as a result of this mutual insight , and retailers
in the UK were involved . Students also participated in a
further project to produce a ‘ trend newsletter ’ featuring
Design Introduction
15
student designers , for distribution to producers in the IFAT
network . 
In the case study of the Customised Denim Project
with Further Education Students , Maria Skoyles , from
Oxford and CherwellValley College in the UK , provides
an example of how students have explored ethics and
sustainability by using the issues as the focus for developing
communication and drawing skills , materials , techniques and
process , and contextual influence . 
The Clothing Care Calculator by Katie Dombek-Keith and
Suzanne Loker from Cornell University in the USA is an
interactive tool using Microsoft Excel . It was developed by
Dombek-Keith based on the Energy Star Calculator ( www . 
energystar . gov ) to calculate the energy use of an individual ’ s
clothing care behaviour and alternatives that would lower
the energy expended . Its intent is to raise the awareness of
designers , consumers and businesses to the major impact
of everyday clothing care on the total energy used in a
clothing garment ’ s lifecycle . It can be used in the classroom
as a tool to introduce lifecycle analysis and the clothing
care stage , or as the basis for a design problem reflecting
the importance of considering the clothing care stage of a
garment ’ s lifecycle in the design process . 
In Style Showdown , Sara B . Marcketti and Sara J . Kadolph
from Iowa State University in the USA provide a series of
questions to explore a news article comparing a $1 , 000
sweater with one that costs $100 . The questions stimulate
students to explore the issue of price , business practices
and sustainability . 
In Design Piracy : A Constructive Controversy , by Sara
B . Marcketti from Iowa State University , USA , students
are encouraged to work cooperatively in small groups
to debate the pros and cons of design piracy , considering
the diverse points of view of designers , garment workers , 
manufacturers and consumers . 					
In the short activity , Cotton Cultivation and Sustainability , 
by Südwind Agentur , Austria , students learn how cotton is
cultivated , and about the social and environmental issues
associated with its cultivation . With a set of images and
matching descriptions about cotton cultivation , students
clarify the meaning and content of these and put them in
order . Students should be able to show understanding by
explaining the images in their own words and using new
vocabulary to do so . This activity can also be used as an
English as a foreign language lesson and German-English
translations are provided . 
In Ideas for Design Briefs we bring you five short ideas for
design briefs from Fashioning an Ethical Industry and Abbie
Price from R . A . J . E , UK . The assignment ideas are based on
designing for fair trade producers , designing a collection
for a brand that promotes itself as ethical and designing
for different lead times . A range of ideas for approaching
sustainability are also included , such as design for leasing , 
design for multiple-use and design based on producers ’ 
skills and capabilities . 
DESIGN
16
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Teaching Materials
There is information about a range of teaching resources , 
films , exhibitions and images on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website at 
resources /  . Some you may find useful for design related
teaching include :  
[ Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG ] Teaching Guide for the Designer ’ s
Atlas of Sustainability
This guide aims to support undergraduate and
postgraduate educators in delivering education in
sustainable design , treating sustainability in its broadest
sense , encompassing ideas about social , environmental , 
economic and well-being . The guide has been produced
to cater to a range of design disciplines , including fashion . 
The teaching guide contains 28 design briefs and exercises , 
and more than 20 additional resources and tips ( such as
ideas for films , essay topics and field trips )  . Themes include
biomimicry , ethical and fair trade issues , slow design , 
happiness , economics and new models of practice that
enable design activism . 
Thorpe , A .  ( 2008 ) Teaching Guide for the Designer ’ s Atlas of
Sustainability . 
Available to download for free from 
atlas . net / teachguide . html 
[ Pre-16 , FE ] The Sustainability Handbook for Design and
Technology Teachers
The handbook aims to “ enable students to produce great
designs and great products based on sustainability principles ”  . 
It ’ s target audience is all design and technology teachers , 
but a number of examples are taken from the fashion
industry and others can easily be adapted by fashion
teachers . The six ‘ R ’ s of sustainability are covered in the
publication – rethink , refuse , reuse , reduce , repair and
recycle - with lots of suggestions for teaching activities and
design tools . 
Capewell , I .  ( 2007 ) The Sustainability Handbook for Design
and Technology Teachers , Practical Action . 
To buy , see 
handbook 
[ Pre-16 , FE ] Passion for Fashion
Passion for Fashion , a resource from the Reading
International Solidarity Centre ( RISC )  , includes lots of
creative and interactive ideas for running a workshop
to introduce participants to working conditions in the
garment industry . 
RISC ( 2003 ) Passion for Fashion , RISC . 
Download for free from 
teaching_resources . html
Further Information
17
Publications
Information about additional books , reports and factsheets
is available on the Fashioning an Ethical Industry website at
resources / 
Sustainable Fashion and Textiles : Design Journeys
This is the first book to bring together a wide range of
sustainability issues that impact on the design of garments . 
It covers , amongst other issues , fabrics , dyes , speed , lightness
and localism . The book introduces practical alternatives and
designers incorporating sustainability ideas into their work . 
Fletcher , K .  ( 2008 ) Sustainable Fashion and Textiles : Design
Journeys , Earthscan
Sustainable Fashion : Why now ? 
The chapters in this book cover sustainability issues
associated with the environment , people and processes
that designers , consumers and others face when creating
and wearing apparel . The book draws on a range of
perspectives and presents new ways of thinking about
sustainable fashion . 
Hethorn , J .  & Ulasewicz , C .  ( 2008 )  . Sustainable fashion : Why
now ? Fairchild Books . 
Sense
Sense is a new magazine for fashion students , covering
everything from business ethics to sourcing fair trade
fabrics . It is packed full of industry tips and profiles
of students designing an ethical industry . Sense offers
inspiration and ideas for students wanting to learn about
ethics in fashion and get involved in creating change while
at university or college . 
Higginson , H .  ( 2008 ) Sense , Fashioning an Ethical Industry . 
DESIGN
18
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
On Teaching Empathy
Sue Thomas , Lecturer in Fashion , School of Architecture and Design , RMIT University , Australia
sue . thomas @ rmit . edu . au
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
Students will be able to speculate on and discuss the potential experiences and feelings of other people . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
4 . Number of students 10 + 
5 . Length of time required 45-60 minutes
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities , Article , Discussion
and debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Consumers , Empathy , Slow fashion , Working conditions
19
I am interested in why designers ( I include myself ) design
sustainably , or wish to . There is a desire to help , to do
better , or to do good – to behave ethically . Following this
line of enquiry , I wondered what was the root motivation
for ethics . My observation and reading would be that it
is empathy - the emotional response for another living
thing experiencing inequality . If we wish to have ethical
behaviour in our industry , we need to encourage ethics . 
Empathy is part of a strong engagement with ethical
design practice and behaviour . There may be cases when
empathy is not part of a response and there is a lack of
emotional connection . The individual can be supported
to imagine beyond the self . An empathetic response can
be encouraged and motivated . Empathy can be used
in a variety of situations by a designer for the potential
user / consumers , or for the planet and its occupants , or
for fellow workers within the supply chain - locally and
globally . An empathetic response can be encouraged or
enabled in students , not by detailing information alone , 
but by providing opportunities for empathy to occur . Katja
Battarbee wrote :  
 “ In order to support positive experiences , designers must
understand what experiences mean to others and why they
respond the way they do .  ”  ( Battarbee : 2003 p . 58 ) 
A little history would help here – it ’ s interesting to discover
that empathy is a recent term . Theodore Lipps , a German
psychologist , utilised the word ‘ einfuhlung ’  :  ‘ feeling into ’ 
a subject . Empathy is the English translation first used in
1910 and adapted from use in aesthetics to the discipline
of interpersonal communication . Definitions of term are
a useful starting point , and the psychologist Roy Schaffer
wrote :  
 “ …Empathy may be defined as the inner experience of sharing
in and comprehending the momentary psychological state of
another person .  ”  ( Schafer : 1959 p . 345 ) 
Another definition of empathy is from CancerWEB :  
 “ An individual ’ s objective and insightful awareness of the
feelings and behavior of another person . It should be
distinguished from sympathy , which is usually nonobjective and
noncritical . It includes caring , which is the demonstration of an
awareness of and a concern for the good of others .  ”  
( 12 Dec 1998 ) CancerWEB ’ s On-line Medical Dictionary1
Why should we bother with empathy as designers ? The
answer is that , with empathy , the designer ’ s ethical response
is more integrated , more holistic , coming from the logic
of problem-solving , but perhaps more importantly from
human emotions . Ethics could be as a result of legalisation
- ‘ don ’ t be unethical , or you will be fined ’  ! This is unlikely
to maintain long-term behaviour change or response . It
should happen because we want to be ethical , it is our
choice . If we as teachers were to take an aspect of the
consumer ’ s or the machinist ’ s experience as the subject
of an empathetic response , how can we enable empathy
to occur ? Students may not empathise with the machinist
overseas or locally , or with a larger woman looking for
underwear , or an older woman looking for her image in
advertising . Recognising this possibility , I started to look into
how to encourage and enable empathy and also where
empathy is needed . Jane Fulton Suri ( 2000 ) identified ways
for practicing designers to acquire more experience in this
area as follows : 
Gathering information
•
Experiencing directly
•
Prototyping experience
•
Role playing , improvising and body storming
•
Storytelling and scenario building
•
From observing students working , experiencing directly
provides the most authentic experience , as it is important
to have an unmediated experience . It provides a clear
perspective of a person , or the object , or the environment
they wish to experience and empathise with . This
engenders a personal response and provides insights : the
students can own their experience and share insights . 
Tuuli Mattelmäki and Katja Battarbee describe another
tool ,  ‘ empathy probes ’  ; packages of material designed 
 ‘ to support self-reflection and documentation ’ of user / 
consumers containing :  
 “ …disposable cameras , maps with instructions and stickers , 
pre-stamped postcards…to support a cultural understanding
at the designer ’ s end .  ”  ( Mattelmäki and Battarbee : 2002
pp . 266-7 ) 
DESIGN
20
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
If the designer is not able to be with the people that are
being empathised with , the user / consumers can provide
an ‘ experience ’ for the designers through these packages , 
through the empathy probes . As teachers , how can we
deliver an empathetic experience ? 
We have the usual options : 
lecture
•
exercise
•
seminar / tutorial
•
field trip
•
individual project
•
I started off trying to think of ways for the students to 
 ‘ experience ’ another person , or another life , within an
informal lecture . I decided to start with ‘ baby steps ’ and
opted for a very basic experience . Firstly , I suggested
that all the students take their shoes off , and put them
in pairs in a row . We stared at them and I didn ’ t actually
indicate why we were doing this . Then I suggested they
move maybe one or two pairs of shoes to the right . To
enter into the experience I usually take my own shoes
off . I then suggested they put someone else ’ s shoes on . 
Aligning with the old adage of ‘ walking a mile in another
man ’ s shoes ’  , you get to understand how they feel . Whilst
we are doing this I ask questions :  ‘ what part of you do
you use to design ?  ’  ,  ‘ how does this affect you as a human
being ?  ’  ,  ‘ how did you actually feel , what are your sensations ?  ’ 
Furthermore , I quizzed them as to whether they could
feel the size of someone else ’ s foot , and the way the
other person had been walking in that shoe – adding that
perhaps they could try to empathise with who that other
person was . 
Another method I have used , which is not unlike imagining
the back-story of a film , or the prequel ( imagineThe
Young Indiana Jones ChroniclesTV series )  , is to empathise
with an image . For this exercise you need to source a
photograph from a contentious environment - where a
newsworthy incident has happened . It is an exercise in
creative imagination , an area in which most students are
highly capable . A useful source is images available from
on-line news services – Al Jazeera . 
net /  , Reuters Press 
, BBC World Service . 
co . uk / worldservice /  , CNN . Once a
few images have been selected , I show the images to them
one at a time . I ask the students questions - for example :  
 ‘ What was the name of the person ?  ’  , in the photograph
of a soldier walking with other soldiers . I didn ’ t say where
he was from . I asked them ,  ‘ Where do you think he was
born ?  ’  ‘ Does his mother love him ?  ’  ‘ What ’ s the taste in
his mouth ? How did they know ?  ’ There is no right or
wrong answer , but the idea is for the students to work
at trying to understand and appreciate another person
– to empathise . If the students are in a seminar , or in an
informal lecture in a studio , it promotes conversation and
it ’ s a good idea for them to call out answers . Here they
share their observations and insights . Another method is
to distribute photographs and get them to work in groups
and describe the person , and imagine who they think he or
she is . Sometimes I have also asked them to try to identify
how separate they are from the people by asking them the
following series of questions : 
Are you related to this person ? 
•
Is this person a friend ? 
•
Is this person from the same culture as you are ? 
•
Is this person a friend of a friend ? 
•
Does this person live in your suburb ? 
•
Does this person live in your city ? 
•
Does this person live in your country ? 
•
This is like the ‘ degrees of separation from Kevin Bacon ’  
( the actor ) game which used to be popular . I asked the
students to consider ‘ how many people are you away ’ from
another person . It is important to remember to select the
images and consider how you wish to order them to lead
to the final subject of empathy . You will need a couple of
images at least to allow students to practice imagining and
empathising . You may start with images of people in conflict
and lead to images of consumers , or workers , depending
on your course subject . The emphasis is best on starting
with general images and guiding the experiences to the
specific , for example the industry workers in their working
environment . 
1
A great deal of useful information on empathy is available from medical education sources , as this is acknowledged as an important part of physician training . 

21
To prepare the students for experiencing the subject 
( client , consumer , co-worker ) of their research , I tried to
establish how to advise the students on how to proceed . I
have been writing and researching around this area , and I
came up with the concept of an empathy loop . 
Empathy Loop ( Thomas 2007 ) 
The idea being that the student would observe , then
witness ( this may include asking open-ended questions )  , 
then reflect , then respond , rather than react . Also , if they
were not sure that their response had been appropriate , 
they could maybe talk again to the person they are
designing for and / or with . Or they would start the loop
again and observe and witness . 
One of the terms in the loop is witness and I think quite
a few people are confused by this , but I like the idea of
witnessing , because basically it encompasses the idea of
sitting still , rather than leaping to the rescue and imposing
a solution . Pausing , even for a little while , and to be present
at , or have personal knowledge of , the other person ( their
research subject ) and their situation and perspective adds
insight to the eventual response . Thus , the subjects are able
to express themselves clearly and the student designer is
more able to understand them . 
Fulton Suri wrote on this perspective :  
 “ We cannot leap to design ideas from analysis directly nor can
we observe people ’ s thoughts and feelings – their motivations , 
emotions , mental models , values , priorities , preferences and
inner conflict . Yet we need to integrate these subjective
phenomena , for it is these that make up people ’ s experiences
and help us as designers to respond .  ”  ( Fulton Suri : 2003 ) 
An alternative and perhaps unexpected area where
empathy can be utilised is within the contemporary
corporate environment . It seems unlikely , but I believe
it makes sound commercial sense . There are four ways
this could happen . Firstly , empathy can be used as a
design methodology , thus the designer is empathic to the
production workers , their skills and work conditions , and
towards the earth ( its current and future inhabitants )  , 
which leads to a less damaging product . Secondly , 
empathetic design can be used to add product differential . 
The idea of using empathy would mean the resulting
product would be different , because the designer would
understand the environment and experience of the user / 
consumer or worker more closely . Thirdly , empathy could
be used as a behavioural indicator . The concept is that
designers would be enabled to anticipate the behaviour of
consumers , maybe even their colleagues . Finally , empathy
can be an aspect of governance or a corporate model of
behaviour . The notion of working empathetically with other
people seems very logical but how often does it occur ? 
Empathy is a professional skill and tool , and a component
of being human and humane . 
Alison Barnes and PaulThagard wrote :  
 “ …empathetic understanding is not always so automatic…
you may not be able to use your general knowledge about
people and yourself to construct a new situation in which you
imagine placing yourself .  ”  ( Barnes and Thagard : 1997 ) 
This direction of thinking is supported by Aaron Sklar et . al .  
( 2004 )  :  
 “ …deeper understanding of their experiences and values…we
try to reach a deeper understanding of what they are thinking
and how they feel .  ” 
This is just a small sample of ideas to start supportive and
proactive experiences building on the students ’ abilities
Respond OBSERVE
REFLECT WITNESS
DESIGN
22
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
and instincts . If we are to engage our students in preparing
themselves to work ethically in our industry , they need
to be able to personally and professionally empathise . To
conclude , here is a useful definition :  
 “ …empathy is the key word . When combined with creativity , it
holds the promise of better and more marketable solutions for
everyone .  ”  ( Myerson : 2001 p . 3 ) 
References
Barnes , A . andThagard , P .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Empathy and Analogy ’  , 
Dialogue : Canadian Philosophical Review , http :  /  / cogprints . 
org / 620 / 00 / Empathy . html viewed 18 October 2006
Fulton Suri , J .  ( 2003 )  ‘ The Experience Evolution : 
Developments in Design Practice ’  , The Design Journal , v 6 , i
2 , 39-48
Fulton Suri , J .  ( 2000 )  ‘ Communicating with Designers : The
Role of Empathy , Evidence and Inspiration ’  , Proceedings of
IEA 2000 / HFES 2000 Congress , 795-798
Mattelmäki , T . and Battarbee , K .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Empathy Probes ’  , 
Proceedings of Participatory Design Conference , Malmö , 
23-25 . 6 . 2002
Myerson , J .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Overview : The Key Word is Empathy ’  , 
Show and Symposium , The Helen Hamlyn Research
Centre , RCA , London 
RA2001 . pdf
Schafer , R .  ( 1959 )  ‘ Generative empathy in the treatment
situation ’  , Psychoanalytic Quarterly , v 28 , 342-373
Sklar , A .  , Velazquez , V . and Adams , B .  ( 2004 )  ‘ Context and
Empathy asTools for Sustainable Design ’  , Designing for the
21st Century III , Proceedings Rio de Janeiro 7-12 . 12 . 2004

forum_sklar . html
Thomas , S .  ( 2007 )  ‘ Design Back-story : Empathy , 
witnessing , reflection and the inclusive response ’  , Include 07 , 
RCA , London
23
Slow Fashion
i
Dr Kate Fletcher , Reader in Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion , UK
kate @ katefletcher . com
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 20 minutes ( reading only ) 
6 . Type of activity Article
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design
8 . Topics covered Care and repair , Consumers , Environment , Fair trade , 
Second hand clothes , Slow Fashion , Textiles , Working
conditions
Follow Up / Related Activities 
 ‘ Designing Slow Fashion ’ by Kate Fletcher , in this Handbook . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
To begin to understand the implications of fast economic speed on workers . 
•
•
To appreciate the existence of other types of speed on fashion production and consumption . 
•
•
DESIGN
24
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Fast fashion has become a defining characteristic of
today ’ s textile and clothing industry . It is a combination
of high speed production and high speed , high volume
consumption . It is made possible by the tracking of sales
with electronic tills and just-in-time manufacturing where a
sample or design sketch is turned into a finished product in
as little as three weeks ; and growing consumer demand – a
recent report revealed that people are buying one-third
more garments than four years agoii 
, fuelled by the rise of
cheap clothes and ‘ value ’ retailers like Primark and Matalan . 
Yet super cheap ,  ‘ value ’ or ‘ fast fashion ’ garments are no
quicker to make or consume than any other garment . The
fibre takes the same amount of time to grow regardless of
a product ’ s speed to market ( in the case of cotton , around
eight months to cultivate and two to ship )  . Likewise , the
raw material takes the same amount of time to be spun , 
knitted or woven , cleaned , bleached , dyed , printed , cut and
sewn ; and the activity of going shopping and laundering
the garment takes the same amount of time regardless of
how speedily a design makes it from studio to high street
retailer .  
 ‘ Fast ’ in the case of today ’ s fashion industry describes
economic speed . Time is just one of the factors of
production along with labour , capital and natural resources
that get juggled and squeezed in the pursuit of maximising
throughput of goods for increased profits . But increasing
the speed of production and consumption comes at a cost . 
Rapidly changing style and novelty is workable only because
clothing is so cheap ( indeed , over the last fifteen years , 
the price of garments has been falling )  , made possible by
the shifting of production to low cost countries , and by
putting downward pressure on working conditions and
environmental standards , the so-called ‘ race to the bottom ’  . 
But there are other views of time and speed which
acknowledge not just economic speed but also nature ’ s
speed and the pace of cultural change . These other views
give us a key portal into the designing and making of more
sustainable , user centred and worker-friendly fabrics and
garments . These views provide us with a multi-layered
focus on speed that is a marked shift in emphasis away
from the status quo in today ’ s industry where fashion is
mass-produced and fashion and textiles are consumed
enmasse . They are part of a different world view , where a
sensitivity to speed in both production and consumption
is transformed into a force for quality ( of environment , 
society , pay , working conditions and products , etc .  ) In this
world view we design ourselves a different system that
makes money and also respects the rights of workers and
the environment and at the same time produces beautiful
and conscientious garments . This different system is
described here as slow fashion . 
Slow fashion is about designing , producing , consuming
better . Slow fashion is not time-based but quality-based 
( which has some time components )  . Slow is not the
opposite of fast – there is no dualism – it is simply a
different approach in which designers , buyers , retailers and
consumers are more aware of the impact of products
on workers , communities and ecosystems . The concept
of slow fashion borrows heavily from the Slow Food
Movement . Founded by Carlo Petrini in Italy in 1986 , 
Slow Food links pleasure and food with awareness and
responsibility . It seeks to defend biodiversity in our food
supply by opposing the standardisation of taste , defending
the need for consumer information , and protecting cultural
identities tied to food . It has spawned a wealth of other
slow movements . Slow Cities , for example , design with slow
values but within the context of a town or city and are
committed to improving the quality of life for its citizens . 
Thus , slow is about a shift from quantity to quality . In
melding the slow movement ’ s ideas with the global clothing
industry , we build a new vision for fashion in the era of
sustainability : where pleasure and fashion are linked with
awareness and responsibility . Slow fashion is all about
choice , information , cultural diversity and identity . Yet
perhaps most critically , it is also about balance . It is about
recognising that slow fashion is a combination of rapid
imaginative change and symbolic ( fashion ) expression as
well as material durability , quality making and long-term , 
engaging products . Slow fashion supports our psychological
needs ( to form identity , communicate with others , be
creative through our clothes ) as well as our material
needs ( to keep warm and be protected from extremes of
climate )  . 
Fast fashion , as it exists today , strikes no such balance . 
Indeed , it is largely disconnected from the reality of poverty
wages , forced overtime and climate change . And fast
fashion has little recognition of the fact that we are now
less happy than our parents and our grandparents were , 
even though we own more material stuff . Slow fashion , 
in contrast , is produced and consumed differently to fast
fashion . The heightened awareness of other stakeholders
25
and speeds in slow fashion , along with the emphasis
on quality , gives rise to different relationships between
designer and maker ; maker and garment ; garment and user . 
Recognising and designing with speeds other than just a
fast commercial pace takes the pressure off time . Garments
are still mass-produced , but they are done so in supplier
factories that pay living wages and maintain high standards . 
Mutually beneficial relationships between retailers , brands
and their suppliers are fostered over the longer term . 
This helps erase the unpredictability for suppliers of small
volume orders and short lead times that frequently lead
to the use of temporary workers and the forced overtime
that have become the hallmark of today ’ s economics
driven fashion . 
The balance implicit in slow fashion comes from combining
newness and innovation with long-term stability . Only in
finding some equilibrium between these speeds will quality
be achieved . Quality normally comes at a price and at
least some slow fashion pieces will cost substantially more
than they do today , reflecting their materials , workmanship
and values . This will result in us buying fewer high value , 
slow-to-consume products and bring key resource savings . 
It has been suggested , for example , that the sector could
halve its materials use without economic loss if consumers
paid a higher price for a product that lasted twice as longiii 
. 
Yet , other slow fashion pieces may cost the same or even
less than today . These will be specifically designed to be
resource-efficient , quick-to-consume products developed , 
say , as part of carefully planned closed materials cycles . 
Slow fashion is a glimpse of a different – and more
sustainable - future for the textile and clothing sector , 
and an opportunity for business to be done in a way that
respects workers , environment and consumers in equal
measure . Here are some tips to slow down your wardrobe : 

Repair your clothes with a smile ( it ’ s easier than
•
going shopping )  . 

Ask stores about repair services ( that may get
•
them thinking )  . 

Ask your friends for new ideas about how to wear the
•
garments you already have ( it ’ s always good to get new
views on how to wear old things )  . 
i This is a part excerpt from Kate Fletcher ’ s book , Sustainable Fashion andTextiles : Design Journeys ( 2008 ) London : Earthscan . 
ii Allwood , J . M .  , Laursen , S . E .  , Malvido de Rodriguez , C . and Bocken , N . M . P .  ( 2006 ) Well Dressed ? Cambridge : University of Cambridge Institute of Manufacturing , p12 . 
iii Allwood , J . M .  , Laursen , S . E .  , Malvido de Rodriguez , C . and Bocken , N . M . P .  ( 2006 ) Well Dressed ? Cambridge : University of Cambridge Institute of Manufacturing , p4 . 
DESIGN
26
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Designing Slow Fashion
i
Dr . Kate Fletcher , Reader in Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion , UK
kate @ katefletcher . com
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : It would be useful to
read the ‘ Slow Fashion ’ contribution in this Handbook
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students D . Specific knowledge required : It would be useful to
read the ‘ Slow Fashion ’ contribution in this Handbook
4 . Number of students A group up to 30 would be ideal
5 . Length of time required If all the tasks were completed this could make up
about a week ’ s short project
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Ideas for projects , 
assignments and briefs , Discussion and debate , Research
related , Practical
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design
8 . Topics covered Care and repair , Consumers , Environment , Fair trade , 
Second hand clothes , Slow Fashion , Textiles , Working
conditions
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
To explore practically a range of speeds and rhythms present in fashion . 
•
•
Through this to build insight and understanding about the impact of today ’ s predominant fashion speed . 
•
•
To begin to develop design outcomes relating to speeds other than just fast economic speeds . 
•
•
27
Designing fashion for speeds other than just a fast
commercial pace has the potential to positively influence
issues surrounding workers ’ rights , labour issues and
sustainability concerns more broadly . But what are these
other speeds and how can awareness of them be raised
within fashion design curricula ? 
Introduction to Ideas of Different Speeds
If we look at how speed is dealt with in places other than
fashion , we see combinations of fast and slow . The Ancient
Greeks , for example , talked of two different kinds of
time – one which focused on the moment and the other
concerned with ongoing time . And in the case of nature , 
we see that ecosystems achieve balance and long-term
resilience of the larger system by adjusting to change at
different paces . Nature typically combines change that
happens on a big scale but very slowly ( like the time
needed to grow a mature , established forest ) with fast , 
small-scale change ( such as in the lifecycle of a flowering
plant )  . Here the varying rates of change within the
ecosystem effectively help sustain it , allowing it to survive
potentially damaging events . This is because the fast parts
react while the slower parts maintain system continuity ii 
. 
Stewart Brandiii
in his book The Clock of the Long Now , 
proposes that any resilient human civilization needs similar
layers of fast and slow activity to balance each other . He
suggests six levels of pace and size . From fast to slow ( and
of increasing size ) the layers are : Art / fashion , Commerce , 
Infrastructure , Governance , Culture and Nature . The fastest
layers , like fashion , bring rapid imaginative change , while the
slowest layers maintain constancy and provide a long-term
supporting structure . Crucially , the system works when
each layer respects the pace of the others . 
Yet the fashion industry , as it exists today , has no respect
for these other layers . Indeed , a growing body of evidence
suggests that it is largely disconnected from the effects of
its products on nature and culture , with little recognition
of poverty wages , forced overtime , waste mountains
and climate change . In fact the commercial agenda in
fashion seems to promote the polar opposite of a multi-
layered , multi-speed industry . Instead , what is marketed to
consumers is a wide range of similar products produced
and consumed for economic speed rather than at speeds
that represent the interests of workers ’ rights or an agenda
supportive of nature and culture . 
How can we design a more multi-speed type of fashion ? 
One place to start is by building an awareness of the
speed of current garments . Described below is a series
of activities that can be used alone or in a sequence to
explore different speeds at use in fashion . 
Suggested Task 1
Brainstorm in a group around how / why garments are ‘ used
up ’ and how long they stay current ( or fashionable )  . Think
about a range of types of garments ( underwear , jeans , 
T-shirts , coats , etc .  ) and look for differences that influence
the factors behind consumption , use and disposal . 
Suggested Task 2
Give students the task of doing some shop research and
analysing the fashion offer of major brands and high street
retailers . Are different speeds evident in the range of
garments these companies sell ? If so , how do pieces vary ? 
Feedback to group , using visuals and looking for common
themes . 
Suggested Task 3
Invite students to do some wardrobe research , looking
in their drawers and on their hanging rails , and those of
their friends . Ask them to look for the different rhythms
with which garments are used , collating / sketching various
archetypal items . Ask them to look for types of garments
that are used and ‘ retired ’ quickly and types of garments
that have a slower rhythm of use . Look for colour , fibre
type , silhouette , fashion level , etc . 
Present this research to the group , looking together for
patterns and themes that emerge . 
Suggested Task 4
Using the information gathered in tasks 1 , 2 and 3 , give
students the task of beginning to explore how these issues
relating to the speed of consumption influence issues
related to production . Investigate what the effects are , for
example , of producing garments with a high fashion level
and high consumption speed on workers . Does this differ
for different garments ? Look for clues on how a focus on
the speed of fashion production and consumption can be
used to specifically help improve the lives of workers . 
DESIGN
28
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Use these clues as insights from which to start to build a
design project around issues of worker-friendly speeds in
fashion . What characterises a worker-friendly speed ? How
can worker-friendly speeds be enhanced ? How can the
negative effects of these speeds on workers be reduced ? 
Design a garment that works with these labour-friendly
speeds ( they may be a combination of fast and slow )  . 
Suggested Task 5
Ask students to bring items into class that represent fast
and slow speed in fashion . In small groups , analyse the
differences and similarities between these pieces , drawing
up a list of key characteristics , and collating the values that
participants / owners ascribe to these pieces and some of
the stories linked to their use . 
Feed these characteristics , values and stories back to the
larger group and collectively develop an understanding of
what fast and slow fashion look like in garment form today . 
Develop a design brief that is concerned with services
or systems ( rather than products ) that bring out the
positive sustainability characteristics of garments that we
already own today , without us needing to consume new
items . How can designers interface with producers and
consumers to slow down consumption but still give people
access to fashion ? 
i This is a part excerpt from Kate Fletcher ’ s book , Sustainable Fashion andTextiles : Design Journeys ( 2008 ) London : Earthscan . 
ii Thorpe , A .  ( 2007 ) The Designer ’ s Atlas to Sustainability , Washington : Island Press , pp48-49 . 
iii Brand , S .  ( 1999 ) The Clock of the Long Now , London : Phoenix . 
29
The Elephant in the Room : Contextualising the
Ethical within Fashion Excellence
Mo Tomaney , Research Fellow , Fashion and Ethics , Central St . Martins College of Art and Design , University of the
Arts , London , and senior lecturer , MA Ethical Fashion , UCA , UK
Motomaney @ aol . com
1 . Level FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 20 minutes ( reading only ) 
6 . Type of activity Article
7 . Discipline Design , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered All
DESIGN
30
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Fashion is , by its nature and definition , about clothes as
more than just protection from the elements or modesty . 
It is a vehicle for individual definition , whether as part of a
clan identity , a professional uniform or as self-expression
at a basic level that touches most people . At its most
expressive , it can be a creative instrument that comes
close to artistry . For most students of fashion design or
related subjects , engagement with the subject originates
in an inspiration with the creative side of fashion rather
than an interest in or awareness of the industrial systems
that make high street fashion possible . The “ elephant in
the room ” is the underside to the fun , creative side of
fashion that engages most fashion students and young
consumers ; it is the unseen cycle of the garment , from yarn , 
though processing stages , through its journey to the store , 
and its afterlife - post fashionability . The nuts and bolts of
the industry can seem to be unrelated to the creative
and sometimes egocentric core of the fashion elite , as
experienced at fashion weeks in London , NewYork , Milan
and Paris ; but producing and delivering the goods , keeping
turnover up and limiting product lifecycles are all part of
what defines the fashion business . Of the few who will
make it big , those designers destined to find success on the
runway or red carpet , many will sign lucrative deals with
mainstream fashion ( high street ) retail chains and brands ; 
for the vast majority of fashion graduates , mass market
fashion is the business model in which they will become
stakeholders at some stage in their careers . The creative
process is often segregated from the sourcing of garments , 
both in college and in industry . As students , fledgling
designers often look to a past era of slower fashion and
couture as a means of production , naturally focusing away
from notions of mass production or sweatshops - perhaps
a reflection of the fact that in fashion we are all in the
business of selling fantasies on some level . 
Despite the perception of a kind of democratization of
fashion that has come about via the growth of cheap , on
trend fast fashion - a phenomenon in which the majority of
fashion students , as consumers , are enthusiastic participants
- there is simultaneously a disconnect between the high
aesthetic goals at the creative end of the fashion industry , 
the growing interest in the ethics of contemporary
consumption among fashion students , and the hunger
for faster and faster lifecyles with high margins that is
generated by fast fashion brands in particular ( though
not exclusively )  . This has created a business model in
which commercial demands often override “ considerate
production ” - quality of materials , craftsmanship , ecological
thoughtfulness , but most of all human rights in production
chains where often invisible subcontracting can be an
unavoidable consequence of the demands of short lifecycle
fashion . Is there , or can there be , a link between the quality
and creative integrity of a finished product and the socio-
economic integrity that is embedded in the way it has
been produced ? Is this something that can successfully be
addressed within fashion schools that may share a parallel
disconnect - simultaneously striving for creative excellence
and innovation alongside the desire to build real links with
industry to create greater depth in the student experience
and to build career pathway links ? 
Ethical considerations can be an alien fit within a set of
learning criteria designed to deliver creative excellence -
the communication of ethical concepts alongside fulfilment
of aesthetic objectives in a way that is relevant and might
really influence student practice is no doubt challenging . 
Many students and staff find an easier engagement with
sustainability issues through the exploration of “ eco ” 
fashion , and there has been more success in the delivery
of sustainability through learning criteria related to
environmental factors , where there may be more obvious
links to the creative ; for example , innovative fibre and
yarn bases , greener ways to create or finish fabric , ideas of
slow fashion , the re-creation of vintage in garment or yarn
recyclage , etc .  , presenting potential for really tangible and
visible results that are embedded in the creative process . 
As such , the “ eco ” option offers a more comfortable fit
for delivering debates around sustainability within existing
curricula , in terms of impacting on the design of the
garment , accessing opportunities to inspire marketing the
collection or influencing communication with the consumer , 
in a way that supply chain ethics or corporate social
responsibility methodology and its implementation simply
cannot deliver within a design course . 
While clearly many fashion students dream of couture , 
slow , hand finished or unique as the pinnacle of their
creative ambition , few , when considering a career in
fashion , dream of sweatshops in China or Bangladesh , or
short lifecycle fast fashion ; who wants to design rags for a
throwaway consumer ? Discussion of supply chains , codes
of conduct , subcontracting or the human plight within
the business of fashion is difficult on several layers for the
fashion design student , particularly as , in the first instance , 
a student may have a limited concept of the way supply
31
chains work , and how they may differ across models of
production . Instilling in the student an understanding that
an item produced at the high end - such as couture , high
quality tailored or hand finished ready-to-wear , where
the highest quality is essential to the product - is likely to
have a shorter , more traceable supply chain but be more
expensive than a fast fashion cut and sew supply chain
that requires lower skill resources , and where the end
product is likely to be finished at a lower quality , can create
a foundation to relating socio-economic considerations to
product and therefore to design . Asking creative fashion
students to consider human rights and ethics in the supply
chain within a typical set design project defies the accepted
boundaries that govern a creative fashion course . In some
ways , the consideration of supply chain might be seen
as a limitation to creativity , so can , in essence , be seen to
actually confront the standard learning criteria . There is a
parallel in industry , where studio designers are sometimes
deliberately shielded from sourcing or costing limitations in
order to maximize creative expression ( within commercial
confines defined by brand or product managers )  , so that
the brand managers and buyers are empowered with not
only the sourcing choices but the creative choices that
become subordinate to financial and logistical restrictions . 
Without including the context of the key business models
that drive the industry within curricula , a discussion of
ethics relating to the design or the product management
role can be hollow . In order for students to grasp the
ethics and politics of fashion production , they must first
understand the fashion industry and the business choices
it faces ; why , for instance , a fast fashion model might lead
to chains of subcontracting , impossible delivery demands
and sweatshops , contrasted with historic perspectives on
slower business and production models that may offer
a vision for the future - building an understanding that it
was not ever thus ! It is important to build into creative
development an understanding of the whole product cycle , 
pre-production through to post-consumption , a holistic
approach to the fashion product that goes beyond design . 
This knowledge may offer potential for creative collision
and transformation in unexpected ways . If awareness
about the whole lifecycle of the garment - including both
business and ethics - can become the norm in discussions
of design and product development , students may begin
to consider the life chain of the products they create as a
matter of course . This would inevitably bring them greater
empowerment when they enter the industry . Graduates
would be better equipped to promote change and enable
positive sustainable solutions within their organisations , with
the by-product that a young designer could confidently
contribute to the broader business debates within those
organisations . 
It is natural that consumer confusion around fashion
ethics impacts on the student cohort as much as on any
other enthusiastic consumer of fashion and media . It is
challenging for an educator to illustrate these complex
and often contradictory debates , or to offer solutions
when the industry itself has not yet been able to decipher
clear routes to change but , rather , has initiated processes
to enable change ( a concept which in itself can cause
confusion in its dissemination to students )  . How can we
support students to visualize how she or he may either
use design itself to bring about change or see how they
may effect change as designers rather than as consumers ? 
The latter may seem more attainable . Fashion students
are opinion leading consumers of fashion , so they are in
a position to influence other consumers both directly
and indirectly , just as they do in terms of fashion itself . 
The question is , how does the undoubted current buzz
around sustainability and ethics transfer itself - as a trend -
down the consumer chain ? Can it be transformed into an
underlying trend , one that will effect lasting change ? Is this
a mobile phone trend , or aTamagochi trend , a little black
dress or a puffball ? 
When they take up posts as designers in industry , fashion
school graduates may frequently find the path to change
seems to be outside their field of influence ; but within
fashion schools , placed in imaginary professional situations , 
students have a real opportunity to come up with visionary
solutions outside commercial constraints , with more open-
ended and holistic sustainability projects that engage them
with the less “ sexy ” side of the discussion alongside the 
 “ sexy ”  . 
Students and staff can begin to see the product and
its relationship to sustainability in a more integral light , 
to embed issues of sustainability directly into creative
processing rather than always treating them as distinct
subjects . For example , why do we always ask students
to produce a collection ? The removal of that framework
invites new creative solutions to the understanding of
what a “ collection ” might be , new possibilities for the
presentation , consumption and marketing of fashion . 
DESIGN
32
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Perhaps the collection is a stale way of looking at the
marketing of fashion that restricts the creative response to
sustainability . 
Students at Central St . Martin ’ s ( CSM )  , London , were
recently given a cross-disciplinary project in which they
were asked to consider sustainability across the life of
a garment . Working in groups of five or six students , 
several of the groups grasped the chance to work with
incredible fabrics and cuts , seeing sustainable solutions for
the consumption of fashion in ideas related to slow , such
as a dress hire collection , a collection of garments that
can be endlessly adapted for future wearers , or a vehicle
for the dissemination of issues . The fashion student is not
necessarily the opinion leader in the political aspects of
ethical or green issues , but as a creative thinker , she is
able to make a real contribution to the broader debates
within the industry through visionary solutions . Creative
students are in a good place to be able to offer creative
pointers to change before they get bogged down in the
industry , corporate loyalties , and subordination of design
departments to branding and sourcing , as is often seen in
the industry . As students , they may be allowed to be thrilled
by fashion , to consider fashion consumption without the
hindrance of business planning and spreadsheets ( so often
the bête noir of young design school graduates )  , to harness
their passion for the subject into real and innovative
sustainable solutions for business and design , and really
show a pathway to the industry . We know that , if it can be
done in a way that is creatively exciting , makes business
sense and grabs consumer interest , the industry is likely to
sit up and listen . 
33
Collaborating with Fair Trade Producers : 
Design and Trends
Toni Hicks , Senior Lecturer , Textile Department , University of Brighton , UK
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : Knowledge of fashion
industry and trend forecasting
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students D . Specific knowledge required : Knowledge of fashion
industry and trend forecasting
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required One term
6 . Type of activity Group work , Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , 
Practical
7 . Discipline Design , Marketing
8 . Topics covered Environment , Fair trade , Ethical initiatives / brands , 
Textiles , Trade
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
Understanding and experience of ethical trading issues . 
•
•
Recognising and understanding the value of historical / traditional influences related to design . 
•
•
Gaining new practical skills through primary research . 
•
•
Exploring and understanding the refinement of technique . 
•
•

Understanding the importance of the needs of a specific market and the potential and sensitive relationships
•
•
with traditions . 
Understanding and awareness of the subtleties in both design and communication . 
•
•
DESIGN
34
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Over the past five years at the University of Brighton , we
have gradually been incorporating into our programmes
a number of events and projects to raise and develop
students ’ awareness of both ethical and ecological issues
relating to the fashion and textile industries . Two years
ago , the new MDes courses inTextiles and Fashion were
validated , integrating these issues into specific objectives
and learning outcomes for each unit of study . 
In 2006 , I met Judith Condor-Vidal fromTrading for
Development , and associate member of the World Fair
Trade Organisation ( IFAT )  , at a ‘ Fashioning an Ethical
Industry ’ training event , and we have developed many allied
projects since then . 
Over five weeks in June / July 2007 , we ran a series of twelve
workshops with IFAT members / producer groups in the
alpaca regions of Latin America ( Ecuador , Peru , Bolivia and
Chile )  . These included showing knitted textile and knitwear
designs developed by our students in targeted projects
that had focused on an understanding of the communities ’ 
abilities and needs . We also discussed the importance of
quality control and exchanged technical skills . From the
mutual insight gained , it was possible to progress design
samples , which were presented to buyers atTopshop , La
Redoute and other European fashion outlets . An exhibition
showing a film , photographs and artefacts from the
workshops and the visit was displayed at the university
and several students are currently organising placements
with some of the groups . We also met with representatives
from the British Embassies in each country , to help ensure
their future support for our projects . 
In a further project , a team of Level 2 students produced a 
 ‘ trend newsletter ’ featuring student designs for distribution
throughout the IFAT network . The first pilot issue was
prepared for the May 2008 COFTA ( Cooperation for Fair
Trade in Africa ) conference for African members of the
IFAT network , held in Cairo . Noel Chapman presented the
newsletter , entitled ‘ Translate ’  . Two students , Laura Andrews
and Laura Gokhale , presented it at workshops they ran
for producer groups in Ecuador . In addition , it was sent for
the Rio de Janeiro IFAT conference for South American
producers in August 2008 and to the Sri Lankan IFAT
conference for Asian producers in October 2008 . After
comment and feedback from IFAT members , we plan to
create further issues on a regular basis , involving students at
all levels . If this proves to be beneficial and is well received , 
it might be possible to include contributions from students
attending other universities . 
PROJECT BRIEF : 
TREND NEWSLETTER FOR 2009 / 2010
UNIVERSITY OF BRIGHTON SPRINGTERM 2008
SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
AND DESIGN –TEXTILES
TEXTILES FOR FASHION , PRODUCT AND
PRESENTATION UNIT CODE AD291
LEVELTWO KNITTEDTEXTILES
A University of Brighton Project for the World Fair Trade
Organisation ( IFAT ) 
This is planned as the pilot for a long-term project . Each
year a new group of students will take the helm . The
newsletter will be distributed amongst all IFAT members
globally . We hope that there would be a possibility of the
recipients sharing its contents as far afield as possible , thus
creating a multiplying effect and enabling accessibility to
those who may not have internet access or are unable to
read . 
The newsletter will provide information on future trends , 
drawing on informed research and your innate “ finger on
the pulse ” to forecast and create sympathetic designs that
will provide valuable information to producers who do
not usually have access to this information . There might be
a small section for information on a particular traditional
design from a specific country ( preferably one that fits
in with the trends being discussed )  . This would provide
a knowledge exchange from producer to producer and
celebrate traditional skill and design . 
As this is the first issue , you will need to come together as
a team to discuss the format , title , focus and identification
of trends . Then decide to each develop a specific theme , 
which will relate to your knitwear project . Next term , all
information and designs will be drawn together , critically
selected and professionally brought to a conclusion . 
There will be a legally binding agreement stating that
the knowledge and design ideas for the newsletter are
regarded as a donation . 
35
You will be introduced and sensitised to the general
themes through tutorials and workshops on fair trade with
Noel Chapman and Judith Condor-Vidal . 
Your learning benefits will include : 
Understanding and experience of ethical trading issues . 
•

Recognising and understanding the value of historical / 
•
traditional influences related to design . 
Gaining new practical skills through primary research . 
•

Exploring and understanding the refinement of
•
technique . 

Understanding the importance of the needs of a specific
•
market and the potential and sensitive relationships with
traditions . 

Understanding and awareness of the subtleties in both
•
design and communication . 
DESIGN
36
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Customised Denim Project with Further
Education Students Studying BTEC National
Diploma Art & Design ( Fashion & Clothing ) 
Maria Skoyles , course leader , BTEC Fashion & Clothing , Oxford and Cherwell Valley College ( OCVC )  , UK
mskoyles @ ocvc . ac . uk
1 . Level FE
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required . 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required . 
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 4-6 weeks
6 . Type of activity Group work , Student presentations , Ideas for projects , 
assignments and briefs , Practical
7 . Discipline Design
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Students explore recycling , reuse of waste , labour issues and fair trade . Students are assessed on their
•
•
communication skills in addition to creative work . 
37
Oxford and CherwellValley BTEC National Diploma 
( Fashion and Clothing ) students , inspired by a visit toTate
Modern , customise jeans donated by Oxfam and explore
recycling , reuse of waste , labour issues and fair trade , and
are assessed through the following BTEC units : 
Unit 1 – Drawing development
Unit 2 – Materials , techniques and process
Unit 5 – Contextual influences
Unit 97 – Fabric manipulation ( part of a textiles short
course award ) 
Environmental and ethical issues are assessed through the
communications portfolio . 
The creative aspect of the project expects students to use
research into modern art , including a visit toTate Modern , 
London , for inspiration to : 
Visually record what they see at the gallery ( unit 1 )  . 
•
Record contextual references ( unit 5 )  . 
•

Research into the history of denim and its place in
•
today ’ s world ( unit 5 )  . 

Research into currently ethical designers and compare
•
their work to others ’  ( unit 5 )  . 

Experiment with denim and manipulate fabric
• 
( units 2 & 97 )  . 

Produce a final outcome from an old pair of jeans
• 
( units 2 & 97 )  . 

Document all their creative developments appropriately . 
•

Each unit has specified requirements . See www . edexcel . 
org . uk for more details on each unit . 
We find that the project generates good debates
and discussions and is therefore great for students ’ 
communications portfolio at either Level 2 or 3 . This
portfolio is a file of work that is put together to show the
students ’ ability in talking , discussing , comparing information
and writing . We ask students to complete the following
tasks which are then assessed : 

Watch
• ‘ China Blue ’  , taking notes and forming opinions on
what they view . 

Participate in Fashioning an Ethical Industry ’ s role play
•
on the impact of buying decisions on workers ( available
in this Handbook )  , offering the opportunity for them to
discuss in small groups and as a class . 

Read , analyse , synthesise and compare a selection of
•
documents ( largely available on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website , or on Oxfam ’ s , Labour Behind the
Label ’ s andTearfund ’ s websites )  . 
Write a short piece about modern art . 
•

Write an extended piece about ethical fashion . Students
•
decide the subject of this piece - they have varied from
researching organic cotton to writing about the industrial
revolution and whether the textiles trade has really
changed . 

Give a selection of talks - and subjects have included
•
their trip toTate Modern and / or a final presentation of
their work . 
Resources to support this learning are available on 
, and include
worksheets , role plays and films . 
The project has been wholly successful . Students have
thoroughly enjoyed the various creative workshops and the
links to the theoretical studies they have done . They have
learnt a great deal ( see learning outcomes below )  , and
achievement has been high in both course grades and key
skills portfolios . 
Learning Outcomes
Students will learn about the following ethical and
environmental issues : 

Waste and alternatives to landfill , including reusing in
•
creative ways . 

The supply chain and how current industrial practices
•
can be unethical , including : labour and living conditions
of workers ; the impact western buying practices have
on factory owners from Less Economically Developed
Countries ; the influence consumers can have on buying
practices and boardroom decisions . 
DESIGN
38
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Clothing Care Calculator : An Interactive Tool to
Evaluate Environmental Impact
Katie Dombek-Keith , Graduate Student and Suzanne Loker , Professor , Cornell University , USA
katiedkeith @ gmail . com , SL135 @ cornell . edu
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 10 to 30 minutes
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Interactive activities , Ideas
for projects , assignments and briefs
7 . Discipline Design
8 . Topics covered Care and repair , Environment
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To introduce the care and maintenance stage of Life Cycle Analysis for clothing using an interactive tool . 
•
•

To evaluate the environmental costs of clothing care and maintenance , and apply the results in clothing design as a
•
•
designer or in behavior choices as a consumer . 
For a copy of the Clothing Care Calculator , please visit : 
resources / teachingmaterials / carecalculator
39
1
The Calculator was designed with macros that , while not essential , make it easier for the user to navigate through the file and to reset the file to its original look . The macros are
harmless but may trigger a security warning pop box when opening . If the pop box shows up when opening and asks if you want to enable macros , then enable them . If the pop box won ’ t
allow you to open the files because of the macros , then you need to lower your security level in Excel to “ Medium ” by following the instructions given ( depending on which version of
Excel you are using , this can usually be done by selecting the Tools menu option and then Macro and Security )  . 
2
The Calculator has been created with a US audience in mind . The authors give permission for the Calculator to be amended to other currencies . 
The Clothing Care Calculator
The Clothing Care Calculator is an interactive tool using
Excel1
and is available at www . fashioninganethicalindustry . 
org / teachingresources / calculator . It was developed by
Dombek-Keith based on the Energy Star Calculator ( www . 
energystar . gov ) to calculate energy use of an individual ’ s
clothing care behavior and alternatives that would lower
energy expended2 
. Its intent is to raise the awareness of
designers , consumers and businesses to the major impact
of everyday clothing care on the total energy use in a
garment ’ s lifecycle . It can be used as : 1 ) an assignment for
students , or in the classroom as a tool to introduce Life
Cycle Analysis and the clothing care stage ; or 2 ) as the
basis for a design problem , reflecting the importance of
considering the clothing care stage of the lifecycle of a
garment in the design process . 
Learning Activity
We have used the Clothing Care Calculator in two
settings . First , during the opening reception for an exhibit
of Dombek-Keith ’ s master ’ s thesis designs , Re-Fashioning
the Future : Eco-friendly Apparel Design ; and then in a
web-based course offered by Loker , Re-Designing “ Green ” 
Apparel , through Cornell University , the University of
Delaware , and Colorado State University . In both settings , 
the Clothing Calculator was presented as a self-directed
activity with instructions embedded in the tool . As
such , there was little specific discussion about applying
the results to the clothing design process or to change
consumer behavior . Below , we outline a possible approach
to engage students in the Life Cycle Analysis process
for clothing , and particularly the significant impact of the
care and maintenance stage of clothing in considering
environmental costs . Both would begin by assigning
students the readings about Life Cycle Analysis of clothing
completed by Patagonia and other organizations , and trying
out the Clothing Care Calculator . 
The Design Problem
Design an article of clothing that limits the amount of
energy in the care and maintenance life stage and / or leads
to changed consumer care and maintenance of clothing . 
1 . 	
Consider specific care activities that have high energy
use , such as hot water , small loads , adjusting water levels
to load size , type of washing and drying machines , air
drying , criteria for and frequency of washing garments , 
dry cleaning , steaming , and other alternatives . 
2 . 	
Brainstorm approaches to clothing design that : 
a ) 	
increase awareness of environmental costs in clothing
care and maintenance ; 
b ) 	
limit environmental costs in clothing care and
maintenance , 
c ) 	
provide several ways to approach clothing care and
maintenance that are easy and flexible to provide
consumer choice ; and
d ) 	
embrace current trends of style and consumer behavior , 
including environmental consciousness . 
3 . 	
Select several design approaches as a class that meet
these criteria . Students can select from these or
others that emerge for their design concept and begin
generating design ideas . 
4 . Critique of initial design ideas . 
5 . Selection of final designs for execution and final critique . 
DESIGN
40
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
LifeCycle Analysis Readings
Brown , M . S . and Wilmanns , E .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Quick and dirty
environmental analyses for garments : What do we need to
know ?  ’  , Journal of Sustainable Product Design , 1 ( 1 )  , 28-34
Patagonia ’ s Footprint ChroniclesTool
www . patagonia . com / web / us / footprint / index . jsp
Patagonia ’ s Methodology for Environmental Cost
Calculations www . patagonia . com / pdf / en_US / method_for_
cost5 . pdf
Walsh , J . A . H . and Brown , M . S .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Pricing
environmental impacts : a tale of two t–shirts ’  , Illahee
11 : 3 & 4 , 175-187
Allwood , J . M .  , Laursen , S . E .  , de Rodriguez , C . M . and
Bocken , N . M . P .  ( 2006 ) Well dressed ? Report on the present
and future sustainability of clothing and textiles in the
United Kingdom . Cambridge , Great Britain : University of
Cambridge , Institute for Manufacturing
41
Style Showdown
Sara B . Marcketti and Sara J . Kadolph , Textiles and Clothing Program , Iowa State University , USA
sbb @ iastate . edu , skadolph @ iastate . edu
1 . Level FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 20 to 60 minutes
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Article , Discussion and
debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design
8 . Topics covered Environment , Prices , Supply chains , Textiles , Wages , 
Workers ’ rights
Follow-up / Related Activities : 
What price a living wage by Doug Miller in the Business Chapter in this Handbook . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Students will utilize their knowledge of textile science and textile science terminology , serviceability of
•
•
textile products , and basic aspects of the organization of the apparel industry , when reading a popular press
newspaper article . 

Students will review their understanding of textile production , assumptions about product quality , and consumer
•
•
expectations for textile products . 
Students will review their understanding of the impact of labor costs and environmental issues on cost of garments . 
•
•
Students will engage in written and oral communication by responding to the questions provided . 
•
•
DESIGN
42
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Instructions for Using the Learning Activity
Require that students read the “ Style Showdown ” article 
( below ) by either presenting a copy of the article in class
or posting the article electronically through email or other
course management software . Instruct the students to
write answers to the following questions . Questions 4-7
are particularly suitable for debate or discussion in small
or large groups . Timing required for this exercise ranges
from 20 minutes to one hour depending on the number of
questions discussed as a group and if oral summaries of the
discussions are shared by each student with the group as a
whole . The number of participants is unlimited . 
Learning Activity Questions
1 . 	
Identify and correct all errors in the article related to
textile terminology . 
2 . Describe the differences between the two sweaters in
terms of : 
a . textile quality
b . design features
c . manufacturing steps for the sweaters
d . 	
labor standards and conditions for the workers
constructing the sweaters
3 . Predict serviceability components of the two
sweaters based on : 
a . fiber content
b . yarn type
c . fabric structure
d . finishes
4 . 	
What basic assumptions does the author make about
the products , access to information from the two
companies , and manufacturing of the two sweaters ? 
Are these assumptions valid ? Why or why not ? 
5 . 	
The author states at the end of the article ,  “ it ’ s safe
to say that the Cucinelli ( $1000 sweater ) is the superior
sweater when it comes to style , quality , and global social
awareness ”  . Do you agree with this statement ? What
evidence is provided that this company is more socially
aware than Lands ’ End ? Does a higher priced garment
always ensure socially responsible business and labor
practices ? 
Note to instructors : Students should be reminded that
price does not necessarily equate to socially responsible
business practices and that garments of different price
points may , indeed , be produced in the same factory . 
6 . 	
Do design details alone justify the cost difference
between the two sweaters ? 
7 . 	
Explore possible reasons why one company provided
more information about their manufacturing processes , 
while the other company was more reluctant to
provide this information . What does this suggest about
competition within target markets ? Does the lack of
information shared by one company suggest actual
differences in working conditions ? Why or why not ? 
For what reasons do you think Lands ’ End might be
unwilling to share more information ? 
Feedback from students
Students in an introductory textile science class at a
four-year institution responded to this article through
postings on a course management Blackboard ( Web-
Ct ) system . In their responses , students considered the
implications of socially responsible business practices
the final cost of a garment . Students could relate to the
concepts presented in the article , specifically the availability
of similarly styled but differently priced garments . This
reading helped students think about the fashion industry
as a vital component of the global economy . Students did
struggle with the idea of purchasing a sweater for $1 , 000 . 
Instructors could consider asking students to research
and compare / contrast middle to lower priced companies ’ 
production and manufacturing processes for a project in an
introductory textile science or production and
sourcing course . 
43
Actual material provided to students
Reprinted by permission of Rightslink : 
Copyright Clearance Center
Style Showdown : 
$1 , 000 Sweater Faces $100 Rival
By Christina Binkley
Wall Street Journal November 29 , 2007 ; Page D1
It ’ s one of the abiding mysteries of fashion : Is it really worth
paying $1 , 100 for a white cotton blouse or $750 for one
of the turtleneck sweaters we see in high-end stores and
magazines ? 
If the labels fell off , would these basic items still feel like
they ’ re worth so much ? The question arises more often
these days , as stores like Zara and H & M thrive on selling
inexpensive fashions that resemble those of high-end
designers like Chanel and Dior . 
With the holiday gift-giving season upon us , I decided to
put a couple of standard sweaters to the test . While I
anticipated differences in style and quality , I was unprepared
for the political issues that arose from my study of these
two sweaters . What started out as a look at fashion
choices turned into a lesson on globalization . 
For this test , we chose two cashmere sweaters from
clothiers with excellent reputations for quality and service , 
one at each end of the price spectrum . One came from
Lands ’ End and cost $99 . 50 before tax and shipping . 
The other , from Italian luxury cashmere maker Brunello
Cucinelli , cost $950 before tax and the valet parking fee at
Saks , Fifth Avenue in Beverly Hills . 
The sweaters are outwardly similar : long-sleeved black
mock turtlenecks , knitted with two-ply yarn , which means
each string is made of two strands that have been twisted
together . Both sweaters are made of cashmere combed
from Mongolian goats , which are said to grow fine , long
hairs to survive the tough winters . The long hair leads to
less pilling , which is a real sweater killer . 
And both garments arrived with deficiencies . My Lands ’ 
End sweater felt stiff and glossy . After wearing it twice , I
tossed it in the delicate cycle of my washing machine , and it
emerged soft and supple . 
I chose a style called a “ cashmere tee ” that is trimmer
and more feminine than the company ’ s core big and
snuggly cashmeres . New this fall , the mock turtle is cut
to layer under a jacket . Despite the fresh styling , it lacks
sophistication , and the fabric tends to wrinkle , particularly
at the crook of the arm . Still , it ’ s an attractive , basic sweater
- soft , comfy and , hey , the price was right . According to
Michele Casper , a spokeswoman for Lands ’ End , it should
last for many years . If not , she noted , I can exchange the
item or get a refund .  “ Everything we sell at Lands ’ End is
guaranteed . Period .  ” 
The Cucinelli sweater has a springier weave that drapes
gracefully and hasn ’ t wrinkled or bagged at stretch points . 
It was a little more uniformly soft than the Lands ’ End
fabric . While all Mongolian goat hair is prized , prices vary
according to quality , and some Italian manufacturers pride
themselves on buying the best grades of cashmere at
auction - one reason for some sweaters ’ higher prices . 
The sweater also has subtly stylish details -- such as small
buttons at the back of the neck that make it easy to pull
the sweater over a hairdo and makeup . 
That ’ s a nice feature , but when I got it home , I discovered
the sweater had unraveled at the teardrop opening at the
nape of the neck . This required a tiresome trip back to Saks , 
where they repaired the tear , telling me that if it happens
again , I should bring it right back . At that price , they can
count on it . But Cucinelli should probably incorporate
some sort of reinforcement at that pressure point . A
spokesman for the designer called the flaw a “ fluke ” and
said Cucinelli has a damage-return rate of just 0 . 005% . 
The standout facets of the Cucinelli sweater are sleeves
that taper at the forearm and then flare at the wrist , and
layers of silk chiffon that have been hand-sewn at the neck
and wrists . My friend Roberta tried it on .  “ It does feel really
nice on my neck ,  ” she said , noodling her head around . These
style details drew attention as I wore the sweater ( the
Lands ’ End sweater garnered no compliments )  . But people
looked stunned if I told them the price . 
So there were style differences between the luxurious
designer sweater and its counterpart , however solidly
made . Another sort of distinction emerged as I learned
how each sweater was manufactured . The goat hairs took
very different paths after being bundled into bales and
taken to auction in Mongolia . 
DESIGN
44
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The label of the Lands ’ End sweater says “ Made in China .  ” 
Lands ’ End gave me an extensive primer on its Mongolian
yarns . But it turned out that the company isn ’ t involved in
that part of the process . It purchases the finished sweaters
from a factory in China - and it ’ s the factory that buys
cashmere at auction . Ms . Casper said the Chinese factory
spins , cards , combs and dyes the yarn and weaves it into
garments according to Lands ’ End ’ s specifications . Lands ’ 
End , she said , tests the results and requires the factory to
meet “ all compliances ” from Sears Holding Corp .  , which
owns Lands ’ End . She declined to elaborate or to divulge
the name of the factory or even the region of China where
it ’ s located . She did say :  “ The cashmere factories are very
clean and feature all state-of-the art , updated equipment . The
employees feel honored to be employed there .  ” 
I was troubled by the company ’ s reticence about the
factory that made my sweater . This came against a
backdrop of news stories out of China ’ s industrial
sector that included recalls of toys , toothpaste and
other consumer products . Many people have seen film
and photos of Chinese factory workers living in sparse
dormitories far from home and working long hours . 
Concerns about Chinese labor and manufacturing
standards have led to the recent increase in “ Made in the
USA ” labels on products made here . 
All this contrasts sharply with Brunello Cucinelli , a
company founded in 1978 by 54 year old designer
Brunello Cucinelli . Both the Saks saleswoman and Massimo
Caronna , Cucinelli ’ s U . S . spokesman and owner of Italian
fashion distributor IMC Group , eagerly elaborated on the
manufacturing . Mr . Caronna even invited me to visit the
factory where my sweater was made , in the tiny Italian
village of Solomeo in Umbria , though I didn ’ t make the trip . 
According to him , the goat hairs in my sweater traveled
in bales from Mongolia to one of several factories in Italy
where it was made into yarn . Cucinelli buys about 70% of
its yarn from the Italian luxury thread purveyor Cariaggi . 
The yarn was then shipped to the Cucinelli factory , which is
in a 17th-century castle . Each of its 1 , 500 employees has a
key , says Mr . Caronna . They work each day from 8 a . m . until
1 p . m .  , breaking for a 90 minute lunch . Many go home for
lunch , but Mr . Caronna says that those who stay are served
a free three course meal cooked up by three local women
who shop for fresh groceries every morning . Employees
return to work from 2 : 30 until 6 p . m . and then head home . 
Mr . Cucinelli wanted to improve on the conditions he
saw his father endure as a farm laborer , Mr . Caronna
says . The designer has donated some company profits
to improvements in Solomeo , such as restoring the
town square , building a local school and , most recently , 
constructing a town theater . The company , which
competes with Loro Piana and also owns the Gunex and
Riva Monti fashion lines , expects revenue of $163 million in
2007 , Mr . Caronna said . 
The Italian manufacturing process also explains a little more
about the cost of my $950 sweater . Hand work allows
sophisticated design details , like the chiffon , that would be
impossible in a garment made entirely by machine . And
25% of the factory employees are devoted to quality
control . Before leaving the factory , every item is washed by
hand - one reason the Cucinelli sweater arrived softer than
the Lands ’ End . 
Lands ’ End won ’ t tell us details such as whether its Chinese
factory has paid for local schools or serves its workers free
three course meals . But it ’ s safe to say that the Cucinelli is
the superior sweater when it comes to style , quality and
global social awareness . 
Whether it ’ s worth nearly 10 times the price , though , is a
matter for you and your wallet . 
45
Design Piracy : A Constructive Controversy
Sara B . Marcketti , Iowa State University , USA
sbb @ iastate . edu
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students 8-80
5 . Length of time required 50 to 60 minutes
6 . Type of activity Group work , Discussion and debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design
8 . Topics covered Branding , Companies , Consumers , Prices
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To work cooperatively in small groups to discuss the pros and cons of the practice of design piracy in order to
•
•
stimulate problem-solving and reasoned judgment . 

To gain a better understanding of the implications of design piracy considering the diverse viewpoints of designers , 
•
•
garment workers , manufacturers and consumers . 
DESIGN
46
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
This classroom assignment presents the format and
content information for a constructive controversy activity
on the subject of design piracy or “ knocking-off ” the
ideas of another designer or manufacturer ’ s work . It is a
controversial practice of the apparel industry , but one that
is pervasive and legal . The constructive controversy format
challenges students to move from simplistic viewpoints to
critical evaluations of a complex issue . Students practice
communication and listening skills while debating a critical
concept in the apparel industry . Within the constructive
controversy format , students are asked to use information
provided to them and their experiences to consider the
topic of piracy from diverse viewpoints , including those of
the designer , the garment worker , the manufacturer and the
consumer . 
Actual materials provided to students
Proponents of Design Piracy
Your position is that design piracy is a positive and much
needed aspect of the ready-to-wear apparel industry . To
support your position , use the information given below
and any information from your own experiences that is
appropriate . Consider the positive implications of design
piracy from the diverse viewpoints of the designer , the
garment worker , the manufacturer , and the consumer . 
Challenge the opponent team ’ s viewpoints ; think of
loopholes in their logic ; insist on compelling information to
support their arguments . 
1 . 	
One of the major reasons for and results of design
piracy is the succession of popular garment styles into
lower price points . When a particular arrangement of
elements in a garment catches the public ’ s imagination , 
other designers and manufacturing interests imitate the
garments . Some manufacturers and designers change
minor details such as color , pattern , and use or type of
trimmings . Other manufacturers and designers copy the
garments in exacting detail , substituting the more invisible
elements such as fiber type or quality of materials . 
Manufacturers copy exactly or make minor changes to
approximate their target markets ’ price range . Nearly all
price ranges in the apparel industry copy , especially since
there are few visual differences between copies and the
originals to the inexperienced eye . 
2 . 	
The business of copying allows for greater employment
opportunities in the apparel industry . The excess
number of style variations produced due to piracy
creates jobs ( and thus income ) for both skilled and
unskilled labor . 
3 . 	
For a garment to become a fashion , it needs to
diffuse to a large mass of people . Design piracy makes
it possible for cheap reproductions of fashionable
goods to diffuse to women of all economic levels . 
If piracy did not exist , there would be obvious class
distinctions between the wealthy , the poor , and all those
in between . Consumers of all economic levels have a
legitimate interest in obtaining fashionable , albeit pirated , 
merchandise . 
Opponents of Design Piracy
Your position is that design piracy is a negative and
detrimental aspect of the ready-to-wear apparel industry . 
To support your position , use the information given below
and any information from your own experiences that is
appropriate . Consider the negative implications of design
piracy from the diverse viewpoints of the designer , the
garment worker , the manufacturer , and the consumer . 
Challenge the opponent team ’ s viewpoints ; look for
loopholes in their logic ; insist on compelling information to
support their arguments . 
1 . 	
Styles copied at lower price points flood the market
with cheap imitations of higher end goods . Piracy
permeates the industry ; even copies are copied . 
According to fashion writer and social historian , Ida
Tarbell ( 1912 , p . 122-123 )  : 
	 
 “ From top to bottom we are copying . The French or
Viennese mode , started on upper Fifth Avenue in NewYork
City , spreads to 23rd St .  , from 23rd St . to 14th St .  , from
14th St . to Grand and Canal . Each move sees it reproduced
in materials a little less elegant and durable ; its colors a
trifle vulgarized , its ornaments cheapened , its laces poorer . 
A travesty , and yet a recognizable travesty .  ” 
2 . 	
One of the ways in which pirated copies appear so
quickly on the market is through the use of cheap
materials . These materials are often of poorer quality
than the more expensive resources used by the higher
priced manufacturers . Great waste results from the
use of poor quality merchandise . Consumers need to
replace their clothing more frequently , and retailers
47
and manufacturers are forced to continuously turn
over their merchandise because consumers desire
new items . Copying also shortens the life of a product . 
As copies flood the various price lines of the dress
industry , higher priced merchandise is knocked off . 
If piracy were eliminated , women would not buy so
many goods , and would save time , money , and energy
purchasing goods less sensitive to change . Consumers
who desired distinctive articles could safely rely upon
the exclusiveness of protected items . Further , fewer
resources would be needed to produce so many
pirated goods . 
3 . 	
Manufacturers who spend the time , effort , and money
to create original garments see their profits diluted
when imitators create similar goods in lower prices . 
Copyists profit unfairly by imitating the hard work of
originators . They then undersell these same originators
causing great losses to the original designers and
manufacturers . 
4 . 	
Companies that practice piracy reduce production costs
by not hiring designers to create original goods , and
pay workers minimal wages for long hours ( Hurley and
Faiz , 2007 )  . Because pirated goods utilize a relatively few
number of designers , competent designers may find it
difficult to find profitable and satisfying work . 
Instructions for Using the Learning Activity
In the constructive controversy format , the cooperative
goal is for each student to reach a deeper understanding
of the subject . The instructor assigns students to groups
of four . One pair of students in each group develops the
best case possible for the pro position , while the other
pair of students does the same for the con position . After
constructing arguments for their positions ( approximately
15 minutes )  , and debating their points ( approximately 15
minutes )  , the pairs reverse perspectives ; the proponents
of a viewpoint become the opponents ( approximately
15 minutes )  . Finally , students seek consensus of the issue 
( approximately 10 minutes )  , and report either verbally or
in writing their consensus to the class and the instructor . 
The instructor is encouraged to move around the room
during the process , listening to the groups ’ constructive
controversies and encouraging deeper understanding
of the issue at hand . Instructors may choose to present
introductory information to the class regarding piracy or
require students to research resources from the internet
and the library prior to the class discussion . 
Feedback from Students
Students have expressed great interest in learning about
design piracy , and enjoyment from participating in this
exercise . 
Regarding the ways design piracy impacts designers , 
students have stated : 
 
 “ The designers whose work is copied achieve “ names ” 
•
very quickly . We see piracy as a compliment to the original
designer .  ” 
 
 “ Design piracy does not allow designers and others within
•
the apparel industry the opportunity to receive credit for
their work .  ” 
Regarding the ways design piracy impacts the garment
worker , students have stated : 
 
 “ Because trends change so quickly there are always
•
employment opportunities in the apparel industry .  ” 
Regarding the ways design piracy impacts the
manufacturer , students have stated : 
 
 “ Piracy maintains equilibrium in supply and demand in the
•
apparel industry .  ” 
 
 “ Piracy allows for an increase in the number and types of
•
manufacturers to satisfy all of the different income brackets .  ” 
Regarding the ways design piracy impacts the consumer , 
students have stated : 
 
 “ Consumers are able to evaluate quality of goods . For each
•
purchase made , consumers can decide if quality , style or
price is more important .  ” 
 
 “ Piracy is detrimental to the apparel industry . Consumers
•
could be “ ripped-off ” if they do not know how to evaluate
quality or unknowingly purchase a pirated garment .  ” 
Regarding the ways design piracy impacts the environment , 
students have stated : 
 
 “ Piracy creates more waste in the apparel industry because
•
people buy lots of clothes and accessories just to stay
current with trends .  ” 
DESIGN
48
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Students have stated the following general comments
regarding the constructive controversy activity : 
 
 “ I appreciate experimenting with new techniques to help us
•
think in different perspectives , and the opportunity to share
our ideas with our classmates .  ” 
 
 “ Trying to debate against something you agree with opens
•
your eyes to other opinions . I was not aware of all of the
different views on one single topic .  ” 
 
 “ It ’ s really hard to think the “ other ” way once you debate
•
one particular side that you agree with . This activity made
me think about both sides of the issue .  ” 
 
 “ Our group was surprised by how much we were persuaded
•
by both the negative and positive sides of this argument .  ” 
Reading List
Horyn , C .  ( 2002 , April 9 )  ‘ Is copying really a part of the
creative process ?  ’ The NewYork Times
Hurley , J . and Faiz , N .  ( 2007 ) Assessing the impact of
purchasing practices on code compliance : A case study of the
Bangladesh garment industry . Retrieved July 3 , 2008 from

Johnson , D . and Johnson , R .  ( 2003 ) Joining together : Group
theory and group skills ( 8th ed .  ) Boston , MA : Pearson
Education , Inc .  ( Original publishers of constructive
controversy idea with teaching instructions ) 
Marcketti , S . B . and Parsons , J . L .  ( 2006 )  ‘ Design piracy and
self regulation : The Fashion Originators ’ Guild of America : 
1932-1941 ’ in Clothing and Textiles Research Journal , Special
issue on social responsibility , 24 ( 3 )  , 214-228
Tarbell , I .  ( 1912 ) The business of being a woman , NewYork : 
The Macmillan Company
49
Cotton Cultivation and Sustainability
Südwind Agentur ( Die Agentur für Süd-Nord-Bildungs - und Öffentlichkeitsarbeit GesmbH ) Vienna , Austria
www . suedwind-agentur . at stefan . kerl @ suedwind . at
1 . Level Pre-16
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 20 minutes
6 . Type of activity Group work , Image related , Interactive activities
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Design , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Agriculture , Big business , Environment , Health and safety , 
Textiles
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
Contextual : 
Becoming acquainted with the cultivation of cotton
•
•

Awareness of social and environmental issues related to cotton cultivation
•
• 
( environment , monocultures , working conditions ) 
Linguistic : 
Understanding vocabulary
•
•
Being able to apply new vocabulary in a presentation
•
•
Materials Provided : 
1 set of photos ( images 1-8 ) High quality versions are available to download from
•
•
resources / teachingmaterials / cottoncultivation
The Cultivation of Cotton picture descriptions worksheet
•
•
German-English vocabulary sheet ( where appropriate ) 
•
•
Desirable Materials : 
Clothes-pegs and clothes-line ( alternatively you can pin or stick the photos up ) 
•
•
Raw cotton
•
•
DESIGN
50
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
In this short activity , students learn how cotton is cultivated , 
and the social and environmental issues associated with its
cultivation . With a set of images and matching descriptions
about cotton cultivation , students clarify the meaning and
content of these and put them in order . They should be
able to explain the images in their own words and use new
vocabulary to do so , in order to show an understanding of
the pictures . In the last stage of the exercise , each student
could be given a piece of raw cotton from which they can
spin a long , thin , strong piece of thread . This activity can
also be used as an English as a foreign language lesson and
German-English translations are provided . 
The instructor sticks all the cotton pictures randomly on
the wall and sets up the clothes-line ( if appropriate )  . Two
students share one worksheet about cotton cultivation and
a vocabulary sheet where appropriate . The instructor asks
one student of each team to read out one of the picture
descriptions and the group then collectively works out the
meaning of the paragraph . The student then selects the
matching image and attaches it to the clothes-line ( or to
the wall )  . The students collectively work out the meaning
of the photo description . This method is repeated for
each picture , until all the pictures have been attached to
the clothes-line / wall . Once each piece of text has been
assigned to an image , each student could receive a piece of
raw cotton , in order to spin a thread as long and thin and
strong as possible . 
THE CULTIVATION OF COTTON - Pictures
1 . Monoculture
Monoculture occurs when only one type of plant is
grown on a large-scale . Chemicals are used to prevent
reproduction1
of pests² , as these are a big problem for
monoculture . The cultivation of cotton needs around
29 , 000 litres of water for a kilo of raw cotton3 
. 
¹ die Fortpflanzung ² dier Schädling ³ die Rohbaumwolle
2 . Flower
The flower of the cotton plant can be either red or yellow . 
3 . Aeroplanes
Aeroplanes spray pesticides¹ on large plantations and
may cause water pollution² . Many people who are exposed
to the pesticides become ill and do not live longer than
35 years . 
¹ die Pestizide ² Verschmutzung
4 . The cotton plant and bud1
The crop is harvested2
by extracting the cotton from
the bud¹ . 
¹ die Knospe ² die Ernte
5 . Cotton Fields
Hundreds of years ago , slaves1
from Africa picked the
cotton by hand . Today many people still work under slave-
like conditions² . Many children also have to work in the
cotton fields and drag³ 40 kilos of cotton a day . 
¹ die Sklaven ² Bedingungen ³ schleppen
6 . Cotton harvesting machine
In northern countries the cotton is usually harvested1
with
machines . The leaves and branches are harvested along
with the cotton . A chemical is sprayed to defoliate the
plant so that only the cotton remains2 
. 
¹ geerntet ² übrig bleiben
7 . Removal1
of the cotton seed
To prepare for sowing² the following year , the cotton
seeds³ are separated from the rest of the plant . The cotton
is then compressed into bales in order to be transported
and stored . 
¹ das Entfernen ² die Aussaat ³ die Samen
8 . Cotton thread1
The cotton is first bleached² , cleaned and combed
and then chemicals are used to dye³ the thread . These
chemicals can be a danger to the health4 of the workers , 
many causing allergies and cancer ( e . g . formaldehyde , 
benzene and azo compounds )  . 
¹ das Garn ³ färben
² gebleicht 4
die Gesundheit
51
DESIGN
1
Monoculture

Credit : Fernando Weberich
2
Flower

Credit ( and owner of photo )  : JohnT . Harding , johntharding @ hotmail . com
3
Aeroplanes

Credit : Carol von Caron
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 2 . 0
Generic License . To view a copy of this license , visit 
4
The cotton plant and bud 
( 6 ) 1 . jpg
Credit : Organic Exchange www . organicexchange . org
5
Cotton fields

Credit : Zohar Shemer
6
Cotton harvesting machine

Credit : Carol von Caron
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-No Derivative Works 2 . 0
Generic License . To view a copy of this license , visit 
7
Removal of the cotton seed

Credit : Keith Wright , ModernMuseum Images kwright286 @ gmail . com
8
Cotton thread

Credit : Stephen Anstey stephen @ anstey . com
52
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
COTTON CULTIVATION – VOCABULARY LIST
agricultural worker der Landarbeiter
assemble zusammenstellen
brand name der Markenname
Department for Trade das Handelsministerium
bud die Knospe
capsules		 die Kapseln
chemicals die Gifte
circulation problems die Kreislaufprobleme
cultivation der Anbau
developing countries Entwicklungsländer
exploit		 ausbeuten
export duty die Ausfuhruzolle
harm schaden
harvest die Ernte
health die Gesundheit
health insurance		 die Krankenversicherung
irrigation die Bewässerung
operate betreiben , führen
pest der Schädling
reproduction die Fortpflanzung
sick pay das Krankengeld
skilful geschickt
slaves die Sklaven
sowing die Aussaat
seeds die Samen
stronghold die Hochburg
tax		 die Steuer
toxic materials giftige Werkstoffe
treat behandeln
work stations der Arbeitsplatz
workforce der Arbeitskraft
thread das Garn
53
Ideas for Design Briefs
Fashioning an Ethical Industry and Abbie Price , R . A . J . E , UK
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Ideas for projects , 
assignments and briefs , Practical
7 . Discipline Design
8 . Topics covered Big business , Care and repair , Companies , Consumers , 
Environment , Fair trade , Ethical initiatives / brands , 
Purchasing practices , Second hand clothes , Slow Fashion
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
To inspire tutors with ideas for bringing sustainability into design assignments . 
•
•
DESIGN
54
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS

•
• Design an item of clothing or accessory taking into
account the resources , capabilities and skills of a
specific group of fair trade producers . Search the IFAT
membership database at www . ifat . org for a list of
producer groups and their websites . 
Contributed by Fashioning an Ethical Industry

Research two companies , such as Zara and People
•
•
Tree , which have different approaches to lead times . 
How will these diverse approaches to lead times affect
your design - taking into account the potential impact
of short lead times on workers ? What do you need to
consider when designing with different lead times ? Some
ideas include complexity of design , distance from retail , 
number of processes , samples . See Fashioning an Ethical
Industry factsheet on purchasing practices at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / factsheets / 
issues / factsheet17 / 
Based on an idea by Abbie Price from R . A . J . E . 


•
• Research a brand that promotes itself as ethical . 
Design a collection to extend and complement the
company ’ s existing range . See . 
org / companies / ethical . htm for more information about
different types of ‘ ethical ’  /  ‘ alternative ’ brands . 
Contributed by Fashioning an Ethical Industry

Design inspiration : Over the course of the Fashioning an
•
•
Ethical Industry project , we have come across many ideas
for approaching sustainability within design work . We
hope these ideas will inspire your design assignments and
motivate students to see design differently : 
Design based on producers ’ skills and capabilities . 
•
•
Design with adequate timings , stability and pricing . 
•
•
Design for leasing rather than selling . 
•
•
Design to engage . 
•
•
Design fewer , higher quality , more durable garments . 
•
•
Design for multiple use . 
•
•

Design truly fast fashion ( for example that biodegrades
•
•
quickly )  . 
Design with re-claimed material . 
•
•
Design for repair . 
•
•
Design for re-use / for the materials to be reclaimed . 
•
•
Design for reduced laundering . 
•
•
Design from a sustainable dye palette . 
•
•
See examples of student work that incorporates some of
these ideas at
fashionstudentswork / 
55
56
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Business Contents
56
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
57
57
BUSINESS
58 Introduction
60	
Further information
Teaching materials
Publications
63 Global sourcing decision case study
		
Minjeong Kim , Oregon State University , Leslie Davis-
Burns , Oregon State University , Marsha A . Dickson , 
University of Delaware and Haesun Park , Louisiana
State University , USA
70 Globalization and supply chain working conditions
Rachelle Jackson , STR Responsible Sourcing , USA
77 Student book club : The travels of a t-shirt in the
global economy
Joy Kozar , Kansas State University , USA
82 Buying power role play : How decision-making in
the fashion industry impacts on working conditions
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
83 Ethical Trading Initiative case studies to address
impacts of purchasing practices on working
conditions
EthicalTrading Initiative , UK
86 What price a living wage ? 
Doug Miller , University of Northumbria , UK
90 Ideas for business related assignments
Chloe Mason , London College of Fashion , 
and Jacqueline Shorrocks , NottinghamTrent
University , UK
92 Book summary : Social responsibility in the global
apparel industry
Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware , Suzanne
Loker , Cornell University , and Molly Eckman , 
Colorado State University , USA
58
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The papers in this chapter are relevant to all fashion
business related courses , including sourcing , retail
management , buying , socially responsible business and
merchandising courses . Educators can explore a number of
ways that businesses impact on workers , their communities
and the environment with students . 
Fashion businesses operate in an industry with a history
of tariffs and quotas and global outsourcing , all of which
affect the sustainability of the industry . Brands and retailers
incorporate corporate social responsibility ( CSR ) into their
business practices , and the impact of these CSR activities
on workers and the environment has varied . Few , however , 
are addressing the impact of decisions made by their own
corporate staff . These decisions can undermine the efforts
to improve working conditions and the environment . For
example , demanding short lead times may mean workers
endure a seven day week and 16 hour days to complete
orders , despite the brand ’ s code of conduct stating a
maximum 48 hour week . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry displays examples of students ’ 
work relating to sustainability on its website at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / studentwork /  . Your own
students may find inspiration in these pages . We would also
be very happy to receive images and information about
students ’ work in your own university , college or school for
consideration for the website . 
About the contributions in the business chapter
In Global Sourcing Decision Case Study , students
collect , synthesise and analyse information from a variety
of sources and use it to evaluate the advantages and
disadvantages of a country as a sourcing option for a
particular company and product category . Students take on
one or more decision-maker roles within the company in
conducting the research and communicating their analysis . 
As a team , students articulate the results of their research
and their decision regarding sourcing from that country . 
This case study activity has been contributed by Minjeong
Kim , Oregon State University , Leslie Davis-Burns , Oregon
State University , Marsha A . Dickson , University of Delaware , 
and Haesun Park , Louisiana State University , USA . 
Global workplace standards , supply chain codes of conduct , 
multi-stakeholder initiatives and case studies of company
responses to workers ’ rights violations are explored in
Globalization and Supply Chain Working Conditions
by Rachelle Jackson from the US organisation , STR
Responsible Sourcing . The activities have been designed
to develop students ’ understanding of the challenges
presented by today ’ s global supply chain , how some
companies are confronting those challenges and what
impact their efforts have on working conditions around the
world . 
Student Book Club : The Travels of a T-Shirt in the Global
Economy by Joy Kozar , Kansas State University , USA , 
requires students to read The Travels of a T-shirt in the
Global Economy by Pietra Rivoli and respond to multiple
discussion questions stemming from the book . The goal
is to assist students to recognise the structure , dynamics
Business Introduction
59
and distribution channels of the global textile and apparel
industries from both current and historical perspectives . 
This involves an evaluation of the cultural , economic
and political factors impacting on sourcing decisions , in
addition to the implications of various global alliances for
trade policies and regulations . Upon completion of this
activity , students should recognise various factors that
impact on compliance with labour laws , standards of social
responsibility and the treatment of workers in textile and
apparel production . The assignment challenges students ’ 
critical thinking skills and supports further development of
their written and verbal abilities . 
In small groups , students take on the roles of CEO , designer , 
buyer , factory owner and factory worker , and consider
how the priorities and challenges facing each of these roles
impacts workers in Fashioning an Ethical Industry ’ s Buying
Power Role Play : How Decision-making in the Fashion
Industry Impacts on Working Conditions . 
Case Studies to Address Impacts of Purchasing Practices
on Working Conditions by the EthicalTrading Initiative , 
UK , were developed as a result of a meeting involving UK
brands and retailers that explored how business decisions
affect labour standards . Questions to enable students to
fully explore the case studies are included . 
In What Price a Fairly Traded T-shirt ? by Doug Miller of
University of Northumbria , UK , students consider how
garments are costed at the factory level and how a living
wage might be achieved in global apparel supply chains . 
The activity is based on actual industry wage figures as
at October 2006 and production line balancing figures
provided by corporate social responsibility / sourcing
managers from a major multinational retailer . 
Four ideas for students are suggested in Ideas for Business
Related Assignments . Chloe Mason from the London
College of Fashion shares how students can develop
two capsule collections : one of ‘ sustainable ’ dresses for a
high street chain and the second of fairly traded clothes . 
Jacqueline Shorrocks at NottinghamTrent University , UK , 
asks students to debate the importance and practicalities
of a fashion retailer acting in an ethical , environmental
or corporately responsible manner within their supply
chains ; and , secondly , to compare two companies , one that
appears to be operating in a sustainable way and one that
appears not to be . 
Social Responsibility in the Global Apparel Industry is a
new book , by Marsha A . Dickson , University of Delaware , 
Suzanne Loker , Cornell University , and Molly Eckman , 
Colorado State University , USA . The book illustrates how
leading apparel and footwear manufacturers and retailers
approach and attempt to maintain social responsibility in
the design , production and sourcing of their products and
in their business operations . Ideas for using the book are
presented . 
BUSINESS
60
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Further Information
Teaching Materials
There is information about a range of teaching resources , 
films , exhibitions and images on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website at
resources /  . 
One you may find useful for business related teaching is :  
[ Pre-16 , FE ] The Real Price of Cotton
This teaching resource is aimed at 14-19 year old
Business Studies and Economics students , although fashion
educators at higher and further education level may also
find it useful . The resource can be used to explore the
social and environmental impact of the cotton industry
from a business studies perspective . The Real Price of
Cotton is a textbook style resource that contains case
study material that can be photocopied , along with
resource sheets and data . 
Webster , K .  ( 2002 ) The Real Price of Cotton , Just Business . 
The resource is available to borrow from Fashioning
an Ethical Industry and some sections are available to
download . See 
resources / teachingmaterials / cottonteachingresource / 
Publications
Information about additional books , reports and factsheets
is available on the Fashioning an Ethical Industry website at
resources /  . 
Factsheet : Purchasing Practices
This factsheet explores the impact of decisions made
within companies on workers . While the cause and
effect relationships are as complex as the supply chains
themselves , it is possible to observe several relationships . 
In this factsheet , Fashioning an Ethical Industry looks at
two relationships : the growth of the ‘ value ’ sector , the
corresponding fall in prices paid to manufacturers and
workers ’ wages ; and secondly , the reduction in lead times
associated with the ‘ fast fashion ’ concept and the number
of hours garment workers have to work to meet orders . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2007 ) Factsheet 17 : 
Purchasing Practices , Fashioning an Ethical Industry . 
Available to download for free from
resources / factsheets / 
issues / factsheet17 / 
61
The China Price : The True Cost of Chinese Competitive
Advantage
This book documents how China has leveraged its
workers , environment and future by competing for the
global business of offering “ cheap goods ” for Western
companies . The author details situations of institutionalised
corruption and how business is gained by those who
lie about their business practices , as she exposes how
businesses have responded to a decade of outsiders
monitoring their factories . First-hand interviews with
workers in apparel production and other sectors reveal the
human misery but also some opportunity that has resulted
from their work . 
Harney , A .  ( 2008 )  . The China Price : The True Cost of Chinese
Competitive Advantage , NewYork : The Penguin Press . 
The Hidden Assembly Line : Gender Dynamics of
Subcontracted Work in a Global Economy
This edited book includes case studies about subcontracted
garment assembly work carried out in small workshops
and in workers ’ homes in South and Southeast Asia . Macro-
economic issues are analysed , as is the impact the work
has on women ’ s social status and household relations . The
book provides understanding of the limited knowledge
workers have about complex global supply chains in which
they are stakeholders . 
Balakrishnan , R .  ( ed .  )  ( 2007 ) The Hidden Assembly Line : 
Gender Dynamics of Subcontracted Work in a Global
Economy , Bloomfield , CT : Kumarian Press . 
Making Sweatshops : The Globalization of the U . S . Apparel
Industry
This book provides a comprehensive analysis of the
globalization of the US apparel industry in a social , 
historical and political context . A variety of perspectives 
( labour , industry and government ) are drawn upon in
analysis of trade policies leading to increasingly free trade . 
The author outlines how consolidation and price-cutting
by US retailers eventually brought back sweatshops in
the U . S . and in developing countries . Special attention is
paid to how globalization affects female labour and links
the paternalistic views of the apparel industry with the
proliferation of sweatshops . A longer review of this book
can be found at 
BookReviewMaking%20Sweatshops9031 . pdf . 
Rosen , E . I .  ( 2002 )  . Making Sweatshops : The Globalization of
the US Apparel Industry Berkeley : University of California
Press . 
Monitoring Sweatshops
This book is based on the author ’ s research into how
monitoring of codes of conduct is carried out in the
California apparel industry , including the shortcomings of
that monitoring . 
Esbenshade , J .  ( 2004 ) Monitoring Sweatshops . Philadelphia : 
Temple University Press . 
BUSINESS
62
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Rising Above Sweatshops : Innovative Approaches to
Global Labor Challenges
This edited book covers a variety of topics related to
ethical fashion . An overview of global labor issues is
provided from diverse perspectives . Case studies are
detailed of how well-known brands , apparel and footwear
and other sectors , are handling these challenges . 
Hartman , L . P .  , Arnold , D . G . and Wokutch , R . E .  ( eds .  )  .  
( 2003 ) Rising Above Sweatshops : Innovative Approaches to
Global Labor Challenges , Westport , CT : Praeger . 
Social Responsibility in the Global Apparel Industry
This book introduces the social and environmental issues in
apparel production , analysing how corporate strategy and
decisions can improve social responsibility . Readers learn
how leading apparel and footwear brands and retailers
are attempting to solve complex problems including child
labour , harassment and abuse , discrimination , excessive
hours of work , low wages , poor factory health and safety , 
and negative impacts on the environment . The authors
draw on their industry and research experience to provide
tools for changing the apparel industry by providing
industry professionals with the awareness , knowledge and
passion to make it more socially responsible . 
Dickson , M . A .  , Loker , S .  , and Eckman , M .  ( 2008 ) Social
Responsibility in the Global Apparel Industry , NewYork : 
Fairchild Books . 
Social Responsibility in the Global Market : 
Fair Trade of Cultural Products
This book examines fair trade as it relates to textile
products that are developed and distributed by fair 
( alternative ) trade organisations in North America . An
introduction to fair trade is provided and the authors
examine how artisan producers gain income , justice and
empowerment through participation in fair trade . Case
studies are provided of major fair trade organisations , 
includingTenThousandVillages and MarketPlace : Handwork
of India . As well , detailed understanding is provided of the
artisans who produce fair trade products and consumers
in the developed world who buy the fair trade products . 
A future-oriented discussion addresses challenges faced by
fair trade organisations if they are to be successful in the
future , including the need to more systematically document
the impacts the business has on artisan producers . A
longer review of this book can be found at http :  /  / www . 
huec . lsu . edu / esrab / downloads / Book%20review_Social%20
Responsibility%20in%20the%20Global%20Market_
KateCarroll605 . pdf . 
Littrell , M . A .  , and Dickson , M . A .  ( 1999 ) Social Responsibility
in the Global Market : Fair Trade of Cultural Products , Thousand
Oaks , CA : Sage . 
Sweatshop USA : The American Sweatshop in Historical
and Global Perspective
This volume offers multiple perspectives on “ sweatshop
studies ” of diverse scholars and activists . The editors
aim to provide historical accounts of the conditions that
surrounded achievement of social and economic change . 
Chapters are contributed by scholars in sociology , history , 
political science , women ’ s studies and American and
ethnic studies and these are organised into three sections :  
 “ Producing the Sweatshop ,  ”  “ Sweatshop Migration ,  ” and 
 “ Sweatshop Resistance .  ” The book synthesises relevant facts
from the past 100 + years and thought-provoking ideas that
are useful for developing strategies for improving working
conditions in today ’ s complex global supply chains . A longer
review of this book can be found at . 
edu / esrab / downloads / BookReviewDicksonSweatshop%20
USA04 . pdf . 
Bender , D . E .  , and Greenwald , R . A .  ( Eds .  )  ( 2003 )  , Sweatshop
USA : The American Sweatshop in Historical and Global
Perspective , NewYork : Taylor & Francis ( Routledge )  . 
63
Global Sourcing Decision Case Study
Dr . Minjeong Kim and Dr . Leslie Davis Burns , Design and Human Environment , Oregon State University ; Dr . Marsha
Dickson , Fashion and Apparel Studies , University of Delaware ; and Dr . Haesun Park , Louisiana State University , USA
Minjeong . Kim @ oregonstate . edu , Leslie . Burns @ oregonstate . edu , Dickson @ udel . edu , hpark @ lsu . edu
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
As a result of this learning activity students will be able to : 

Take on the role of a decision-maker within the textile , apparel and accessories industries in determining the
•
•
advantages and disadvantages of a country as a sourcing option for a particular company and product category , 
with particular emphasis on ethics and human resource concerns . 

Collect , synthesize , and analyze information from a variety of sources and use this information to analyze the
•
•
advantages and disadvantages of a country as a sourcing option for a particular company and product category . 

Work as a team in analyzing factors that affect a country ’ s abilities to effectively participate in the global textile , 
•
•
apparel , and accessories industries . 

Articulate , through written and oral means , the results of their research and group decision regarding a selected
•
•
country as a sourcing option . 
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Several weeks , including several class periods for oral
presentations
6 . Type of activity Group work , Course outlines and learning goals , Ideas
for projects , assignments and briefs , Discussion and
debate , Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Companies , Consumers , Corporate social responsibility , 
Trade , Working conditions
BUSINESS
64
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Summary
Students collect , synthesize , and analyze information from a
variety of sources and use this information to evaluate the
advantages and disadvantages of a country as a sourcing
option for a particular company and product category 
( presented in a case study )  . Students take on one or
more decision-maker roles within the textile , apparel , and
accessories industries ( e . g . labor compliance specialist , 
product development specialist , trade and investment
specialist , human resources specialist , cultural liaison ) in
conducting the research and communicating their analysis . 
This learning activity can be completed as a team project
or as an individual project . Students are expected to
articulate , through written and oral means , the results of
their research and decision regarding a selected country
as a sourcing option for a particular company and product
category . 
1 . 	
Instructions for Using the Learning Activity 
( e . g . background concepts , timing required , 
recommended number of participants ) 
Students are divided into teams of no more than five
students with each student in the team taking the role
of the one of the specialists . The students complete the
learning activity through a combination of individual and
group work . Each team is assigned a country for their
analysis . An overview of the project is presented in class
with time allowed for teams to get together and work
on their contract . It is recommended that the instructor
select a country not already assigned and model the group
presentation – highlighting the analysis and justification
of the sourcing decision with the advantages and
disadvantages based on the input of all five specialist areas . 
Class time is required for the oral presentations by each
group . It is recommended that presentations occur over
several class periods . 
2 . 	Actual Materials Provided to Students
Global Sourcing Decision Case Study
Expected Student Learning Outcomes
As a result of this project you will be able to : 

Take on the role of a decision-maker within the textile , 
•
apparel , and accessories industries in determining the
advantages and disadvantages of a country as a sourcing
option for a particular company and product category , 
with particular emphasis on ethics and human resource
concerns . 

Collect , synthesize , and analyze information from a
•
variety of sources and use this information to analyze the
advantages and disadvantages of a country as a sourcing
option for a particular company and product category . 

Work as a team to analyze factors that affect a country ’ s
•
abilities to effectively participate in the global textile , 
apparel , and accessories industries . 

Articulate , through written and oral means , the results
•
of your research and group decision regarding a selected
country as a sourcing option . 
Background Information
Jenny Active Wear
LaTasha Lewis and Anthony Magine are successful
graduates of Oregon State University and have started
their own private corporation : Jenny Active Wear - a chain
of specialty retail stores for women ’ s leisure and sports
apparel merchandise in the better price zone ( based
on the price zone categories of designer , bridge , better , 
moderate , and budget )  . Through their Jenny retail stores , 
Jenny Active Wear offers both private label ( store brand ) 
merchandise under the Jenny label and recognized national / 
international brands ( e . g . Nike , Champion )  . Business has
picked up and sales have grown more than they ever
expected . They are planning to add 20 Jenny retail stores
this year as well as expand their retail website . LaTasha and
Anthony anticipate needing 100 , 000 units to stock these
new stores . Because of this they have hired a US-based
consulting firm ( your group ) to advise them on sourcing
options for their store brand merchandise . Apparel
manufacturers from several countries have approached
the partners and they have attended MAGIC Sourcing
Fair in LasVegas . To inform their decision-making , they
want your group to tell them whether or not they should
consider a particular country as a sourcing option for their
merchandise ( you will be given a product category )  , and
65
why . In order to advise the company as to whether or
not they should source from a particular country , you will
want to investigate various aspects of the country . Each
group member takes the role of a specialist responsible
for investigating a specific aspect of the country and
contributing to an overall team decision regarding sourcing
from the country you have researched . The group ’ s
sourcing decision will be presented in class . When thinking
about “ sourcing ”  , consider the level of sourcing as well –
that is , would you source labor only ? What about fabric ? 
Are there any trade agreements / restrictions ? 
The Specialists
Each specialist is responsible for preparing a written report
on his / her area of specialty ( 100 points )  . After investigating
the specialty area , the specialist should recommend a
sourcing decision at the conclusion of the written report . 
Clearly state the advantages and disadvantages of factors
considered and the logic behind your decision , given the
information reported . Below are the areas of specialty : 
Human Resource Management Specialist : This specialist
gives an overall analysis of the human resources in the
country . He / she researches the demographics of the
labor force ( i . e .  , ethnic / racial heritage , population and age
breakdown , language , religion , education / literacy levels , etc .  )  . 
Labor and employment laws and practices ( e . g . wages , 
unions , minimum age ) should be described and analyzed
in terms of the needs of the company . This specialist also
provides basic geographic data on the country including
climate , terrain , crops grown , major industries , etc .  , as a
way of better understanding the country ’ s industries and
labor force . The primary question to be addressed is : 
Does this country have the necessary human resource
base to effectively produce the goods ? This information
is interpreted and analyzed in relation to the sourcing
decision . 
Cultural Liaison : This specialist examines the cultural
background of the workforce in order to understand
social interaction with the people . In addition , this person
must answer the following questions : What is the cultural
orientation of the country ? What are the patterns
of communication and cultural beliefs / values of the
citizens ? Based on religious , cultural , and communications
background , what should be some of the practices / 
etiquette that one should keep in mind when working with
individuals from this country ? Does this country have any
past historical experiences with the United States that may
affect its perception of the US ? What should our company
do in order to build long-term relationships with people
from this country ? This information is interpreted and
analyzed in relation to the sourcing decision . 
Trade and Investment Specialist : This specialist investigates
the country ’ s role in world trade of textiles and apparel , 
the political and economic orientation of the country , 
the adequacy of the infrastructure for trade ( e . g . 
communications , highways , etc .  )  , currency used and its
exchange rate against the US dollar ( also its stability )  , and
opportunities for foreign investment . As well , this specialist
provides a description and analysis of the types of products
produced for export , the extent of the country ’ s importing
and exporting , major trading partners , trade restrictions
that are in effect , trade agreements with the US , freight
rates , and the availability / location of major ports / airports . 
This specialist also examines any government support for
the apparel and textile industry in the country ( e . g . special
industrial zone or export program )  , and addresses what
potential political and economic risks would be involved in
sourcing in this country . This information is interpreted and
analyzed in relation to the sourcing decision . 
Product Development Specialist : This specialist examines
the production capacity of the country for the product
category identified as well as related product categories . 
This includes examining the capacity of the country
to produce all aspects of the product in addition to
final assembly of the goods , the cost of production , the
machinery / technology available for textile and apparel
production , and availability of natural resources and
domestically produced component parts ( e . g . would they
need to import fabric or other materials ?  )  . In other words , 
what is needed to design and produce the merchandise at
the specified price zone , and does this country have firms
that could accomplish the necessary tasks ? Also consider
any special techniques / products traditional to the area , and
whether these traditional products can be used in product
development of textiles and apparel . 
Labor Compliance Specialist : This specialist develops the
business ethics guidelines , a code of conduct specifying the
minimum labor standards and working conditions required
when producing goods for Jenny Active Wear , and a plan
for implementing the code of conduct . Additionally , the
current labor practices should be examined from a
BUSINESS
66
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
business ethics perspective . Also consider whether the
country has been the focus of human rights or sweatshop
investigations , which may disrupt the flow of merchandise , 
or if there have been environmental issues . This person
will make suggestions about how to work in a socially
responsible manner in this country . 
Demonstrating WhatYou Have Learned
Group Contract ( 10 points ) 
Each group must submit a written group contract that
outlines the following : 
Country to be investigated . 
•

Product category : 93% cotton / 75 spandex knit ( with
•
anti-pilling finish ) zip-front jacket with patch pockets
and rib knit collar , cuffs , and hem . Matching relaxed pant
with drawcord waistband . Better price zone ( based on
price categories of designer , bridge , better , moderate , and
budget )  . 
Individuals ’ specialty areas . 
•

Process for completing the group paper
•
and presentation . 
Communication processes by the group . 
•
Contact information . 
•

The contract must be signed by all group members . 
•
Each member should have a copy of the contract ( the
original will be turned in )  . The contract will be graded on
its completeness and effectiveness as a tool to assist the
group in operating effectively . 
Individual Specialist Report ( 100 points ) 
Each specialist will submit a written report of 3-5 pages . 
The written report should include the specialist ’ s analysis of
the country , advantages and disadvantages for sourcing in
that country from his / her perspective , a recommendation
for the company to source in this country , and justification
for this recommendation . The report should synthesize
information drawn from books , articles , government
publications , and the internet . References are required and
must be cited in the body of the report and listed at the
end of the paper using APA citation style . Use of Wikipedia
and similar sources is discouraged ; but if you choose to
refer to them , use them as starting places only . DO NOT
cite them as they are not reliable sources of information
and are therefore inappropriate references for this type
of professional paper . If using tables and figures , use APA
style as well . The report should include an introduction , 
discussion , conclusions , and reference sections . Other
headings in the body of the report are encouraged to
assist with the organization and readability of the paper . 
Use 10 or 12 font size please . Each report will be graded
on its completeness , level of analysis , justification for the
recommendation , writing style , quality of references , and
appropriate use of APA format for citing references in the
text and at the end of the paper . 
Group Report ( 25 points ) 
Each group will submit a summary report ( 2-3 pages ) that
summarizes each specialist ’ s sourcing recommendation , the
final sourcing decision for that country by the group , and
the rationale / justification for the group decision . Each group
report will be graded on its completeness , justification for
the group decision and writing style . 
Group Presentation ( 25 points ) 
Each group will also present their sourcing decision to
the class ( 5-7 minutes )  . The date of the oral presentation
will be assigned by the instructor . The presentation should
include a brief overview of the country , highlights of the
country ’ s strengths and weaknesses for sourcing the
product category , the final sourcing decision , and the
rationale for the decision . Use of PowerPoint is highly
recommended as a visual tool to reinforce and illustrate
key points of the presentation . Any number of group
members can speak and transition among speakers should
be smooth . Please practice beforehand . Each presentation
will be graded on how well it informs the audience about
the country and the sourcing decision made by the group . 
3 . 	Learning Resources : Reading / film lists or
links to necessary resources / background
	information
EthicalTrading Action Group ( 2006 , December ) Revealing
clothing : Transparency report card 2006 . Executive Summary , 
Ottowa , Ontario : EthicalTrading Action Group
Kunz , G . I . and Garner , M . B .  ( 2007 ) Going global : The textile
and apparel industry . NY : Fairchild Publications
Nordas , H . K .  ( 2004 ) The global textile and clothing industry post
theAgreement onTextiles and Clothing , WorldTrade Organization
Discussion Paper No . 5 , Geneva , Switzerland : WTO
Rivoli , P .  ( 2005 ) The travels of a t-shirt in the global economy , 
Hoboken , NJ : John Wiley and Sons
67
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
[ Available at ] 
4 . Evaluation Criteria , including Grading Rubrics
	if available
Human Resource Management Specialist ( 100 points ) 
Paper includes the following : 
Analysis of the labor conditions in the country . 
•
Description of the demographics of the labor force . 
•
Description of the geographic information about
•
the country . 
Analysis of labor and employment laws . 
•

Answers the question : Does this country have the
•
necessary human resource base to effectively produce
the goods ? 
Sourcing decision justified based on the analysis . 
Paper written in a professional manner with few editorial
corrections needed . 
References included and cited appropriately . 
Trade and Investment Risk Specialist ( 100 points ) 
Paper includes the following : 

Analysis of the country ’ s role in world trade of textiles
•
and apparel . 

Analysis of the political and economic orientation of and / 
•
or risks in the country . 
Analysis of the infrastructure for trade . 
•

Description of the currency and exchange rate , and
•
opportunities for foreign investment . 

Description of major trading partners and types of
•
products produced for export , and the extent of the
country ’ s importing and exporting . 

Analysis of trade restrictions that are in effect and any
•
trade agreements with the US . 
Sourcing decision justified based on the analysis . 
Paper written in a professional manner with few editorial
corrections needed . 
References included and cited appropriately . 
Product Development Specialist ( 100 points ) 
Paper includes the following : 
Analysis of the production capacity of the country . 
•

Description of the machinery / technology available for
•
textile and apparel production . 

Description of the availability of natural resources and
•
domestically produced component parts . 

Consideration of any special techniques / products
•
traditional to the area and whether these can be used in
product development of textiles and apparel . 

Answers the question : Does this country have firms to
•
produce the merchandise at the standards and price level
indicated ? 
Sourcing decision justified based on the analysis . 
Paper written in a professional manner with few editorial
corrections needed . 
References included and cited appropriately . 
Cultural Liaison ( 100 points ) 
Paper includes the following and addresses the following
questions : 

Description of the cultural orientation of the country ; the
•
patterns of communication and cultural beliefs / values of
the citizens . 

Analysis of the historical changes and cultural background
•
of the country . 

Does this country have any past historical experiences
•
with the United States that may affect its perception of
the US ? 

What should be some of the practices / etiquette that one
•
should keep in mind when working with individuals from
this country ? 

What should our company do in order to build long-
•
term relationships with people from this country ? 
Sourcing decision justified based on the analysis . 
Paper written in a professional manner with few editorial
corrections needed . 
References included and cited appropriately . 
Labor Compliance Specialist ( 100 points ) 
Paper includes the following : 

Development of the code of conduct for the company
•
including labor standards and working conditions . 

Analysis of the current labor practices from a human
•
rights perspective . 

Analysis of : 1 ) if and when the country has had labor / 
•
human rights violations or sweatshop investigations
highlighted ; and 2 ) the implications for the company
that these violations and / or investigations may have
on sourcing in that country ( e . g . flow of merchandise , 
environmental issues )  . 

Suggestions regarding implementation and enforcement
•
of the labor standards and working conditions specified
in the code of conduct so that the company can work in
a socially responsible manner in this country . 
Sourcing decision justified based on the analysis . 
BUSINESS
68
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Paper written in a professional manner with few editorial
corrections needed . 
References included and cited appropriately . 
Group Report ( 25 points ) 
Paper includes the following : 
Summary of each specialist ’ s sourcing recommendation . 
•

The final sourcing decision for that country by
•
the group . 
The rationale / justification for the group decision . 
•
Sourcing decision justified based on the analysis . 
Paper written in a professional manner with few editorial
corrections needed . 
Presentation
Presentation Format : 
Includes an effective introduction , body , and conclusion . 
•

Country information and sourcing decision are clearly
•
presented and explained . 

Advantages and disadvantages for sourcing in this
•
country are justified . 

Sections of the presentation are presented in a
•
logical order . 
Visuals effectively reinforce the main points . 
•
Time of presentation is planned carefully : 

To include an effective introduction , body , 
•
and conclusion . 
To allow time for questions . 
•
The speakers : 
Are poised and comfortable before the class . 
•
Are knowledgeable about the topic . 
•

Maintain eye contact and deliver the talk without relying
•
on notes . 
Transition among speakers is smooth . 
•
5 . Feedback from Students / Assessment of
Learning Outcomes
Advantages of the project : This project allows students to
examine a sourcing decision from the perspective of an
industry specialist , conduct individual research , and work
in a team to come to a consensus / decision about sourcing
in a particular country for a particular product category . 
The project provides opportunities for students to apply
knowledge they may have acquired in other courses or
experiences , and draw connections among topics and
issues related to global sourcing . Students have commented
that the project opened their eyes with regards to sourcing
in various countries of the world . They have also liked the
opportunity to apply concepts through a case study format . 
Challenges with the project : Students initially tend to focus
on the descriptive aspects of the individual specialist . 
Providing examples and modeling the analysis aspects of
the individual specialist is imperative so that students fully
understand the expectations of the project . In some cases
members of a team may not fully participate in the project . 
The contract ( see example below ) provides a basis for
which the other team members and the instructor can use
when evaluating team member participation . 
69
Sample Contract : 
Country to be investigated : India . 
•

Product category : 93% cotton / 75 spandex knit ( with
•
anti-pilling finish ) zip-front jacket with patch pockets
and rib knit collar , cuffs , and hem . Matching relaxed pant
with drawcord waistband . Better price zone ( based on
the price zone categories of designer , bridge , better , 
moderate , and budget )  . 
Individuals ’ specialty areas : 
•
Mary Jones : 
John Rodriguez : 
LaVonda Woods : 
Ralph Davis : 
Jennifer Wong : 
Process for completing the group paper
•
and presentation : 

We will start researching our country individually and
have bi-weekly meetings at the library to share the
research we have found . Deadlines for completing the
group paper and presentation will be determined at
our first meeting . We will each work on our individual
papers and then meet as a group to determine
our group decision . We will all contribute to the
presentation information . Mary will be the point
person for the group report . LaVonda and Ralph will
develop the PowerPoint . Mary , John , and Jennifer will
give the presentation . 
Communication processes by the group : 
•

We will communicate through email and group
meetings . Group meetings will be held on Sunday
evenings at 7 p . m . We will also touch base with each
other after class . 
Contact information : 
•
Mary Jones email : 
John Rodriquez email : 
LaVonda Woods email : 
Ralph Davis email : 
Jennifer Wong email : 
6 . Follow Up / Related Activities
Follow up activities can include having students discuss
similarities and differences among the advantages and
disadvantages of sourcing in particular countries . Reflective
learning activities ( e . g . asking students to write / discuss the
three major points they learned from the activity ) can
also be used . A follow up discussion of standard codes
of conduct and labor compliance implementation in the
countries presented would also be beneficial . 
BUSINESS
70
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Globalization and Supply Chain
Working Conditions
Rachelle Jackson , STR Responsible Sourcing , USA
rachelle . jackson @ strrs . com
1 . Level FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : Educators should have
a cursory knowledge of supply chain codes of conduct
and basic exposure to global trade issues
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Minimum of 8 for some activities
5 . Length of time required 6 to 6 . 5 hours to complete all four sections
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Course outlines and
learning goals , Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , 
Film related , Discussion and debate , Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Campaigns , Companies , Corporate social responsibility , 
Globalisation , Multi-stakeholder initiatives , Trade unions , 
Workers ’ rights , Working conditions
Follow Up / Related Activities
Students may visit clothing stores and identify the various countries where the clothes are made . They may then profile
the supply chain labor standards programs , if any , of this brand or retailer . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Provide students with an understanding of the labor rights challenges present in today ’ s global supply chain , how
•
•
some companies are addressing these challenges , and what impacts , if any , their efforts have had . 
71
I . Introduction
Some have argued that globalization has made the world
smaller , or flatter . Most of us are working on laptops
where the processor was made inTaiwan , the screen was
manufactured in China , and the parts were assembled in
Malaysia1 
. Our clothes may have been sewn inThailand , 
of fabric made in China , from cotton grown in the
United States . Whether good or bad , we can assume
that globalization is here to stay . What does this mean for
companies who source products in far flung countries and
for consumers who buy these products ? At what personal
price do workers produce such cheap goods ? 
To explore these questions with students , a series of
interactive sessions are outlined here . Audio-visual tools
will help students unfold complex issues . Case studies
and sample documents help expose students to business
realities and human rights concerns from both sides . 
This paper will present a learning module introducing the
topic of working conditions in the supply chain , multi-
stakeholder initiatives and the supply chain codes of
conduct used by many brands and fashion houses today . 
On completion of the module , students should have an
understanding of the challenges presented by today ’ s global
supply chain , how some companies are confronting those
challenges , and what impact their efforts have , if any , on
working conditions around the world . 
II . Connecting Students to Challenges of Globaliza-
tion , Supply Chain Working Conditions and Buyer
Codes of Conduct
A . Globalization and Working Conditions
The issue of globalization and working conditions , especially
in less developed countries , is a complex one . Some may
argue against “ sweatshop ” labor and the exploitation of the
working poor , while others argue that such jobs offer good
economic opportunities for workers , providing better jobs
than are otherwise available to them . In order to explore
these issues more fully in a classroom environment , pre-
assignment reading should focus on the duality of this issue
and the complexity of the debate . 
In order to introduce the topic of globalization and supply
chain working conditions , there are several documentary
films that highlight poor working conditions of garment
workers and expose the risk to brands that source from
these factories . Some of them also touch on challenges that
businesses face when trying to promote better working
conditions ( for example , see “ A Decent Factory ” below )  . 
These audio-visual tools can be useful to convey pertinent
contextual understanding for students . 
The recommended film for this session is China Blue . Other
options are listed below . 
Following the screening of the film , an open discussion
period should follow , incorporating the pre-assignment
reading . Suggested questions for discussion include : 

Does the film present Jasmine as a victim of globalization
•
or a beneficiary of it ? What about her family ? 

What were the worst aspects of her job ? Was there an
•
obvious reason or cause for the conditions that she was
subject to ? 

Did the factory owner view his workforce as a
•
commodity or a liability ? What was his primary
motivation for opening an export factory ? 

Could buyers from the factory have a role in improving
•
conditions for Jasmine ? If so , how ? If not , why not ? 

Would Jasmine and her family be better off if she stayed
•
at home ? What is the solution you would recommend ? 
Estimated time for session , including film viewing : 2 hours
Recommended film : 
China Blue , released in 2005 . Directed by Micha X . Peled , 

documentary film follows the journey of a young Chinese
girl from her village to an urban factory and reveals the
difficult conditions in which she lives and works while
making clothing for the export market . 
1
Friedman , T .  ( 2005 ) The world is flat . United States : Farrar , Strauss & Giroux
BUSINESS
72
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Additional film options : 

• Made in L . A .  , released in 2007 , Directed by Almudena
Carracedo .  film
documents the journey of three Los Angeles garment
factory workers as they campaign against retailer Forever
21 to win better working conditions . 

A Decent Factory
• , released in 2004 . Directed byThomas
Balmes . 
documentary follows social auditors for Nokia , the
electronics firm , as they assess working conditions in a
Chinese factory . 

Gap and Nike : No Sweat ? 
• Released in 2000 by BBC
Panorama . 
panorama / 970385 . stm . A BBC reporter exposes poor
working conditions in Cambodian factories producing for
Gap and Nike , despite the codes of conduct espoused by
these brands . 
Recommended pre-assignment reading materials : 
Kristof , N .  , Two Cheers for Sweatshops . NewYork Times : 
NewYork , September 24 , 2000 . 
library / magazine / home / 20000924mag-sweatshops . html
Supplementary reading materials include : 
Elliott , K . A .  & Freeman , R . B .  ( 2003 ) Can Labor Standards
Improve Under Globalization ? Washington DC : Institute for
International Economics 
[ Note : This book may be considered as advanced reading
due to its use of economic data and discussion of trade
policy .  ] 
Harney , A .  ( 2008 ) The China Price : The True Cost of Chinese
Competitive Advantage , NewYork : Penguin Press . Chapters
2 , 6-8 are especially relevant . 
B . Buyer Codes of Conduct
Having examined working conditions and the challenges
faced by buying companies , brands and retailers in the
previous session , the focus will now shift to the standards
espoused by these brands and retailers , most frequently by
way of a supplier code of conduct . 
Supplier codes of conduct are intended to articulate the
standards a buying company ( e . g . a retailer or brand ) 
expects from their suppliers and vendors . The code usually
covers companies directly supplying the company as
well as business partners . For codes of conduct written
specifically to address supply chain working conditions , 
those commitments generally cover the well-being of
the employees in the supply chain . They may also cover
environmental and community impacts . Many retailers and
manufacturers have articulated such codes of conduct
in order to ensure their supply chain partners are aware
of and uphold their standards related to business and
employment practices . 
A sample of brand codes of conduct will be provided for
the students to review and dissect in an attempt to identify
the most commonly shared attributes of these codes . The
following are publicly available codes suggested for this
exercise : 

Adidas : 
•
• 
suppliers_and_workers / code_of_conduct / default . asp

Carrefour : 
•
• 
commerce / our-social-and-ethical-approach / the-group-
and-its-suppliers / 

Gap : 
•
• 
vendor_conduct . pdf

Lego : 
•
• . 
asp ? page = conduct
Levi : 
•
• 

Marks & Spencer : 
•
• 
gp / browse . html / ref = sc_fe_c_9_0_43474031_1 / 202-
0614151-2011867 ? ie = UTF8 & node = 43495031 & no = 434
74031 & mnSBrand = core & me = A2BO0OYVBKIQJM

Mattel : 
•
• 
Responsibility / cr_global . asp

Nike : 
•
• 
tools / Nike_Code_of_Conduct . pdf

Tesco : 
•
• 
id = 2C8F604AACC54868963C4121B14294BD & faqelem
entid = 9AC40CE015B840C99C2F69ADE384B410

Wal-mart : 
•
• 
r_2727 . pdf
73
It is suggested that students review the individual codes
and compare the standards put forward by each . The
instructor may consider facilitating the construction of a
comparative table to identify the commonalities of these
supply chain codes . 
Questions that should be answered during the exercise
include : 

What elements do most of these codes share in
•
common ?  ( i . e . no child labor , no forced labor , minimum
wages , limit on overtime hours , etc .  ) 

Which code allows the youngest age of worker ? 
•
What age is that ? Is that age based on an international
standard ? 

Which code allows the highest number of work hours ? 
•
How many do not specify the limit but defer to
local laws ? 

Did some clauses stand out when compared to other
•
codes ? If so , which ones ? Why did these stand out ? 

What are the apparent strengths and weaknesses of
•
these codes ? 
Estimated time for session : 60-90 minutes
Recommended pre-assignment reading material includes : 
Jackson , R .  ( 2003 )  ‘ Codes of Conduct for Business Partners ’  , 
United Kingdom : Ethical Corporation Magazine . http :  /  / www . 
ethicalcorp . com / content . asp ? ContentID = 358
Supplementary reading materials include : 
Mamic , I .  ,  ‘ Managing Global Supply Chain : The Sports Footwear , 
Apparel and Retail Sectors ’  . Journal of Business Ethics , Volume
59 , Numbers 1-2 , June 2005 , pp . 81-100 ( 20 )  . 
C . Introduction to Multi-Stakeholder Initiatives
The next step in the learning module is to review the types
of initiatives buying companies may undertake to address
the critical issue of working conditions in the supply chain . 
This will consist of a group work exercise to investigate and
report on different global and regional multi-stakeholder
initiatives , identifying examples of activities these initiatives
have undertaken to address poor working conditions . In
this case , multi-stakeholder initiatives refer to projects or
programs that “ bring together various stakeholders to address
specific issues [ such as ] monitoring and verifying compliance
with a code of conduct .  ” 2
The recommended format of the session is to organize
students into groups and assign each group an initiative to
research and profile . This can be done either in time spent
outside the classroom or by providing handouts in the class
on the initiatives for the students to review and discuss
in their groups . However , instructors can also choose to
provide an overview of these initiatives in lecture style if
more appropriate to course schedule . 
Suggested initiatives for review include the following : 

EthicalTrading Initiative . A United Kingdom based
•
initiative comprised of companies , trade unions and
NGOs working in collaboration to promote and improve
the implementation of corporate codes of practice which
cover supply chain working conditions . An overview
of past pilot projects can be found at http :  /  / www . 
ethicaltrade . org / Z / lib / annrep / 2000 / publ / index . shtml

Fair Labor Association . A United States based
•
organization that hires and accredits third parties to
monitor factories against the FLA ’ s code of conduct
with participation from many of the sport apparel and
footwear brands , major retailers , and university licensees . 
A recent annual report contains a summary of the
monitors ’ findings and descriptions of some pilot projects
that are ongoing in this association , pages 29-31 , http :  /  / 
www . fairlabor . org / all / 2006PublicReport . pdf

JO-IN . A joint initiative of several multi-stakeholder
•
groups , this pilot project focused specifically on improving
working conditions inTurkey . 
trprojesi . asp

MFA Forum . This forum focuses on promoting good
•
labor practices in countries that are seen as less
competitive following the end of the multi-fiber
agreement trading regime . 
2
Clean Clothes Campaign . Short overview of multi-stakeholder initiatives aimed at
overseeing code implementation :  . org / codes / code
BUSINESS
74
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Questions for the groups to answer during their research
activity include : 
What is the primary work and mission of the initiative ? 
•

What types of entities are members of this initiative
• 
( brands , NGOs , trade unions , other )  ? 

What kinds of programs or projects have been
•
undertaken in the initiative to address working conditions
in the supply chain ? 

If possible , pick one project to profile and report on the
•
outcomes or impact of the project . 

Based on the information reviewed during your research , 
•
determine whether this initiative ( i ) appears to be
achieving its mission ;  ( ii ) has a positive impact on working
conditions in the global supply chain . 
Estimated time for session : 90-120 minutes
Recommended pre-assignment reading includes : 
Business for Social Responsibility , Monitoring of Global Supply
Chain Practices , Issue Brief , 
issue-brief-details . cfm ? DocumentID = 48948
Clean Clothes Campaign , Short overview of multi-stakeholder
initiatives aimed at overseeing code implementation 
. org / codes / code_initiatives . htm
Supplementary reading materials include : 
Hartman , L . P . et al ( eds .  )  ( 2003 ) Rising above sweatshops : 
Innovative approaches to global labor challenges . Connecticut : 
Praeger Publishers . Chapters 5 , 7-9 , 11 are especially
relevant . 
D . Brands , Suppliers and Social Compliance : 
Role Plays
To conclude the investigation into globalization and
working conditions , two sets of case studies will be
presented based on actual historical events . Students will
be asked to take on particular roles in the case studies and
explore possible outcomes in each scenario . The educator
will then review the actual outcome of each scenario . 
Recommended pre-assignment reading material includes : 
Jackson , R .  ( 2006 )  ‘ Responsible sourcing : Do corporate
initiatives make a difference ?  ’  , United Kingdom : Ethical
Corporation Magazine . 
content . asp ? ContentID = 4499
Rosoff , Robert ,  ( 2003 )  ‘ Beyond Codes of Conduct : 
Addressing Labor Rights Problems in China ’  . 
Washington D . C .  : China Business Review , http :  /  / www . 
chinabusinessreview . com / public / 0403 / rosoff . html
1A . 
Case study on freedom of association : Kukdong
in Mexico
Students are provided with the following information , 
extracted from a Human Rights Watch report :  
 “ In January , an activist group investigated conditions at the
Kukdong factory in Mexico , which manufactures shirts for
Nike [ … ]  . The factory management had been accused
of labor rights violations including unlawful employment
of children , physical and verbal abuse of workers , failure
to provide maternity leave and benefits , firing workers
engaged in union activities , refusing to reinstate workers who
participated in a work stoppage earlier in January , and a
failure to honor the terms of a binding agreement between
Kukdong management and its workers . The [ activist group ] 
concluded that many of the allegations were well-founded
and launched a campaign to seek redress for the workers .  ” 3
Roles : The following roles are assigned to specific students
or groups of students . Approximately 15-20 minutes
should be provided to discuss the case study , with
students sharing viewpoints based on their assigned roles . 
Nike representative
•
Factory manager
•
Factory worker
•
Labor rights activist
•
Outcome : The final outcome can be shared at the
conclusion of the group discussion . 
As a result , and due to pressure from Nike , in late
September , Kukdong ( now renamed Mexmode
International ) reinstated the ousted workers and agreed
to a new collective bargaining agreement with workers . 
Kukdong also agreed to create a formal grievance
process , to address complaints of harassment by its
managers and to improve cafeteria conditions . 4
1B . 
Case study on freedom of association : Tarrant Ajalpan
in Mexico5
Students are provided with the following information : 
Workers at a garment factory in Mexico were facing
increasingly difficult work conditions , including forced
overtime work , non-payment of overtime wages , and
harassment by supervisors . Workers engaged in a
75
work stoppage to protest conditions at the factory . A
group of worker leaders negotiated an agreement with
management that called for specific changes . Following
this agreement , which was signed by both parties and a
neutral government mediator , the worker leaders came
together in an attempt to organize a union . The factory
responded by firing the group of worker leaders and
eventually , over a period of several weeks , an additional
300 workers as well . An investigation was launched by
an activist group , who called on several brands sourcing
in the factory to persuade the factory to re-hire the
illegally fired workers . Levi Strauss & Co . was one of the
brands sourcing in the factory . They were contacted by
the activist group and asked to intervene on behalf of the
workers . 
Roles : The following roles are assigned to specific students
or groups of students . Approximately 15-20 minutes
should be provided to discuss the case study , with
students sharing viewpoints based on their assigned roles . 
Levi Strauss representative
•
Factory manager
•
Factory worker
•
Labor rights activist
•
Outcome : The final outcome can be shared at the
conclusion of the group discussion . 
Levi advised the factory that compliance with their code
was a mandatory part of their business relationship . 
As a result , the factory decided not to maintain the
business relationship6 
. Levi no longer had leverage to
advocate directly on behalf of the workers . Following this
development , Levi decided that the best course of action
was to engage the other brands still in the factory and
offer them support . They also wrote letters to the local
government entities in Mexico asking them to support
the legal claims of the workers . 7
Years later , the situation
has yet to be settled to the workers ’ satisfaction . 
The following questions may be considered with the
students at the end of the first two role plays . 
What were the similarities between these two case studies ? 
•

Why were the outcomes so different ? What can we learn
•
from this ? 
What should other brands learn from these case studies ? 
•
2A . Case study on child labor in the supply chain : Primark
in India
Students are provided with the following information : 
An exposé by the BBC program Panorama8
revealed
that clothing produced in India for UK retailer Primark
was made by child labor . The garments had been
subcontracted by the original supplier to shops and
homes , even refugee camps , where children as young as
11 years old were employed to do handwork on the
garments . Journalists reported that the children worked
long hours and did not earn the minimum wage . Reports
suggested that five children earned the wage of one
adult . The exposé claimed that , as a provider of low
price clothing , Primark had pushed to the bottom of the
production rung in their sourcing practices , ensuring that
suppliers would in turn use the cheapest labor inputs , 
even child refugees . 9
Roles : The following roles are assigned to specific students
or groups of students . 
Approximately 15-20 minutes should be provided to
discuss the case study , with students sharing viewpoints
based on their assigned roles . 
Primark representative
•
Consumer
•
Factory production manager
•
Child worker ’ s parent
•
Labor rights activist
•
3
Human Rights WatchWorld Report 2002 
4
Thompson , G .  ( 2001 ) Mexican Labor Protest Gets Results , NewYork Times

5
Ferriss , S .  ( 2003 ) Mexican workers say rights denied as firms threaten to pull out , Cox News Services . 
6
Workers Rights Consortium ( 2003 )  , p . 8 ( Mexico ) %20%2009-15-03 . pdf
7
Letter from Levi written in response to USAS Campaign , dated Monday , 22 Sep 2003 . Also see Annex 4 of the Draft Report Addressing Labor RightsViolations at Tarrant ,  . 
org . uk / Z / lib / 2004 / 05 / codeviol-mex / ETI-tarrant-summ . pdf
8
BBC News , Primark : On the Rack , 
9
McDougall , Dan , The hidden face of Primark fashion , The Observer , 2008 . 
BUSINESS
76
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Outcome : The final outcome can be shared at the
conclusion of the group discussion . 
Upon learning that their goods were being
subcontracted to child workers , Primark responded
that it was not acceptable to have children working
on their clothes . The retailer stated that the work was
subcontracted without their knowledge or consent . They
immediately cancelled all new orders with the suppliers
and withdrew the goods made by child labor from sale . 
They called their local suppliers together for a meeting to
reinforce their standards . NGOs criticized the move by
Primark to terminate their relationship with the suppliers
implicated in the use of child labor . The NGO groups
argued that workers were punished by this move and , by
leaving the factory , there was no-one left to advocate for
improvements in working conditions . 10
Primark was seen
as not doing anything to improve worker rights . Primark
defended its action as being tough on standards and
responding to shareholders ’ needs . They partnered with
an NGO to act as their “ eyes and ears ” in southern India . 
They also set up a foundation to offer financial support
to NGOs focused on improving the lives of children . 11
2B . 
Case study on child labor in the supply chain : Gap
in India
Students are provided with the following information : 
The UK ’ s Sunday Observer broke a story about children
in bonded labor producing clothing for Gap in India . 12
The clothing had been subcontracted by a Gap supplier
to an informal cottage industry ( i . e . homeworkers ) 
where children were employed . The working and living
conditions of the children were deplorable . Some slept
in the factory or lived on the roof . One workplace was
found to have raw sewage leaking into the aisle ways . 
Many children were not earning any wages at all , but
instead working off “ debt ” of payments allegedly made to
their parents in exchange for teaching the child a skill . The
children worked long hours and were even physically
abused . Some were tattooed with the number of the
sweatshop to which they were bonded . 
Roles : The following roles are assigned to specific students
or groups of students . Approximately 15-20 minutes
should be provided to discuss the case study , with
students sharing viewpoints based on their assigned roles . 
Gap representative
•
Consumer
•
Factory production manager
•
Child worker ’ s parent
•
Labor rights activist
•
Outcome : The final outcome can be shared at the
conclusion of the group discussion . 
Gap stated they prohibit the use of child labor and that
the subcontracting to child home workers occurred
without their knowledge or permission . The retailer
responded by launching an investigation , cancelling the
order , destroying the goods made by children , and calling
an emergency meeting with all regional suppliers to
re-emphasize their standards and prohibitions against
subcontracting . 13
However , Gap did not sever their ties
to the supplier . The NGO and media response to Gap ’ s
actions was positive . Many viewed their response as
being strong and effective in addressing the situation . 14
Gap brought in an NGO to help return the child
workers to their families . The local government was
involved to ensure the processing of the children and
their return home . 
The following questions may be considered with the
students at the end of the second two role plays : 
What were the similarities between these two case studies ? 
•

Were the outcomes different ? If so , why ? What can we learn
•
from this ? 
What should other brands learn from these case studies ? 
•
Estimated time for session : 30-45 minutes per case study . 
III . Conclusion
Together , these different sessions bring students a
comprehensive and interactive introduction to the
complex issues of globalization and supply chain working
conditions . This learning module has been presented
in classroom style trainings in the corporate world in a
modified form . Participant feedback has been positive , 
especially where the level of participation and discussion
helps students understand the complexity of the issues . 
10
Labour Behind the Label , Primark Actions Branded “ Irresponsible ” by Campaigners , http :  /  / 
www . labourbehindthelabel . org / campaigns / urgent / primark / 246-primark-actions-branded-
irresponsible-by-campaigners
11
See Primark response to Panorama exposé : 
panorama / 7461496 . stm
12
McDougall , D . Indian ‘ slave ’ children found making low-cost clothes destined for Gap , Sunday
Observer , 2007 . 
13
Gap statement on media reports

14
McDougall , D . Gap plan “ sweatshop free ” labels . Guardian , 2007 . 

McDougall , D . EmbroideredT-shirt , Price : £4 , Cost : Misery . BBC News , June 2008 . 

77
Student Book Club : 
The Travels of a T-Shirt in the Global Economy
Joy M . Kozar , Ph . D .  , Department of Apparel , Textiles & Interior Design , Kansas State University , USA
jkozar @ ksu . edu
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
The overarching goal of this activity is to assist students in recognizing the structure , dynamics , and distribution
channels of the global textile and apparel industries from both current and historical perspectives . This involves an
evaluation of the cultural , economic , and political factors impacting sourcing decisions , in addition to the implications
of various global alliances on trade policies and regulations . Upon completion of this activity , students should recognize
various factors that impact compliance with labor laws , standards of social responsibility , and the treatment of workers
in textile and apparel production . The assignment challenges students ’ critical thinking skills and supports further
development of their written and verbal abilities . 
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : at least a minimal
understanding of international trade regulations and
policies . Knowledge of the various ethical , legal , logistical , 
social and environmental issues involved in the global
production and distribution of textile and apparel
goods is also beneficial to creating an ideal learning
environment
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required : Depending on the students ’ 
background understanding of the economics of apparel
and textile trade , the instructor might find it necessary
to leave out some discussion questions that extend
beyond the students ’ comprehension
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Book related , Discussion
and debate , Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Agriculture , Companies , Globalisation , History , 
Migrant workers , Second hand clothes , Supply chains , 
Technology , Textiles , Trade
BUSINESS
78
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Introduction
This learning activity requires that students read and
respond to multiple discussion questions stemming from
the book , The Travels of a T-shirt in the Global Economy , 
written by Pietra Rivoli . Originally created for a course
that introduces and includes an analysis of the global
fiber , textile , and apparel industries , this assignment is
most effective in smaller seminar-format classes . However , 
this activity has also been implemented in larger lecture
classes with few modifications . In larger sized classes , 
it is recommended that students be divided into small
discussion groups ( approximately 5-10 students per group ) 
with alternating discussion leaders . For smaller classes 
( approximately 30 students or less )  , discussions can be led
by the instructor or alternating students . 
Individual class sessions can be periodically set aside during
the course of the semester to discuss the content of
Rivoli ’ s book . This is a useful strategy for supplementing
related course content and various subjects introduced in
class . If adequate class time to discuss Rivoli ’ s book is not
available , the instructor can require students to submit their
responses as a midterm or final project . 
This activity can be integrated into a course as several
individual assignments or as a larger semester project . 
Questions are developed based on separate sections
of the book . Depending on the size of the class and the
instructor ’ s preference , students can work on forming their
responses to these questions individually or in pairs or
larger groups . Due dates can correspond with the content
of the topics discussed in class as outlined in the course
schedule or responses can be submitted in their entirety as
a midterm or semester project . 
To enhance student learning outcomes , all students should
be thoroughly prepared to discuss the assigned readings
prior to class . Based on the responses given by students , 
the instructor may find it useful to probe for further
information as a mechanism for fostering a more in-depth
discussion . This strategy is also useful for guiding students
to think more critically about the subject matter , including
the various social and environmental issues related to the
production and trade of apparel goods . Questions relating
to each chapter are outlined below . 
Preface and Prologue
1 . 	
What do you believe was the author ’ s major objective
for writing this book ? 
Probe : How did the author originally get interested in this topic ? 
PART I : King Cotton
Chapter 1 : Reinsch Cotton Farm , Smyer , Texas
1 . 	
According to Rivoli , the U . S . has remained the top
cotton producer in the world for over 200 years . 
Explain the reasons Rivoli gives for this
continued dominance . 
Probe : On page 7 , the author writes “ U . S . cotton growers
have since the beginning been embedded in a set of
institutions that insulate them from the full strength of a
variety of market forces .  ” What do you think Rivoli meant
by this statement ? 
Chapter 2 : The History of American Cotton
1 . 	
By the mid 19th
century , the majority of cotton
produced in the U . S . was in the American South . 
Describe how plantation owners ensured large-scale
cotton production during this time period ( before and
after the civil war )  . 
Probe : How were workers “ tied to the land ” by plantation
owners ? 
2 . 	
Why did cotton production increase significantly in
the US during the early to mid 19th Century while in
other parts of the world , particularly in China and India , 
cotton production remained fairly constant ? 
Probe : What other technological advancements have
impacted apparel and textile production and distribution
since that time ? 
Chapter 3 : Back at the Reinsch Farm
1 . 	
In the early 1940s , the U . S . Department of Labor
authorized the Bracero Program . Why was it initially
formed and what major purposes did it serve ? 
Probe : Are there certain elements of the Bracero Program
that could be viewed as unethical or immoral ? Explain . 
2 . 	
What was the significance of the mechanical cotton
stripper to farmers ( i . e .  , why was it so critical to their
success )  ? 
79
3 . 	
How are farmers benefiting from the recycling and
reusing of the “ garbage ” collected when cotton is
picked ? What are some of the ways cotton trash is
being reused ? 
Probe : Would you consider these to be sustainable
initiatives ? Why or why not ? What does the term
sustainability mean to you ? 
4 . 	
Respond to the following phrase found on page 55 :  
 “ The low labor costs that might give the poor farmers
an advantage are in fact their undoing .  ” What does the
author mean by this ? 
PART II : Made in China
Chapter 4 : Cotton Comes to China
1 . 	
In all the stages of production discussed by the author , 
which one has been the most difficult to mechanize ? 
Why do you think this is ? 
Chapter 5 : The Long Race to the Bottom
1 . 	
Who does the author state were some of the earliest
cotton mill workers ( in both Britain and New England )  ? 
Why were these particular groups sought by factory
owners ? What commonalities do these workers
share with those now working in apparel production
factories ? 
Chapter 6 : Sisters inTime
1 . Describe , in your own words , China ’ s Hukou System . 
2 . 	
Within Chapter 6 , the author uses the term “ floating
workers .  ” Describe these workers . 
Probe : What commonalities exist between China ’ s Hukou
System and the Bracero Program initiated in the 1940s by
the U . S . Department of Labor ? 
3 . 	
Given Rivoli ’ s discussion , do you believe China ’ s textile
and apparel factories are a form of liberation or
enslavement for workers ? Explain your answer . 
Probe : What other sources of information besides Rivoli ’ s
book would you consult to help you with this decision on
liberation or enslavement ? 
PART III : Trouble at the Border
Chapter 7 : Dogs SnarlingTogether
1 . 	
What reasons does the author give for the significant
increase in China ’ s apparel exports to other
industrialized nations while exports to the U . S . have
been far less striking ? 
2 . 	
Examine Figure 7 . 3 on page 121 . Why might China ’ s
quota limit on cotton knit shirts be so much lower than
several other countries ’  , includingVietnam , Turkey , 
and Pakistan ? 
Probe : How do the political relationships between countries
influence trade regulations ? 
3 . 	
Given what you know from reading Rivoli ’ s book and
other knowledge about textile and apparel trade , 
explain why textile and apparel trade and policy has
been , and continues to be , a major political issue . 
Probe : Why has the protection of apparel and textile
manufacturing jobs been a critical issue to voters in the
American South ? How have U . S . politicians responded to
these concerns ? 
Chapter 8 : Perverse Effects and Unintended
Consequences of T-ShirtTrade Policy
1 . 	
Worldwide , both domestic and offshore jobs in the
textile and apparel production industries are declining
because of what ? 
2 . 	
What are some of the unintended outcomes of the
quota system addressed by the author ? 
Probe : Why was the quota system originally established ? 
Chapter 9 : 40Years of “ Temporary ” Protectionism Ends in
2005 – and ChinaTakes All
1 . 	
Why were trade policies with Pakistan renegotiated
shortly after September 11 , 2001 ? 
2 . 	
According to the author , what will happen to many
poor developing countries when quotas are completely
phased out ? 
3 . 	
What strategies does the author write about that
countries such as India and Pakistan intend to use to
compete with China in the race to the bottom ? What
about Cambodia ? 
Probe : What other strategies can be implemented by
countries wanting to compete with China in the worldwide
production of apparel goods ? 
PART IV : My T-Shirt Finally Encounters a Free Market
Chapter 10 : WhereT-Shirts Go after the Salvation Army Bin
1 . 	
What is your perception of the recycled clothing
industry as discussed by Rivoli and given your personal
experience with donating clothing ? Do you believe it
promotes sustainability and social responsibility , or does
it just treat some of the world ’ s poorest countries as
dumping grounds ? What might happen to clothing that
is discarded in another way ? Explain your answer . 
BUSINESS
80
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Chapter 11 : How Small Entrepreneurs Clothe East Africa
with Old AmericanT-Shirts
1 . 	
What reasons does the author give for why recycled
men ’ s clothing exported toTanzania is sold at much
higher prices than women ’ s clothing ? 
2 . 	
Why do some African countries ban the import of used
clothing , according to the author ? Why does the author
criticize the barriers erected to mitumba trade ? 
3 . 	
How is mitumba shopping for the African consumer
similar to apparel shopping for the American consumer ? 
Conclusion and Epilogue
1 . 	
After reading this book , what was most interesting
or surprising to you ? Were your original perceptions
regarding the global trade of textile and apparel goods
changed ? Why or why not ? Would you describe yourself
as a protectionist or an advocate of globalization and
free trade ? Explain . 
Assessment
Students are evaluated on four major criteria , including : 

Completeness of responses : Was the entire question
•
•
answered thoroughly ? Did the student use examples to
substantiate responses ? 

Justification of argument : Were answers sound and based
•
•
on appropriate and educated reasoning ? Was a rigorous
approach taken in defending opinions and viewpoints ? 

Overall professionalism :  ( correct grammar , spelling , etc .  , in
•
•
written responses )  . 
Participation in class discussion . 
•
•
Reflections
Upon completion of the assignment , students often
recognize the differences in viewpoints among those who
advocate globalization and free trade versus those who
support more protectionist perspectives . Students are
also perceived to possess an advanced knowledge of the
markets , influences , and policies of world trade , including
factors that impact working conditions and the treatment
of workers in the garment industry . An effective assessment
of this activity which provides a forum for student feedback
is an evaluation of students ’ responses to the conclusion / 
epilogue question . Specific responses received from
students previously include the following :  
 “ …My original perceptions regarding the global trade of
textile and apparel goods have changed . I used to support
globalization very much , not caring about sweatshops at
all . My knowledge of child labor or sweatshops was not
well educated . I appreciated finding really good deals while
shopping at the mall . After reading this book , and taking this
course , it is hard for me to buy a really cheap item without
thinking about the people who made it . I will also look at the
tag of the item to see where it was made . Most of the clothes
I own were made in China . I still support globalization because
it does help improve a country ’ s economy and infrastructure . 
Yet , I believe the countries America imports from should have
fair labor laws for all apparel and textile workers .  .  .  ” 
							 
 “ One of the most striking things brought up in this book
was the complexity of the apparel and textile industry
worldwide… I never gave thought to where clothing goes after
places like the Salvation Army… In reading this book , I found
myself very torn between being mad about the exploitation
of workers in other countries or thinking that some of these
countries are better off being a part of this industry to help
improve their economy… I just loved how she [ the author ] 
gave such insight into how politics and the apparel and textile
industry are related and that the lines between ethics and the
race to the bottom are becoming more and more blurry with
each passing year .  ”  
 “ …By far the most surprising thing I have learned would be
the dependence of developing countries on the apparel and
textile industry . Before reading this book , I never knew that
many smaller , underdeveloped countries were so dependent on
the industry… ” 
81 
 “ Before reading this book and taking this class , I really didn ’ t
know anything about the global trade of textile and apparel
goods . I definitely think that my perception of the industry
has changed , because now I am more knowledgeable about
the industry… I found this book to be very fascinating and
informative about a number of issues including the struggles
of cotton farmers , how technology has changed cotton farming , 
about workers in China and the conditions they often are
working in , as well as the recycling of clothing… ” 
Project Extension
Based on feedback received from students , in addition
to an assessment of students ’ learning outcomes , the
instructor may also consider assigning additional readings
that corroborate and / or challenge Rivoli ’ s book . The
textbook , Going Global by Grace I . Kunz and Myrna B . 
Garner , is useful in providing background information on
the production and distribution of textile and apparel
goods in the age of globalization . For students particularly
interested in the treatment and exploitation of workers
in apparel production , as well as tactics in combating
sweatshops and labor abuse , the book , Slaves to fashion : 
Poverty and abuse in the new sweatshops written by
Robert J . S . Ross , is recommended . Additionally , several
human rights videos have recently become available , 
including Sweating for a T-shirt , China Blue , Made in L . A .  , 
and Maquilapolis . These documentaries are effective in
providing added insight into the working conditions in
sweatshops both offshore and domestically . In previous
classes , the combination of these resources has been found
to be instrumental in providing a means for encouraging
student activism , in addition to socially responsible apparel
purchasing behavior . 
BUSINESS
82
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Buying Power Role Play : How Decision
Making in the Fashion Industry Impacts on
Working Conditions
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
1 . Level FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
4 . Number of students 8 to 20
5 . Length of time required One to two hours
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities , Discussion and
debate , 
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Companies , Corporate social responsibility , Purchasing
practices , Supply chains , Trade , Wages , Workers ’ rights , 
Working conditions
Follow Up / Related Activities
EthicalTrading Initiative case studies to address impacts of purchasing practices on working conditions , by ETI , available in
this Handbook . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
For participants : 

To consider the priorities and challenges facing fashion designers , companies , factory owners and workers within the
•
•
garment industry , and how these impact on working conditions in the garment industry . 

To consider the actions that fashion designers , companies , factory owners and workers could take or are taking to
•
•
improve conditions for garment workers . 
This role play explores how the decisions made by different actors within the fashion supply chain impact on working
conditions in garment manufacturing . It has been designed for students on fashion related courses - buying , design , 
business and merchandising , etc . - and could be used at a range of different levels . In small groups , students take on
the roles of CEO , designer , buyer , factory owner and factory worker , and consider how the priorities and challenges
facing each of these roles impacts on workers . An optional second round of the role play considers actions that fashion
designers , companies , factory owners and workers could take or are taking to improve conditions for garment workers . 
The ‘ Buyer Power ’ role play is available to download from resources / teachingmaterials / 
buyingpower /  . The pack contains role-sheets and guidance notes for facilitators . A PowerPoint presentation and step-by-
step guide to running the role play is also included . 
83
Ethical Trading Initiative Case Studies to
Address Impacts of Purchasing Practices on
Working Conditions
Ethical Trading Initiative , UK eti @ eti . org . uk
1 . Level UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : An understanding
of company buying practices and basic terminology
associated with social auditing
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students D . Specific knowledge required : An understanding
of company buying practices and basic terminology
associated with social auditing
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required One to two hours
6 . Type of activity Group work , Discussion and debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Companies , Corporate social responsibility , Purchasing
practices , Supply chains , Trade , Wages , Workers ’ rights , 
Working conditions
Follow Up / Related Activities
Buying power role play : How decision making in the fashion industry impacts on working conditions , by Fashioning an Ethical
Industry , available in this Handbook . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To understand the Ethical Trading Initiative ( ETI ) Base Code . 
•
•
To understand the impact of purchasing practices on worker ’ s rights and conditions . 
•
•
To analyse what could be done to prevent the negative impact of purchasing practices on workers . 
•
•
BUSINESS
84
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Summary
Two case studies are presented with questions for students
to consider concerning the impact of purchasing practices
on workers , based on original case studies from ‘ Purchasing
Practices : Case studies to address impacts of purchasing
practices on working conditions ’  , Report from ETI members ’ 
meeting , 29 November 2007 by the EthicalTrading
Initiative . 
Background
It is increasingly recognised that retailers ’ purchasing
practices can have a significant negative impact on
working conditions in the supply chain . Many key
purchasing processes and decisions within a sourcing
company – such as critical path management , terms and
conditions in the buyer-supplier relationship , sourcing
and merchandising – affect how suppliers manage their
workforce and production , and can indirectly impact on
working conditions . This is supported by findings of the ETI
Impact Assessment ( 2006 )  , which found that ‘ … suppliers in
all countries and sectors reported that [ downward pressure
on prices and lead times ] limited their ability to make
improvements in labour practices ’  ! 
Since 2005 , the ETI Purchasing Practices Project has been
working to tackle these issues and identify purchasing
practices which support a company ’ s commitment to
labour standards . The Project Group includes several
member companies , trade unions and NGOs working
together to assess the impacts of buying practices
throughout the supply chain . As a result of taking part in
the project , some participants have been able to make
recommendations for changes to buying practices , have
communicated these to company Boards , and begun
a training programme for buying staff . The aim is to
disseminate the learning from the Purchasing Practices
Project Group in order to help companies integrate
ethical trading into core business practices . It is against
this background that ETI held a members ’ meeting to
explore potential solutions to some of the common
purchasing practices which undermine working conditions , 
and to encourage companies to consider what practical
improvements they can make in their own buying
processes . The case studies and questions are taken
from the report of this meeting :  ‘ Purchasing Practices : 
Case studies to address impacts of purchasing practices on
working conditions , Report from ETI members ’ meeting , 29
November 2007 . 
Case Study Questions
Two garment related case studies are presented below for
students to consider the following key issues : 

What breaches of the ETI Base Code ( 
•
• http :  /  / www . 
ethicaltrade . org / Z / lib / base / index . shtml ) occurred in the
case study scenario , and what were the possible impacts
on workers ? 

How , if at all , the buying practices described go against
•
•
the ETI Principles of Implementation ? 
What factors led to the breach occurring ? 
•
•

What could be done to prevent that kind of breach
•
•
happening again ? 
It is highly recommended that educators view the
responses by ETI members to the case studies to assist
them in guiding students ’ discussion and analysis of the case
studies : Ethical Trading Initiative ( 2007 )  ‘ Purchasing Practices : 
Case studies to address impacts of purchasing practices on
working conditions , Report from ETI members ’ meeting , 
29 November 2007 
lib / 2007 / 11 / pp-forum / index . shtml
Further Information
The following documents are available on the ETI website
at www . ethicaltrade . org : 
ETI Base Code and Principles of Implementation
•
•

•
• Bridging the Gap Between Commercial and Ethical Trade
Agendas : Pioneering Approaches to Purchasing Practices , 
Briefing Paper No 5 , ETI , 2005 . 

•
• Purchasing practices : what impact on labour conditions ? 
Chapter 9 of Key Challenges in EthicalTrade : Report on
the ETI Biennial Conference 2003 , ETI , 2003 . 

•
• Purchasing practices : Marrying the Commercial with the
Ethical , ETI Members ’ Roundtable , 7th July 2004 . 

•
• Key Challenges in Ethical Trade : Report on the ETI Biennial
Conference 2003 , ETI Report , 2003 . 

•
• Further details on training buyers can be found at www . 
ethicaltrade . org / d / purchasingpractices . 

Information on ETI ’ s Purchasing Practices project can be
•
•
found on the ETI website , or contact ETI at
eti @ eti . org . uk
85
The Fashioning an Ethical Industry Factsheet on Purchasing
Practices , available at 
resources / factsheets / completelist / factsheet17 /  , outlines key
issues and further reading materials . 
Case Study 1 : 
Exerting Downward Pressure on Prices
This is a case study of a situation whereby a retailer plans
to cut costs by reducing prices paid to suppliers . 
Context : Part of the 2007 merchandising strategy in a
major high street clothing retailer is to cut costs in the
supply chain by reducing prices paid to suppliers by 5% on
the previous year ’ s factory gate prices . All merchandisers
in the business are informed of this target , and are
instructed to negotiate with suppliers to reduce factory
gate prices for comparable products to 5% lower than
in 2006 . Individual merchandisers are told that they will
be rewarded for meeting cost-cutting targets with a
performance-related bonus at the end of the year . 
Buying practice : Merchandisers based in India negotiate
with long-standing suppliers to achieve the lower price , and
assure suppliers that they will get repeat orders over the
next year if they can meet this lower price . The suppliers
agree . 
The supplier and worker scenario : One factory manager
calculates that , if they produce the goods in their own
factory , the lower price means that they will only just break
even . This is because the unpredictable flow of orders
with short lead times will require them to do overtime
shifts , and the costs of paying overtime premiums will be
too expensive . Therefore , to keep costs down , the factory
manager decides to sub-contract part of the order to
another factory in the city which has lower operating costs , 
without telling the retailer . The sub-contractor has never
been audited and does not know about the ETI Base Code
standards . Workers at the sub-contractor ’ s factory are
paid below the legal minimum wage , working hours often
exceed 60 hours a week , and none of the workers have
contracts . There are no fire exits in the factory . 
Case Study 2 : Lack of Integration between
Commercial and Ethical Activities
This is a case study in which there is a lack of integration
between the activities of a retailer ’ s audit team and its
buyers . 
Context : A high street retailer buys basic t-shirts all
year round and often sources from the same factory in
Bangladesh . The retailer has commissioned audits of this
factory and the factory manager has made efforts to
follow the corrective action plans . Working conditions have
improved over time , particularly regarding health and safety , 
and a newly established worker committee has met with
management and successfully bargained for wages above
the national minimum wage . The buyer ’ s performance is
largely measured against sales and margin targets . 
Buying practice : A large order for t-shirts is about to be
placed . The buyer asks for quotes from several factories , all
of which operate to good quality and service levels . The
factory that usually supplies the t-shirts tenders at $1 . 50
per item , which is the same price as the previous year ; a
neighbouring factory tenders at $1 . 40 . The buyer uses the
lower quote to try and bargain the price down at the usual
factory , but the factory manager refuses to reduce the
unit price . As a result , the order is placed with the cheaper
factory . 
The supplier and worker scenario : An audit of the new 
( cheaper ) factory is carried out after the order is placed
there . The audit finds no mention of a trade union or
collective bargaining in the factory , and pay records show
that most workers are paid the national minimum wage . 
BUSINESS
86
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
What Price a Living Wage ? 
Doug Miller , School of Design , University of Northumbria , UK
doug . miller @ northumbria . ac . uk
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
To understand how garments are costed at factory level . 
•
•
To consider how a living wage might be achieved in global apparel supply chains . 
•
•
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required . 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required . 
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Student preparation time : 30-45 minutes internet
search time . Seminar : 60 minutes
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Interactive activities , Ideas for projects , 
assignments and briefs , Discussion and debate , Research
related
7 . Discipline Business
8 . Topics covered Companies , Prices , Wages
87
Introduction
Students are given a task to complete in preparation
for a workshop / seminar discussion . The preparation can
involve online and ‘ in store ’ research . In class they complete
a task to calculate the unit labour cost1 
. A PowerPoint
presentation is available at www . fashioninganethicalindustry . 
org / teachingresources / livingwage to feed in key points
about the global value chain in garment manufacture
and the make up of a freight / free on board price . The
Educator ’ s Note gives some guidance to support the
student tasks that are set out at the end of this paper . 
Educator ’ s Note
Student Task 1 : Preparation Activity
Please complete this task sheet for the next session . Feel
free to work in pairs or small groups . 
1 . 	
Find out the typical price of a plain adult cotton t-shirt . 
You may wish to do a price comparison on the internet
or visit some high street stores . 
2 . 	
For the purposes of this task , we are going to assume
that our t-shirt was sourced in Bangladesh . How much
do you think the high street or online retailer paid the
factory for the shirt ? 
Student Task 2 : In Class
The workers at the factory where the t-shirt is assembled
work a standard 8 hour day , 26 days per month on average 
( excluding overtime )  . 
The wage scales for workers in the Bangladeshi industry
are as follows : 
Grades Position Monthly Wage
inTaka
Monthly Wage in
£ Sterling
1 Pattern Master 5140 £41 . 98
2 Mechanic 3840 £31 . 36
3 Sample Machinist 2449 £20 . 00
4 Cutter 2250 £18 . 37
5 Junior Cutter 2046 £16 . 70
6 Sewing Machinist 1851 £15 . 12
7 Assistant
Operator
1662 . 5 £13 . 58
Source : People ’ s Republic of Bangladesh Government Ministry of Labour
and Employment , Minimum Wage Ordinance , October 22 2006
The machinists are organised in actual production lines
of 12 and have a daily production target of 900 . Of
course many more workers are engaged in the whole
manufacturing process . In this particular case , some 51
workers are involved in the full process from stores
through cutting to assembly and inspection . The specific
occupations and numbers of workers necessary are set out
in the table below .  : 
Tasks No of
Workers
Daily Rate in
Taka
Total Amount
Stores 4 107 428
Cutting 5 86 . 5 432 . 5
Machinists 12 86 . 5 1038
Inspectors 2 86 . 5 173
Helpers 6 64 384
Washers / Thread
Cutters
10 64 640
Ironing & Packing 12 86 . 5 1038
TOTALS 51 4133 . 5
The workers are paid an hourly rate and do not receive a
production bonus or piece rate . 
The total wage cost for making the t-shirt is calculated
by dividing the relevant monthly wage for the specific
category of worker by 26 to determine a daily labour cost 
( column 2 )  . 
This is then multiplied by the number of workers
performing the task and the total gives the daily labour cost
to achieve the production target ( column 3 )  . 
1 . Total up columns 1 and 3 . 
2 . 	
Calculate the labour cost involved in assembling each
t-shirt ( unit labour cost )  . 
	
You will need to divide column 3 by 900 to arrive at a
unit labour cost . 
You can set the information out in this table : 
Number of workers in line 51
Target number of shirts per day 900
Total wage bill for day 4 , 133 . 5
Unit labour cost 4 . 59Taka
Unit labour costs in £ / $ 3 . 9 pence / 6 . 6 cents
1
The activity is based on actual industry figures on wages as at October 2006 and
production line balancing figures provided by CSR / sourcing managers from a major
multinational retailer . 
BUSINESS
88
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
3 . 	
Calculate this figure as a percentage of the average
retail price for a plain cotton t-shirt . 
	
You will need to use a figure from StudentTask 1 to
work out the percentage . 
4 . 	
Some estimates of a living wage in Bangladesh in 2007
were targeting a figure of 4 , 500Taka for Grade 7
although given a hike in food prices this is no longer
a realistic figure . 2
By how much would the retail price
of this cotton shirt have to increase in order for the
retailer of the t-shirt to be paying a living wage as
defined in 2007 ? 
To cover a threefold increase in the wage , the unit labour
cost element in the Freight On Board ( FOB ) would need
to be in the order of 12p or 20 cents . Discussion should
focus on how small the actual increase would need to
be . This can then lead into a discussion about consumer
behaviour regarding price sensitivity , consumer education
and mechanisms for transferring increases to the workers
via theFOB to a supplier factory . 
Background Material
Miller D . and Williams P ,  ( 2009 )  ‘ What price a living wage ?  ’  , 
Journal of Global Social Policy Volume 9 Issue 1
PowerPoint Guide
Slide 1 : Title . 
Slide 2 : Breakdown of FOB price of a cotton t-shirt . 
Slide 3 : 	
Changes in FOB prices on t-shirts imported
into the USA 1994-2004 . 
Slide 4 : Some things a buyer would need to know . 
Slide 5 : 	
Pay scale in the industry in Bangladesh with
some examples of jobs . 
Slide 6 : 	
How the unit labour cost can be calculated 
( alternative method involves timing the
production cost in minutes and multiplying
this by a minute labour cost figure to arrive at
a labour minute value )  . 
Slide 7 : 	
Some observations on additional pay
elements in Bangladesh factories making
t-shirts : Obviously earnings can include non-
wage benefits such as a food and / or transport
allowance , and they can be boosted by piece-
work and an annual bonus averaged over
the year , but in many factories none of these
benefits are available . 
Slide 8 : How the unit labour cost is calculated . 
Slide 9 : 	
Added value in a clothing supply chain ( this
slide should be self-explanatory )  . 
STUDENT HANDOUTS
Actual materials given to students
Student Task 1 : Preparation Activity
Please complete this task sheet for the next session . Feel
free to work in pairs or small groups . 

Find out the typical price of a plain adult cotton t-shirt . 
1 . 
You may wish do a price comparison on the internet or
visit some high street stores . 

For the purposes of this task , we are going to assume
2 . 
that our t-shirt was sourced in Bangladesh . How much
do you think the high street or online retailer paid the
factory for the shirt ? 
2
Let ’ s Clean up Fashion , Labour behind the Label , September 2007
89
Student Task 2 : Class Activity
The workers at the factory where the t-shirt is assembled
work a standard 8 hour day , 26 days per month on average 
( excluding overtime )  . 
The wage scales for workers in the industry are as follows : 
Grade Position Monthly
Wage inTaka
Monthly Wage in
£ Sterling
1 Pattern Master 5140 £41 . 98
2 Mechanic 3840 £31 . 36
3 Sample Machinist 2449 £20 . 00
4 Cutter 2250 £18 . 37
5 Junior Cutter 2046 £16 . 70
6 Sewing Machinist 1851 £15 . 12
7 Assistant Operator 1662 . 5 £13 . 58
Source : People ’ s Republic of Bangladesh Government Ministry of Labour
and Employment Minimum Wage Ordinance October 22 2006
The machinists are organised in actual production lines
of 12 and have a daily production target of 900 . Of
course many more workers are engaged in the whole
manufacturing process . In this particular case , some 51
workers are involved in the full process from stores
through cutting to assembly and inspection . 
The specific occupations and numbers of workers
necessary are set out in the table below : 
Tasks No of Workers Daily Rate in
Taka
Total Amount
Stores 4 107 428
Cutting 5 86 . 5 432 . 5
Machinists 12 86 . 5 1038
Inspectors 2 86 . 5 173
Helpers 6 64 384
Washers / 
Thread
Cutters
10 64 640
Ironing & 
Packing
12 86 . 5 1038
TOTALS
The workers are paid an hourly rate and do not receive a
production bonus or piece rate . 
The total wage cost for making the t-shirt is calculated
by dividing the relevant monthly wage for the specific
category of worker by 26 to determine a daily labour cost 
( column 2 )  . 
This is then multiplied by the number of workers
performing the task and the total gives the daily labour cost
to achieve the production target ( column 3 )  . 
1 . Total up columns 1 and 3 . 
2 . 	
Calculate the labour cost involved in assembling each
t-shirt ( unit labour cost )  . 
You can set the information out in this table : 
Number of workers in line
Target number of shirts per day
Daily wage per worker
Unit labour cost
You will need to divide column 3 by 900 to arrive at a unit
labour cost . 
3 . 	
Calculate this figure as a percentage of the average
retail price for a plain cotton t-shirt . 
4 . 	
Some estimates of a living wage in Bangladesh target a
figure of 4 , 500Taka although given a hike in food prices
this is no longer a realistic figure3 
. 
By how much would the retail price of this cotton shirt
have to increase in order for the retailer of the t-shirt to
be paying a living wage as defined in 2007 ? 
3
Let ’ s Clean up Fashion , Labour behind the Label , September 2007
BUSINESS
90
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Ideas for Business Related Assignments
Chloe Mason , London College of Fashion , and Jacqueline Shorrocks , Nottingham Trent University , UK
c . mason @ fashion . arts . ac . uk , jacqueline . shorrocks @ ntu . ac . uk
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students B . General knowledge of the textiles and garment
industry required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Group work , Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , 
Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Companies , Corporate social responsibility , Fair trade , 
Ethical initiatives / brands , Working conditions
91
We hope the following briefs will give you some food
for thought when planning business assignments for your
students .  
 ‘ Sustainable Dress ’ Capsule Collection
As a group of four assistant fashion buyers at a high street
chain ( instructor to specify company )  , you are asked to put
together a capsule collection of ‘ sustainable ’ dresses for high
summer . A 1 , 500-word report must be compiled which is
ordered , credible and convincing . Your report must detail
the rationale behind your concept reflecting on range-
building , mood boards , a range plan including budgets , 
supply source , and a buying plan including a promotional
calendar with launch date , phasing and mark-down strategy . 
The assignment culminates in a ‘ selection meeting ’ using
real samples and ‘ mock-up ’ garments to portray your range
for discussion and debate . You must present your rationale
for the range , showing the underpinning knowledge
gained throughout the term . In essence , through cross-
examination , students must justify why they believe the
collection will be successful . 
Contributed by : Chloe Mason for the Fashion Buying
Unit of the BA ( Hons ) Fashion Management ( Buying and
Merchandising Pathway )  . 
c . mason @ fashion . arts . ac . uk

Fair Trade Capsule Collection
In this group project , you are to work as a team of retail
consultants who have been asked by a high street company 
( instructor to specify company ) to plan and deliver a ‘ fair
trade ’ capsule collection with 10% of the profits donated
to Oxfam ( a development charity ) to support fair trade
ventures . In order to do this you will deliver a 2 , 500–3 , 000
word document comprising a feasibility study to explore
the market potential , a ‘ Stock Package ’ and range outline
detailing the collection ’ s minimum credible offer with ideas
for the store environment and visual displays to encourage
maximum sell through . Contributed by : Chloe Mason
for the Fashion Buying Unit of the BA ( Hons ) Fashion
Management ( Buying and Merchandising Pathway )  . 
c . mason @ fashion . arts . ac . uk

Debate the importance and practicalities
of a fashion retailer acting in an ethical , 
environmental or corporately responsible
manner within their supply chain
Students will need to demonstrate that they understand : 

The topic and its breadth including the different types of
•
ethical and environmental behaviour . 

That issues exist all along the supply chain and not just at
•
point of manufacture . 

That supply chain best practice , e . g . low cost and speed , 
•
potentially contradicts ethical , environmental and corporate
responsible behaviour and can make it more difficult to
identify problems in the supply chain . 

How head office practices and policies may force suppliers
•
to behave in certain ways . 
Assignment set for Merchandise Management programme
at University of Westminster . 
Contributed by : Jacqueline Shorrocks , former course leader , 
Merchandise Management , University of Westminster , now
AcademicTeam Leader , Fashion Marketing , Management
and Communication , NottinghamTrent University . 
jacqueline . shorrocks @ ntu . ac . uk

Identify through research one company
that appears to be operating as an
ethical , environmental and corporately
responsible retailer and one company that
does not
Give evidence for why you believe them to be ethical or
not . Identify and compare the strategies of each company . 
Discuss the implications of both strategies and what
the consequences of them hold for the future of each
company . 
Assignment set for Merchandise Management programme
at University of Westminster . 
Contributed by : 
Jacqueline Shorrocks , former course leader , Merchandise
Management , University of Westminster , now Academic
Team Leader , Fashion Marketing , Management and
Communication , NottinghamTrent University . jacqueline . 
shorrocks @ ntu . ac . uk
BUSINESS
92
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Book Summary : Social Responsibility in the
Global Apparel Industry
Marsha Dickson , Fashion & Apparel Studies , University of Delaware , Suzanne Loker , Cornell University ; and
Molly Eckman , Department of Design & Merchandising , Colorado State University , USA
Dickson @ udel . edu , sl135 @ cornell . edu , eckmanm @ cahs . colostate . edu
1 . Level FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Book related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Campaigns , Child labour , Companies , Consumers , 
Corporate social responsibility , Environment , Gender , 
Globalisation , Health and safety , History , Home-
based workers , Informal work , Legal initiatives , Multi-
stakeholder initiatives , Migrant workers , Purchasing
practices , Supply chains , Trade , Trade unions , Wages , 
Workers ’ rights , Working conditions
93
Educators in fashion related fields will , early in 2009 , have
a new resource available for use in the classroom . Our
book , Social Responsibility in the Global Apparel Industry , 
published by Fairchild Books of NewYork , provides
foundational knowledge on how leading apparel and
footwear manufacturers and retailers approach and
attempt to maintain social responsibility in the design , 
production , and sourcing of their products and in business
operations . The book primarily focuses on topics associated
with achieving improved labor standards and working
conditions . We address the complexity of identifying and
finding solutions for problems found throughout global
apparel and footwear supply chains , such as child labor , 
harassment and abuse , discrimination , excessive hours
of work , low wages , factory health and safety , and limits
on freedom of association . We introduce various supply
chain stakeholders , what they demand , and how they have
influenced the industry ’ s movement toward greater social
responsibility . We highlight trends in global production
and sourcing and the social responsibility field . In addition
to issues related to labor and working conditions , we
introduce how environmental concerns important to the
industry are being addressed . 
The book is based on a wealth of information we have
gained through research involving a variety of first-hand
experiences with the topics . We have conducted interviews
with individuals who work for multinational corporations , 
NGOs and labor groups , and factory management in the
US and off-shore ; made observations in numerous factory
visits in various regions of the world , including China , 
Guatemala , Hong Kong , Thailand , Turkey , andVietnam ; 
participated in the decision-making and leadership of an
organization ( the Fair Labor Association ) that focuses
on improving labor conditions in apparel and footwear
factories ; and analyzed research articles , corporate and
NGO reports , and editorial and news reports from the
international press . 
We describe a range of labor and environmental problems
that are encountered in the production of apparel , linking
them with human rights and respected international
agreements regarding workplace standards . Macro factors
including politics , economics , and culture are analyzed
for the ways they shape business response to labor and
environmental issues . Various stakeholders associated with
global apparel supply chains are introduced and we advise
on how to effectively engage them . We analyze how codes
of conduct for labor standards are implemented and the
shortcomings of their monitoring , and describe the new
divisions that apparel brands and retailers have created
to manage labor compliance , as well as multi-stakeholder
and business initiatives that have formed . A variety of
strategies that apparel brands and retailers might use to
address environmental concerns are explored . Finally , we
offer possible new solutions for social and environmental
problems . Throughout the book , various theories are
explained and drawn upon for understanding and analyzing
the action of businesses . 
Ideas for Using the Book
There are a variety of ways that you might consider using
this book . Instructors in the apparel field could develop
an undergraduate course that would focus on social
responsibility in the global apparel industry , using this book
as its primary text . Alternatively , you might use the book to
supplement a course examining economics , trade , sourcing , 
and other topics related to the global apparel industry . 
The book could also be used for graduate level courses
focused on current issues in the global apparel industry . 
Educators from other disciplines - including business , 
sociology , women ’ s studies , international economics , and
others - could use the book as an industry sector case
study when examining business and society , globalization , 
and international development . 
BUSINESS
94
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
95
96
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Marketing Contents
96
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
97
98 Introduction
99	
Further information
Teaching materials
101 Ethical issues in fashion marketing
RosemaryVarley , London College of Fashion , UK
108 Sourcing ethically : Learning through presentations
Claire Orwin , De Montfort University , UK
112 Visual display and merchandising for an ethical
fashion industry
Connie Ulasewicz , Apparel Design & Merchandising , 
San Francisco State University , USA , Educators for
Socially Responsible Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , 
PeoplewearSF , and Fashion Group
97
MARKETING
98
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The way in which ethics is marketed can support
attempts to bring about sustainable change in the fashion
industry , but can also undermine these efforts when
claims are unsubstantiated or vague . The contributions
in the Marketing section of this Handbook provide
useful starting points to engage students in marketing
related courses such as visual merchandising , promotion , 
consumer behaviour , strategic fashion management and
communications . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry displays examples of students ’ 
work relating to sustainability on its website at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / studentwork /  . Your own
students may find inspiration in these pages . We would also
be very happy to receive images and information about
students ’ work in your own university , college or school for
consideration for the website . 
About the contributions in the marketing chapter
In Ethical Issues in Fashion Marketing , Rosemary
Varley from London College of Fashion , UK , provides an
introduction to three key areas that could be used within a
marketing programme or to highlight ethical issues within
a strategic management context . She suggests specific
learning activities and essay questions to guide educators
in the use of the material provided . The three areas are
the evidence of a change in consumer attitude towards
ethical products ; the characteristics of an ethical consumer ; 
and the opportunities for fashion business to achieve
competitive advantage by means of an ethical offer . 
A review of two mini-presentation activities , designed to
introduce students to ethical issues related to sourcing
in fashion retailing , is provided by Dr . Claire Orwin , De
Montfort University , UK , in Sourcing Ethically : Learning
Through Presentations . In the first activity students
investigate brands that have been criticised for their
sourcing activities and the subsequent steps that have
been taken to safeguard workers from exploitation . The
second activity involves researching clothing brands that
are promoted as being either ethical or environmentally
sensitive . Students evaluate a company ’ s policies to
determine how successful they believe the company ’ s
approach is . 
The focus of the assignment presented by Connie
Ulasewicz from San Francisco State University , USA , in
Visual Display and Merchandising for an Ethical Fashion
Industry is for students to create window displays with
the primary objective of motivating passersby to stop , 
think and learn about some part or process of ethical
fashion creation . 
Marketing Introduction
99
Teaching Materials
There is information about a range of teaching resources , 
films , exhibitions and images on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website at 
resources /  . One that you may find useful for marketing
related teaching is :  
[ Pre-16 , FE , UG ] Seeing through the spin : Public relations
in the global economy
This resource can be used to explore how public relations , 
branding and marketing influence our perceptions
of transnational corporations and non-governmental
organisations . Seeing through the Spin contains 14 activities
that explore branding , PR and marketing in depth using
case study material . Although the publication is not fashion
specific , many activities use case studies from the fashion
industry , and others can be easily adapted for use in
fashion courses . 
Babymilk Action & RISC ( 2001 ) Seeing through the spin : 
Public relations in the global economy , Babymilk Action
and RISC . 
Available to download for free by activity or to buy at

Publications
Information about additional books , reports and factsheets
is available on the Fashioning an Ethical Industry website at
resources /  . 
Discussion paper 1 : 
The rise and impact of ethical consumerism
The market for ‘ ethical ’ fashion is booming . But what do
we mean by ‘ ethical consumerism ’  , and does this trend
mean that the fashion industry as a whole is becoming
more ethical ? In this factsheet , this question is examined
from two sides : demand and supply . Firstly , it considers
the extent to which there really is a demand for ethical
clothing from consumers . Next , it looks at what the market
is doing to satisfy that demand . Finally , it examines whether
the market ’ s response to consumer demand is benefiting
workers in the supply chain . The discussion paper also
contains references to further reading on this issue . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2008 ) Discussion paper 1 : 
The rise and impact of ethical consumerism , Labour Behind
The Label . 
Available to download for free from http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / factsheets / issues / 
factsheet19ethicalconsumerism / 
Further Information
MARKETING
100
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Further Information
Podcast of the 2008 FEI Conference , Ethics of Fashion or
Fashion of Ethics ? 
On the 27th of February 2008 the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry annual conference ,  ‘ Ethics of Fashion or Fashion of
Ethics ?  ’  , was held at the Zion Arts Centre , Manchester . The
event brought together 200 students and educators from
universities across the UK to hear from a wide range of
industry specialists . 
This podcast covers the day ’ s events and features
interviews with Suki Chung ( Labour Action China )  , Mary
Rayner ( Ethical Consumer Magazine )  , Vik Banks ( Arkadash )  , 
Katie Stafford ( Marks & Spencer ) and Laurence MacSween 
( Clownfish Marketing )  . The recording is around 30 minutes
long . 
Available to download for free from http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / podcastconference2008 / 
Greenwash Guide
Eco and ethical issues have become increasingly important
in business communication strategies and , at the same time , 
we have seen an increase in greenwashing - what Futerra
call ,  ‘ an environmental claim which is unsubstantiated ( a fib ) 
or irrelevant ( a distraction )  ’  . Futerrra , a communications
consultancy , has produced a guide to help communications
professionals get their green messaging right . Futerra say
that confidence in companies ’ communications is now at
an all time low ,  ‘ with only 10% of consumers trusting green
information from business and government ’  . They argue that ,  
 ‘ without confidence in the claims , consumers are reluctant to
exercise the power of their green purchasing , as they no longer
know who or what to believe . This puts the whole market for
the ‘ green pound ’ in danger and might damage the virtuous
circle of companies ’  . 
Futerra ( 2008 ) Greenwash Guide , Futerra
Available to download for free from http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / reports / 
greenwashguide / 
101
Ethical Issues in Fashion Marketing
Rosemary Varley , Subject Director in Management ( Retail and Marketing )  , School of Management and Science , 
London College of Fashion , UK . She previously taught and researched fashion business and management at the
University of Huddersfield . 
r . varley @ fashion . arts . ac . uk
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

The purpose of this section is to introduce three relevant resource items , which could be used within a marketing
•
•
programme on a fashion management course or to highlight ethical issues within a strategic management context . 
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Individual work , Group work , Ideas for projects , 
assignments and briefs , Article , Discussion and debate , 
Research related
7 . Discipline Marketing
8 . Topics covered Big business , Branding , Companies , Consumers , 
Corporate social responsibility , Ethical initiatives / 
brands
MARKETING
102
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
This paper covers three key areas : the evidence of a
change in consumer attitude towards ethical products ; 
the characteristics of an ethical consumer ; and the
opportunities for fashion business to achieve competitive
advantage by means of an ethical offer . Following the
teaching material , a number of suggestions are given to
guide educators in the use of the items , with specific
learning activities and suggested essay or assignment
questions at the end of the section . 
Item 1 : Evidence of Consumer Attitude Change –
Using the Co-operative Bank ’ s Ethical
Consumerism Report
Although it is apparent that consumer attitudes toward
ethical fashion are changing , both from media sources
and the responses that fashion companies have already
made , it can be difficult to find any hard evidence to work
with . A useful source of information about UK ethical
consumerism therefore is The Ethical Consumerism Report
published by the Co-operative Bank ( Co-operative Bank , 
2007 . Also available online at . 
co . uk / images / pdf / ethical_consumer_report_2007 . pdf )  , 
which provides some relatively reliable marketing data as a
basis for learning activities in the context of ethical fashion
consumption and marketing . 
The Co-operative Bank report provides data that shows
the rise in ethical consumerism in the UK overall ( graph
on page 4 )  , and the changes from 2005-2006 in different
product sectors ( table on page 5 )  . The data on page 5
shows sales of ethical clothing increased by 79% in 2006 . 
A chart on page 6 shows how ethical behaviours have
increased over time . For example , more people now both
choose and avoid products based on company reputation . 
Another interesting point is that the number of people
who have felt guilty about an unethical purchase has almost
doubled to over a third of all consumers , which indicates a
growing awareness of the issues and the choices they can
make . 
What is interesting to consider is that , while sales of fair
trade and organic clothing grew by 79% in 2006 , the base
value ( £52m ) is still small compared with , for example , the
market for ethical cosmetics ( £386m )  , which in turn is only
3% of the overall cosmetics market . This is shown on page
16 of the report . 
An important aspect of ethical consumerism highlighted by
the report is clothing boycotts . Ethical boycotting , according
to the Co-operative Bank , is where consumers avoid
using companies or brands that they perceive to be acting
irresponsibly ( page 16 of the report )  . It is suggested that , 
once a consumer has boycotted a brand , they are unlikely
to return to it . There seems to be an emerging pattern of
behaviour where consumers avoid budget clothing outlets
because they feel that the prices can only be achieved by
using suppliers that have poor labour conditions . Overall
clothing boycotts grew by 20% in 2006 to reach £338m . 
This figure , being significantly greater than actual sales of
ethical clothing , highlights the reason why it is so important
for companies to avoid negative publicity about their
ethical credentials . 
The table on page 17 gives a breakdown of ethical clothing
consumption and how this has changed from 2005–2006 . It
demonstrates how the majority of ethical clothing sales in
this timeframe were organic products rather than fair trade 
( the Fairtrade Mark for cotton first appeared on clothing
in November 2005 )  . However , the report forecast strong
growth in both Fairtrade and organic ethical clothing , 
predicting that the total market would be over £150m in
2008 . The fact that mainstream clothing retail distributors
like Marks & Spencer and Sainsbury are now selling
Fairtrade and organic cotton garments will add to the
increased consumption due to more convenient availability
of products to consumers . 
Item 2 : Is There a ‘ Typical Ethical Consumer ’  ? 
There are strong indications that consumers generally are
becoming more ‘ ethical ’ when it comes to product choices . 
Research conducted by Mori in 2006 suggested that
around one-third of the British public purchase ethically
to some degree ( see FEI discussion paper on ethical
consumerism )  ; and in 2007 , The Henley Centre Headlight
Vision reported that 62% of UK adults said that they had
become more environmentally aware over the previous 12
months ( Curry et al , 2008 )  . 
The RetailThinkTank ( White Paper , 2007 ) suggests that , 
although ‘ ethical ’ and socially conscious issues may be 
 ‘ fashionable ’ or ‘ politically correct ’ at the present time , a
growing number of consumers will , in the future , be more
and more concerned about them . The RetailThinkTank
considers ethical and environmental concerns to be not
103
just an “ affluent urban middle class consciousness , but an
issue and influence on consumer minds and actions that will
continue to grow and gain momentum ”  ( RetailThinkTank , 
2007 )  ; and that children taught about ethical issues at
school will push their sometimes reluctant parents into
more ethical buying patterns . 
However , there is a growing belief that it makes little sense
to talk about the ‘ ethical ’ consumer as a general category . 
There has been some attempt to profile the ethical
consumer more precisely . For example , the
Co-operative Bank Ethical Consumerism Report 2007
suggests that consumers can be broadly divided into three
groups according to their consumption : the committed
consumers , the regular consumers and the passive
consumers . However , in the RetailThinkTank White
Paper ( 2007 )  , four groups , devised by the Henley Centre
HeadlightVision were put forward into which the UK
population could be divided according to their attitudes
towards ethical consumption : 

Principled pioneers / vocal activists ( 8% )  : Committed
•
environmentalists who put pressure on companies and
lobby them to change their product offer . 

Positive choosers ( 31% )  : Those who buy ethically from
•
good companies and boycott bad ones . They support
their local community and buy local . They are more
affluent , less price sensitive and thus a good target for
more expensive ethical / environmental produce . 

Conveniently conscious ( 35% )  : These are making
•
easy changes to their lifestyles , but are not willing to
compromise on quality or value . They are an interesting
target for companies who can offer them a simple way of 
 ’ doing the right thing ’  . 

Onlookers ( 26% )  : For these , interest and activity is only
•
peripheral and / or limited . 
In addition , the Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( FEI ) 
discussion paper on ethical consumerism outlines Marks & 
Spencer ’ s own ‘ ethical segmentation ’  , which broadly reflects
that of the Henley Centre . 
However , there is often a discrepancy between what
people say and what they do because of a fear of paying
higher prices . The Fashioning an Ethical Industry discussion
paper discusses the link between consumer concerns
about ethical issues and economic prosperity . The ability
or reluctance to pay for the premium that ethical products
command is also demonstrated by the disinclination of
younger consumers to buy ethical products , whilst being
as or more knowledgeable and concerned about ethical
issues compared with other consumers ( Just-Style , 2006 ; 
Retail Bulletin , 2007 )  . These younger consumers may be
using their low income levels to ‘ justify ’ buying cheap and
probably unethically produced fast fashion . Other reasons
for not buying ethical products include consumers thinking
that their individual buying decisions and actions will not
make a difference , and because a lack of information
prevents informed choice . The FEI discussion paper
provides further discussion on the confusing messages that
consumers are confronted with in the fashion market . 
Media exposure can play a powerful part in altering
consumer attitudes . Bad publicity seems to be influencing
consumers who are not normally concerned with ethical
production . A report ( Just-style , 2008b ) of a survey carried
out by ICM Research on behalf of Drapers magazine
suggests that 42% of Primark shoppers are now less likely
or a lot less likely to use the retail chain following the
exposure of child labour in its supply chain in 2008 . Primark
shoppers do not normally use ethical considerations
in their buying decisions , with only 3% using ethical
production as a factor in their choices . Nearly half ( 46% ) of
Primark shoppers quote ‘ value for money ’ as the decisive
factor in purchasing decisions . 
Item 3 : Achieving Competitive Advantage in the Mar-
ket via the Ethical Route
The concept of competitive advantage is an important
one in marketing strategy formulation . The seminal work of
Michael Porter ( 1985 )  , which is now reiterated in virtually
all marketing textbooks , led to the general understanding
that there are two main ways that a business can be better
than its competitors at appealing to customers : being
cheaper ( cost leadership ) or being different ( which includes
being the first to do something different )  . 
Being ethical therefore can be considered as a means by
which a company can achieve differentiation . However , like
being ethical as a consumer and being ethical as a product , 
being ethical as a company is complex . The FEI discussion
paper on ethical consumerism provides a useful overview
of the responses of the clothing industry to the growth of
ethical consumerism ( FEI ) and , within this discussion , the
different levels to which a company commits to ethics is
questioned . 
MARKETING
104
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
In the past three years a transformation of the image of
ethical clothing from hippy to hip has taken place , and
phrases like ‘ green is the new black ’ and ‘ you can now
be stylish and eco-friendly ’ are rather ‘ last season ’  . The
opportunities to achieve competitive advantage simply by
offering an ethical product option or range are probably
no longer there . However , that doesn ’ t mean that ethical
products are irrelevant to competitive advantage ; but
that the way in which competitive advantage is achieved
needs to be more sophisticated and tuned into the type of
customer the brand is appealing to , both in terms of their
attitude to ethical products ( see item 2 ) and their fashion
design preferences . 
Brands like PeopleTree , Howies , and Edun , for example , 
have similar market positioning in terms of price and
commitment to ethical products . They achieve competitive
advantage over others at the upperend level of the mass
fashion market on the basis of their ethical stance ; however , 
they differentiate themselves from one another on the
basis of product design and brand identity . Likewise , at the
designer level of the fashion market , Katherine E . Hamnett
and Stella McCartney are cited as ethical brands , but the
collections are very different in terms of design appeal . 
In the middle mass market many brands , including
both retailers and producers , have introduced organic
or Fairtrade labelled products or ranges as an option . 
Examples include : Marks & Spencer , Sainsbury , Next , H & M , 
Levis and Gap . Whilst these moves were noteworthy in
both the fashion trade and the national press in 2006 , 
there is a danger that they are now considered to be
simply chasing the ethical pound ( FEI discussion paper )  . 
Additionally , and unsurprisingly , there is considerable
confusion and mistrust in the consumer market about
the terms used and the claims made by companies . 
Nevertheless , in April 2008 , a poll conducted by Marketing
Week magazine put Marks & Spencer as the ‘ greenest
brand ’  , suggesting that their high profile marketing
communications in conjunction with their corporate
social responsibility Plan A has had a positive effect on
consumers ’ perception of their commitment to ethical
issues ( Morgan , 2008 )  . The time may not be so far away
when the absence of an ethical offer could put a fashion
company at a competitive disadvantage . Tesco , for example , 
has not managed to convince audiences of an ethical
orientation despite a plethora of green initiatives and
announcements in 2007 / 8 ; the company managed to gain
the highest number of mentions when marketers were
asked to say which brands had made the fewest real
inroads in green issues over recent years ( Morgan , 2008 )  . 
Nevertheless , given the rise of ethical consumerism ,  
 ‘ chasing the ethical pound ’ makes commercial sense if your
customers show preference for ethical products ; and it
seems that brands that have niche appeal are including
ethical products because they know that their customers
will respond positively to this product feature .  ‘ Street-
wear ’ brands like Converse , Carhartt , SP : UK and Matix , for
example , have all had ‘ ethical ’ products within their ranges , 
yet are not overtly ‘ ethical ’ brands . 
This brings us to the idea of brand positioning which , like
competitive advantage , is an important strategic concept , 
particularly in a crowded and complex consumer market
like fashion . Successful fashion branding uses a blend of
a number of ‘ positioning variables ’ such as price , quality , 
fashionability , sportiness , ethical , and so on , that together
allow a brand to find its own space in the market . Once
this space has been found , the company can use marketing
communications to reinforce or defend that space . The
extent to which a company can use ethical claims in
their marketing communications relies on the integrity
of their ethical supply chain – which is why so few do it ! 
A truly ethical supply chain could give an organisation
real competitive advantage ; the most valuable types of
competitive advantages are the sustainable ones and the
ones that are most difficult to copy , and so a truly ethical
supply chain could be one of the most effective sources
of competitive advantage . Interestingly , the partnership
betweenTopshop and PeopleTree in the form of a
concession was reported to be having difficulties because
of supply chain issues such as longer lead times due
to hand crafting techniques ( Just-style . com , 2006 )  . For
the time being , the fashion industry and the consumer
market will have to accept that some market positions are
impossible to achieve , such as low priced , high quality , truly
ethical , catwalk-inspired fashion ! 
105
Points for Learning and Teaching
Analysis of trade figures in Item 1 allows students to see
evidence of consumer trends , as opposed to media hype . It
puts the value of sales into perspective ( currently low – the
high growth figures are a result of increases on a very small
base level )  . It also demonstrates that there is a long way to
go ( huge market potential )  . It is interesting to see the value
of boycotts – the hidden force of consumerism . 
Item 2 provides a starting point for an exploration of the
concept of an ‘ ethical consumer ’  . Just as the term ‘ ethical
clothing ’ can represent products with different levels of 
 ‘ ethicalness ’ within its components and features , so the
ethical consumer has different concerns , different levels
of attitude towards those concerns , and demonstrates
different types of behaviour in response to those attitudes . 
Students can use their own attitudes and behaviours as
reference points ; however , as so little is known about
consumer attitudes ( and they are changing rapidly )  , there
is a great opportunity to teach the fundamentals of market
research using the ethical consumer as a vehicle . 
Item 2 is useful when teaching the concept of
segmentation in a marketing course . It allows the
student to understand the difference between traditional
measurable demographic segmentation variables ( such
as age and income ) and attitudinal variables , in this case
attitude towards ethical issues . This can lead into the
concept of targeting - considering which companies
target particular attitudinal group ( s ) - and then on to the
idea that companies can used a mix of demographic and
attitudinal variables to come up with a more narrowly
targeted offer , such as age and attitude towards ethical
clothing . It is also useful to try to analyse to what extent
high profile ethical clothing brands use age in their
targeting , because many don ’ t ! 
Item 3 demonstrates how ethical issues can effectively be
used to underpin an exploration of strategic marketing
concepts . There are many marketing textbooks that
cover these concepts , either in a chapter as part of
an introductory text ( such as Brassington and Pettitt , 
Jobber or Kotler )  , or in a more detailed way in a strategic
marketing text ( such as Aaker , Baker or Brennan et . al . -
see further reading section )  . The company examples are
included in this item in order to provide some suggestions
for strategic analysis , asking questions such as what is the
company ’ s strategic brand positioning ; what is the level of
commitment of the organisation to an ethical supply chain , 
and so on . Other companies to add in here would be : Adili . 
com , Noir , Ciel , American Apparel and Gary Harvey . 
Using information from all three items , students can start
to consider the societal aspect of a business environment
analysis ( PESTLE )  , and how this is likely to present future
opportunities or threats for ethical clothing brands . 
Suggestions for Specific Learning Activities

Collect articles from newspapers and trade journals
•
•
about consumer boycotts , lobbying and sales response
to ethical fashion ranges : What evidence is there from
these that consumer attitudes are changing ? How have
companies responded to consumer actions and buying
behaviours ? 

Devise a questionnaire and conduct a small-scale survey
•
•
of consumer attitudes towards ethical clothing . Design
questions carefully to gain the most valuable data you
can get in a short space of time . Questions could
cover the following aspects : frequency of purchase of
ethical clothing ; expenditure levels ; avoidance of brands
considered unethical ; future intention to purchase ; 
different attitudes and behaviours of different consumer
groups , defined by age , gender , income , interest in fashion , 
etc .  ; different attitudes and behaviours according to
clothing category ( babyfood , for example , is a highly
successful organic food category ; is the same true of
baby clothes ?  )  . 

Conduct a focus group to look into the issue of
•
•
consumer confusion with ‘ ethical labelling ’  . Use products , 
labels and promotional material where possible to
prompt the discussion . Probe into reasons for purchasing
or not purchasing products when different ethical terms
are used to promote them . 
MARKETING
106
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Suggested Essay / Assignment Questions

Provide evidence to support the suggestion that fashion
•
•
consumers and producers are increasingly frequently
using ethical concerns in their decision-making . 

It no longer makes sense to consider the ‘ ethical
•
•
consumer ’ en masse . Using the concepts of segmentation
and targeting , provide an analysis of the UK consumer
market in terms of the different levels of commitment to
ethical consumption . 

For a fashion retailer or fashion brand of your choice , 
•
•
analyse its strategic positioning in the context of
appealing to the ethical consumer .  ( You must choose a
company that has some kind of ‘ ethical ’ offer .  ) 

What do you understand by the term ‘ greenwashing ’  ? 
•
•
How can you relate this idea to ethical issues in fashion
marketing ? 

Choose a fashion retailer / brand that currently does
•
•
not offer an ethical option and suggest how it could
introduce one . In doing so consider : the size of the range ; 
what the competition offers ; how the range should be
marketed ; and the supply chain strategy that should
be implemented to support the range . In choosing
the company to work with , the student will need to
consider if / why this company should introduce an ethical
range ; how interested current customers are likely to
be ; whether new customers will be attracted ; whether
an ethical range will fit with the current brand image . 
The choice of company therefore becomes part of the
assessment criteria . 
References
Brennan , R .  , Baines , P .  , Garneau , P . andVos , L .  ( 2008 ) 
Contemporary Strategic Marketing ( Second Edition )  , 
Basingstoke , Palgrave
Curry , A .  , Stevenson , G . and Goodacre , R .  ( 2008 ) Green
Consumer , Green Citizen ?  ,  . 
com / Pages / Article . aspx ? ArticleID = 2741 & Title = Green_
Consumer , _Green_Citizen ?  , accessed 18 / 07 / 08
Just-style . com ( 2006 ) United Kingdom : Who cares for
ethical clothing ;  . 
aspx ? ID = 93844 , accessed 26 / 05 / 08
Just-style ( 2008a ) Spain : Inditex close Bangladesh plant
after BBC probe ,  . 
aspx ? ID = 101172 , accessed 24 / 06 / 08
Just-style ( 2008b ) UK : Primark “ to lose customers ” post-
Panorama – survey ,  . 
aspx ? ID = 101270
Morgan , N .  ( 2008 ) Marks & Spencer is greenest brand , 

greenest_brand_by_a_huge_margin_04-04-08 / 
Porter , M . E .  ( 1985 ) Competitive Advantage , NewYork : Free
Press
Retail Bulletin ( 2007 ) Who is the typical ethical consumer ? 

80d672a811ed3b56da0b05e , accessed 01 / 03 / 07
107
Further Reading
Co-operative Ethical Consumer Report 2007Available at

consumer_report_2007 . pdf
Davies , B . and Ward , P .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Managing Retail Consumption ’ 
in The Social and Ecological Context , Chichester : Wiley
Chapter 16
RetailThinkTank White Paper . Available at http :  /  / www . 
retailthinktank . co . uk / news / news_releases / white_paper_-_
july_2007 / 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry Ethical Consumerism
Discussion Paper ( 2008 )  , Bristol : Labour Behind the Label . 
Available at ! file / Discus
sion + Paper + 1 + Ethical + Consumerism . pdf / 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2008 ) Conference Report : Ethics
of Fashion or Fashion of Ethics ?  , Bristol : Labour Behind the Label . 
Available at resources / 
reports / conference2008report / 
Textbooks
There are many textbooks that can be used for marketing
theory , but few that contextualise marketing within fashion
management . The following list of recommended texts is by
no means exhaustive . 
Aaker , D . A . and McLoughlin , D .  ( 2007 ) Strategic Market
Management , European Edition , Wiley
Baker , M .  ( 2007 ) Marketing Strategy and Management 
( 4th Edition )  , Palgrave Macmillan
Brassington , S . and Pettit , F .  ( 2006 ) Principles of Marketing 
( 4th Edition )  , FinancialTimes / Prentice Hall
Easey , M .  ( 2008 ) Fashion Marketing 
( 3rd Edition )  , Wiley Blackwell
Jobber , D .  ( 2006 ) Principles and Practice of Marketing 
( 5th Edition )  , McGrawHill
Kotler , P . and Keller , K .  ( 2008 ) Marketing Management 
( 13th Edition )  , Pearson Education
Websites
www . ethicalconsumer . org
www . headlightvision . com
www . just-style . com
www . theretailbulletin . com
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org
MARKETING
108
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Sourcing Ethically : Learning through
Presentations
Dr Claire Orwin , Senior Lecturer , Retail Buying , Department of Fashion & Textiles , 
De Montfort University , UK
cno @ dmu . ac . uk
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To critically discuss the ethical issues surrounding sourcing in fashion retailing . 
•
•
To develop students ’ abilities to present ideas effectively and professionally . 
•
•
To develop students ’ personal research skills . 
•
•
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Around 40
5 . Length of time required Two to three weeks
6 . Type of activity Group work , Student presentations , Ideas for projects , 
assignments and briefs , Discussion and debate , Research
related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing
8 . Topics covered Big business , Branding , Campaigns , Companies , 
Consumers , Corporate social responsibility , 
Environment , Ethical initiatives / brands , Prices , Supply
chains
109
Abstract
The paper details two mini-presentation activities designed
to introduce students to the ethical issues surrounding
sourcing in fashion retailing . The activities seek to both
educate students and invite debate over the concerns
currently being faced by the industry . The first activity
involves students developing a mini-presentation following
their own investigation into brands that have been criticised
for their sourcing activities , and the subsequent steps
which have been taken to try to safeguard workers from
exploitation . The second activity is based on researching
clothing brands that promote themselves as being either
ethical or environmentally sensitive . Students evaluate
their policies to determine how successful they believe
the company ’ s approach is . Students also consider how
brands criticised for their policies can learn from more
ethically orientated brands , and the benefits and problems
associated with adopting a more ethical approach . Finally , as
consumers can be said to be driving the trend towards low
prices and fast fashion , which can encourage a less ethical
approach to trading , students consider how consumers
can be influenced and encouraged to consider the ethics
behind the label . 
Background
The activities were designed for year two Retail Buying
students within the Department of Fashion & Textiles
at De Montfort University , the concept for the activities
arising from a wish to introduce ethical issues within the
curriculum . Rather than developing knowledge through
taught lectures , students were given self-directed learning
tasks to research brands criticised for their trading
policies as well as those commended for them , enabling
the students to engage further with the subject matter
and develop their own appreciation of the ethical issues
around sourcing fashion and ways in which information
is presented by the media . The task provided scope for
students to investigate brands of their choice , and hence
enabled them to relate the exercise to their specific area
of interest . They were able to gain an appreciation of the
criticisms faced by the fashion industry and an awareness
of what retailers and brands are doing positively to address
these issues , hence developing a more balanced view of
the situation . As students also considered the consumer ’ s
role , they questioned their own behaviour and developed
suggestions for how consumers may be positively
influenced to consider the ethics behind the label . 
Activity Requirements
The presentation activities do not require any prior
knowledge or background information on the subject . 
Students are required to be able to use presentation
software and to understand how to search effectively
for information . 
As there is such a wealth of easily accessible information
available in the public domain , students are not provided
with specific resources or reading lists , but encouraged to
develop their personal research skills by using newspaper , 
magazine and academic journal articles plus the Internet
and other electronic resources to develop their own list of
research resources . 
The Activities
Presentation Activity 1 
 “ Ethical sourcing is one of the most emotive issues
affecting the apparel industry today and , as more and
more companies seek to reduce costs by exporting
their manufacturing to countries with lower labour rates , 
the subject of exploitation and social accountability will
inevitably continue to be raised . And it is not just in Third
World factories where the problems lie , since many
allegations of poor working conditions have also surfaced in
the so-called developed markets too .  ” 
Dr . Keith Jones , A question of ethics , 13 Apr 2000 , 
Source : 
Task
Ethical trading has become a very important issue within
the textile and clothing industries . As companies source
from a variety of countries across the globe , there is a
marked difference in working conditions and payment
rates which can cause concern for companies involved
with suppliers . For your project you are requested to
complete the following : 
1 . 	
Visit a variety of local high street clothing retail stores
from the cheaper end of the market through to higher
priced stores . Consider the prices of particular types
of garments and look on the care labels to identify
where they were made . 
MARKETING
110
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
2 . 	
Using the selling price information , consider how the
revenue from that product might be apportioned
between the retailer and manufacturer . Taking a couple
of examples from your store visits , consider the price
that the supplier may be getting for the product and
how this might affect the wages paid to the employees
in the factory that made the product ( taking into
account that there is a cost for the raw materials
and the transportation of the product from where
it was made to where it is sold )  . Whilst for many
fashion products the retail price is three times more
than the price paid to the supplier for producing that
product , retail margins vary widely . Do higher selling
prices always mean manufacturers are being paid
more for the product ? It is argued by some that many
low priced products are made alongside products
for the higher priced brands , therefore is the selling
price always a true indicator of the price paid to
manufacturers and the wage paid to factory workers ? 
Collate this material for discussion . 
3 . 	
Consider the statement made by Keith Jones shown
above in light of the controversy faced by brands
such as Nike in the 1990s . Investigate ethical trading
and provide details of a brand which was criticised
for their trading polices , considering how companies
are now taking steps to ensure that workers are not
being exploited to produce their products . Write a five
minute PowerPoint presentation on this topic using
commercial examples where possible
The first presentation was designed for students to
research the topic individually and write their presentation
in their allocated self-directed learning time . The students
each gave five minute presentations using Microsoft
PowerPoint , followed by five minutes for questions and
changeover to the next speaker . 
Presentation Activity 2
Self-directed Study Task
Research clothing brands that promote themselves
as being either environmentally sensitive or based on
ethical trading . Choosing one as an example , collate
copies of the company ’ s marketing materials ( preferably
visual )  , and consider its policies and how successful you
believe the company is in its approach . 
The second presentation was done in the next session
in small groups of 3-6 and required students to create a
presentation on flip-chart paper . Ten minutes were given
to debrief the activity and organise students into groups 
( students may be organised according to the brand
chosen )  . Students were then given 40 minutes to develop
their group presentations , arranging the materials and the
format of their presentations . 
Presentation Task
Using flip-chart paper , create a mini-presentation to
include / address the following : 
Examples of the brand ’ s marketing material . 
•
What are its ethical and environmental policies ? 
•

How successful are its policies , i . e . are the retailers
•
genuinely providing a more ethical / environmentally
sound approach to business ? Or does the policy just
provide good PR and a point of differentiation ? 

How can brands criticised for their policies learn from
•
these brands , and what might be the benefits and the
problems associated with adopting such an approach ? 
Finally , consumers can be said to be driving the
trend towards low prices and fast fashion , which can
encourage a less ethical approach to trading . How do
you think consumers can be influenced to encourage
them to consider the ethics behind the label ? 
Each group was allowed a maximum of ten minutes for
its presentation . After each presentation questions were
encouraged from the whole group . 
111
Evaluation Criteria
The presentation activities were both designed to provide
formative feedback to the students . 
The evaluation of both presentations was based upon the
following : 
Background research of the subject . 
•
Use of examples . 
•
Grasp of the subject . 
•
Presentation structure and materials . 
•
Presentation style . 
•
Response to questions . 
•
In both activities , students were given an indicative grade
for their performance in each element of the criteria as
well as an overall grade . Written comments were also
provided for additional feedback . 
Activity Review
Students reacted very positively to the task , engaging well
with both activities . In the first presentation , there was
a tendency for students to focus on very similar brands
such as major sports brands . However , as the students
engaged further for the second presentation , they chose
to discuss many niche brands such as PeopleTree , Green
Knickers and EDUN as well as the larger brands like Marks 
& Spencer andTopshop . In terms of students ’ research skills , 
they were all able to find sufficient depth of information to
complete the task well . Students developed an awareness
of individual companies ’ codes of conduct as well as
organisations such as NRET ( Natural Resources and Ethical
Trade Programme )  , Clean Clothes Campaign , Labour
Behind the Label , and the ETI ( EthicalTrading Initiative )  . 
As the presentations were given in groups , students
were able to learn from each other as well as from their
own research . Students also became aware of their
responsibilities both as future buyers and consumers by
debating the role the consumer has to play in driving
demand for cheap fast fashion . Students highlighted a
lack of promotion by companies to develop consumers ’ 
awareness of the positive work some retailers are doing , 
and of the more ethical products available ; they suggested
retailers do more to promote these activities . Students
suggested the greater use of celebrities to drive the agenda
more into the mainstream . They also recognised the
necessity that products will succeed because they are good
fashion and not just because they are ethical or eco fashion . 
In terms of their presentation skills , students tended to fall
into the common pattern of working from a script for their
first presentation , which made their engagement with the
audience limited . However , during the second presentation , 
students had to present in a more spontaneous style , 
talking around their key points more freely and hence
demonstrated greater interaction with the audience . Once
highlighted , students were able to recognise how they
needn ’ t always rely on having prescribed notes to present
their work , and that a more discursive approach can create
a more dynamic presentation . Hence the activity also had
the subsidiary benefit of developing students ’ confidence in
their own presenting abilities . 
The only real difficulty found with undertaking such
activities was the length of time required to see students
present on an individual basis ( which was the premise of
the first presentation activity )  . It is , however , possible to
ask students to prepare a group presentation instead , an
option which I have also successfully used . 
In terms of achieving the learning outcomes , all have been
met in the author ’ s experience of running such activities , 
which have now been undertaken with different cohorts
of students . The activities provide an opportunity to
introduce ethical issues by giving students ownership of
their individual learning , and encouraging them to engage
fully with the subject matter . Students are able to develop
an awareness of the issues , which provides a foundation to
discuss more complex issues in the future . 
MARKETING
112
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Visual Display and Merchandising for an Ethical
Fashion Industry
Connie Ulasewicz , Assistant Professor , Apparel Design & Merchandising , San Francisco State University , 
USA , Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , PeoplewearSF , 
and Fashion Group International
cbu @ sfsu . edu
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To develop skills in designing and implementing window displays and shadow boxes using a variety of materials , 
•
•
props and mannequins . 

To apply the elements and principles of design to the analysis and development of promotional windows , signage
•
•
and / or displays . 

To critically assess , through a lens of social justice and responsibility , current advertising and promotional activities at
•
•
our university , in our local community , state , country and world . 
To create a window display that silently sells an ethical issue related to social responsibility in our fashion industry . 
•
•

Example Issue : To raise an understanding and awareness of current practices and conditions for garment
•
•
industry workers including agricultural practices , dyeing and printing , cutting and sewing , finishing and packaging . 

Example Issue : To raise an understanding and awareness of the ethical issues related to over-consumption
•
•
and waste . 
To verbally and visually explain and take suggestions for a design for a visual display . 
•
•
1 . Level FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required . 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students D . Specific knowledge required ( specified )  : Colour and
design
4 . Number of students 12-100
5 . Length of time required Semester
6 . Type of activity Group work , Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , 
Practical
7 . Discipline Marketing
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
113
Window displays are considered silent sellers in retailing . 
Traditionally window displays are designed using seasonable
merchandise with the primary objective to motivate
the passerby to enter , shop and purchase . Traditionally , in
visual merchandising or retailing classes , students are given
assignments to create window displays using elements and
principles of design to learn the skills of creating pleasing
displays that will sell merchandise . 
The focus of this assignment is for students to create
window displays with the primary objective to motivate
the passerby to stop , think and learn about some part or
process of ethical fashion creation . The design of the display
requires the same approach to planning and execution , yet
signage often becomes more critical as the viewer initially
will need more direction to grasp a concept , for example
ethical fashion , rather than if they like the color , fit , style or
look of a fashion item in a window . Uncomfortable issues
are often difficult to read about , yet dynamic displays can
instigate awareness and understanding that can actually
motivate more intelligent sales . Students will still grasp
an understanding of the interplay of the elements and
principles of design , as they create displays that silently
educate and stimulate the viewer to understand how social
responsibility and ethical issues are woven throughout the
fashion industry . 
In a semester class , all students have the same learning
objectives ( see section below )  , yet each pair of students
will approach the creation of their window in their own
unique way . By the end of the semester , the 6 , 12 , or 20
completed window displays have mentally , emotionally and
creatively changed the students and the viewers that pass
by the windows . 
Actual Materials Provided
1 . 	
Students must be provided with the actual space to
create the window displays in the department , library , 
bookstore or local merchants . 
2 . 	
Most of the actual display materials are found , 
borrowed and / or created by the students . 
3 . 	
Access to a computer lab is helpful to make effective
signage . 
Reading / Film Lists
With clear objectives , students tend to be very resourceful
in coming up with topics and ideas that they are curious
to research and in determining how to design an effective
display to sell their message . 
Student Instructions for Learning Activity
a . 	
Central to the themes of all window displays will be
the promotion and support of activities and events
relating to a socially responsible fashion industry , 
specifically themes of equity , diversity , social justice and / 
or sustainability . 
b . 	
Students will choose a partner for the research , design
and execution of each display . 
c . 	
A detailed sketch of the display and a materials list will
be presented to the instructor and the class one week
prior to the installation . Each student pair will have 10
minutes to show their sketch and materials list , and
interact with suggestions given by other class members . 
d . 	
Window displays are up for 1 week . Students are
responsible for all photos , signage and merchandise
before , during and after the window is completed . Each
pair is responsible for removing all items and cleaning
the space in time for the next display installation . 
e . 	
Displays must be checked throughout the entire week . 
This is a learning activity ; students may continue to
view , analyze , and make additions and adjustments
throughout the week . 
f . 	
Each student completes an evaluation sheet ; it must be
turned in after installation as it is the instructor ’ s guide
for understanding and grading the display . 
g . 	
Students should make sure they photograph their
displays ; these will be included in their senior portfolio . 
Students are encouraged to spend the time to take
several good photos . 
MARKETING
114
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Window Evaluation Criteria
Type or neatly write complete responses to each item below on a separate sheet and attach . 
Possible Points
1 . What is the theme of the window ? How does the viewer know the theme ? 		 15
2 . 	
Effectiveness of display ( rhythm , balance , emphasis , proportion , harmony / unity )  . 
Explain which you used , and how , in self-evaluation . 
Did you use length , width and height effectively ? 					 25
3 . Creativity / excitement - is it eye-catching , do people stop and look ? 
Explain the most creative part in self-evaluation . 					 15
4 . Use of props and materials - are they effective , do they overpower merchandise ? 
Are materials clean , pressed , aids hidden ? 
How is your name included in a professional , creative manner ? 20
			
5 . Display sketch and materials list – attach to this sheet . 					 10
6 . What specifically did you view and / or read that inspired this theme ? 				 5
7 . Self-evaluation - what specifically did you do for the window ? 
Describe how the creative process worked for you ; was it challenging , smooth , invigorating ? 
What will you do differently next time ? 									 10
									 100 points total
Feedback from Students 
 “ 
This is much more difficult than I expected . It was tough to decide on an idea as there were so many ethical issues to
•
choose from .  ”  
 “ 
This was a lot of fun . We got a lot of comments from people as we were installing our window about hemp . People still don ’ t
•
get that you can ’ t get high from wearing it .  ”  
 “ 
My boss was really interested in the statistics I was finding about denim production in China , she wants me to do a window
•
display in our store .  ” 
This activity has heightened the awareness in our university of how relevant and integral our fashion curriculum is in
meeting the university ’ s mission of teaching social justice . Viewing the window displays is not always comfortable as topics
chosen can be controversial , but the objective to motivate the passerby to stop , think and learn about some part or
process of ethical fashion creation is achieved . 
115
116
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Cross-Curricular Contents
116
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
117
117
CROSS CURRICULAR
118 Introduction
119	
Further information
Teaching materials
120	Reading lists according to theme
Caryn Simonson , Chelsea College of Art
and Design , UK
125 e-clips [ http : eclips . cornell . edu ] A video clip
database including socially responsible apparel
businesses
Suzanne Loker , Cornell University , USA
128 Moral development 			
Andrea Egger-Subotitsch , abif , Austria
133 Encouraging independent research through
examining contentious issues
Sarah McDonnell and Colin Wilson , 
Northumbria University , UK
137 Implementation of an introductory college course / 
curriculum : globalization and labor in textiles
Stacey Skold and Wendy Weiss , University of
Nebraska-Lincoln , USA
143 Thinking globally , acting locally : School project
Dorothea Odörfer , Modeschule Hallein , Austria
EthicalTrading Initiative , UK
118
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The teaching activities and case studies in this chapter can
be used within any fashion discipline to introduce a range
of social , environmental and economic sustainability issues . 
There ’ s a comprehensive reading list , ordered according to
key themes that arise in student dissertations around ethics
and sustainability , a higher education course outline and a
case study of a whole school approach . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry displays examples of students ’ 
work relating to sustainability on its website at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / studentwork /  . Your own
students may find inspiration in these pages . We would also
be very happy to receive images and information about
students ’ work in your own university , college or school for
consideration for the website . 
About the contributions in the
cross-curricular chapter
Caryn Simonson , Chelsea College of Art and Design , UK , 
provides Reading Lists According to Theme . Subjects
covered are : General Fashion books - global perspectives
and identity ; Gender ; Globalisation / Supply Chains / 
Markets ; Consumption ; Production ; Branding / Marketing ; 
Ethical – Workers / Trade Unions / Labour Rights ; Informal
industry ; Social Audits ; Slow Fashion , Slow Living , Well-Being , 
Emotional Design ; Sustainability ; Materials . 
In e-clips [ http : eclips . cornell . edu ] AVideo Clip Database
including Socially Responsible Apparel Businesses , 
Suzanne Loker from Cornell University , USA , describes
how the e-clips database can be used to illustrate concepts
related to socially responsible business , specifically apparel , 
using video clips from interviews with entrepreneurs noted
for their progressive approaches to socially responsible
business . e-clips [  ] is an open-access , 
searchable database of over 10 , 000 video clips ( usually 30
seconds to 3 minutes in length ) highlighting experiences
and advice from entrepreneurs in a variety of industries , 
including the apparel industry . The site explains a variety
of ways to use the clips , including technical directions , and
hosts some lectures and assignments that are “ ready to go .  ” 
In Moral Development , Andrea Egger-Subotitsch , from
abif , Austria , introduces moral dilemmas as a means to
help students develop their moral thinking by intensively
dealing with a dilemma . The dilemma discussion method
outlined consists of portraying a hypothetical dilemma
to the students that can only be resolved by deciding on
competing moral positions . In the course of an intensive
discussion , the students take a critical look at their own
value systems and the argumentation and value systems
of others . The important thing here is not ‘ right ’ or ‘ wrong ’ 
decisions but the way in which decisions are justified . 
Clear guidance is provided to educators to enable them
to develop their own dilemmas and to facilitate the
discussions . 
Sarah McDonnell and Colin Wilson , Northumbria
University , UK , describe the module and brief they have
developed in Encouraging Independent Research through
Examining Contentious Issues . The brief invites students
to identify a contentious issue and conduct independent
research . Through a series of set tasks , students produce
a fully referenced and educated argument , giving a holistic
view of the issue through a visual presentation , supported
by a written document that highlights their assigned
role / character ’ s opinion on the subject . Students are
Cross-Curricular Introduction
119
encouraged to develop their understanding of professional
practice in the design industries , within the context of
social , cultural , political , economic and technological change . 
Contentious issues that students have addressed have been
wide-ranging , including current political issues impacting
on society , and different design disciplines including fast
fashion , size 0 , politics of fake , ethics of labour , trade tariffs , 
authenticity of brand , reporting and news , sustainable
fashion and ecology of fashion textiles . 
Stacey Skold and Wendy Weiss , University of Nebraska-
Lincoln , USA , provide an outline of a course implemented
in the context of a Design Issues and Perspectives
graduate-level seminar . Students gain an insight into global
issues in relation to how garments are manufactured , and
the experience of the clothes we wear , through readings , 
research , seminar discussions , interactive activities and
visiting speakers . Students express resulting views and
opinions via a creative object or installation . These ideas are
presented in Implementation of an Introductory College
Course / Curriculum : Globalization and Labor in Textiles . 
In Thinking Globally , Acting Locally : School Project , 
Dorothea Odörfer from the Modeschule Hallein , Austria , 
describes how 120 students and 13 teachers from six
school classes were involved in a year-long Responsible
Consumption project . Various events were held during the
project including a fashion show , workshops for students , 
and a panel discussion involving local politicians and fair
trade organisations . In addition , the students developed a
label for local businesses relating to sustainability . 
Teaching Materials
There is information about a range of teaching resources , 
films , exhibitions and images on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website at 
resources /  . Also , see the Interactive Activities chapter for
relevant activities . 
CROSS-CURRICULAR
Further Information
120
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Reading Lists According to Theme
Caryn Simonson , Member of Textile Environment Design Research Group , Senior Lecturer and Theory
Co-ordinator , BA ( Hons ) Textile Design , Chelsea College of Art and Design , University of the Arts , UK
c . simonson @ chelsea . arts . ac . uk
1 . Level UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Book related , Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing
8 . Topics covered Branding , Campaigns , Companies , Consumers , 
Corporate social responsibility , Empathy , Environment , 
Gender , Globalisation , Informal work , Purchasing
practices , Slow Fashion , Supply chains , Textiles , Trade , 
Trade unions , Workers ’ rights , Working conditions
121
Abstract
Reading lists to assist educators and students research the
following topics are included here : 

General Fashion books - global perspectives
•
•
and identity
Gender
•
•
Globalisation / Supply Chains / Markets
•
•
Consumption
•
•
Production
•
•
Branding / Marketing
•
•
Ethical – Workers / Trade Unions / Labour Rights
•
•
Informal Industry
•
•
Social Audits
•
•
Slow Fashion , Slow Living , Well-Being , Emotional Design
•
•
Sustainability
•
•
Materials
•
•
General Fashion Books -
Global Perspectives and Identity
Breward , C . and Gilbert , D .  ( eds .  )  ( 2006 ) Fashion ’ s World
Cities , Oxford : Berg ( Cultures of Consumption series ) 
Colchester , C .  ( ed .  )  ( 2003 ) Clothing the Pacific , Oxford : Berg
Eicher , J . B .  , Evenson , S . L . and Lutz , H .  ( 2008 ) The Visible Self : 
Global Perspectives on Dress , Culture , and Society , 
NewYork : Fairchild Publications
Fashion Theory Journal , Oxford : Berg
Kaur , J . and Gale , C .  ( 2004 ) Fashion and Textiles : An Overview , 
Oxford : Berg
Kaur , J . and Gale , C .  ( 2002 ) The Textile Book , Oxford : Berg
Lynch , A . and Strauss , M .  ( 2007 ) Changing Fashion : A critical
Introduction to Trend Analysis and Meaning , Oxford : Berg
Niessen , S .  , Leshkowich , A . M . and Jones , C .  ( eds .  )  ( 2003 ) 
Re-Orienting Fashion : The Globalisation of Asian Dress , Oxford : 
Berg
Perani , J . and Wolff , N .  ( 1999 ) Cloth , Dress and Art Patronage
in Africa , Oxford : Berg
Rabine , L .  ( 2002 ) The Global Circulation of African Fashion , 
Oxford : Berg
Root , R .  ( ed .  )  ( 2005 ) The Latin American Fashion Reader , 
Oxford : Berg
Welters , W . and Lillethun , A .  ( eds .  )  ( 2007 ) The Fashion
Reader , NewYork : Berg
Gender
Ascoly , N . and Finney , C .  ( eds .  )  ( 2005 ) Made by Women : 
Gender , the Global Garment Industry and the Movement for
Women Workers ’ Rights , Amsterdam : Clean
Clothes Campaign
Balakrishnan , R .  ( ed .  )  ( 2001 ) The Hidden Assembly Line : 
Gender Dynamics of Subcontracted Work in a Global
Economy , Kumarian Press
Elinor , G . et al ( eds .  )  ( 1987 ) Women and Craft , 
London : Virago
Kabeer , N .  ( 2000 ) The Power to Choose : Bangladeshi Women
and Labour Market Decisions in London and Dhaka , New
York : Verso
Livingstone , J . and Ploof , J .  ( eds .  )  ( 2007 ) The Object of Labor : 
Art , Cloth , and Cultural Production , Chicago : School of the Art
Institute of Chicago Press
Raworth , K .  ( 2004 ) Trading Away our Rights : Women Working
in Global Supply Chains , Oxford : Oxfam International http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / reports / taor / 
Globalisation / Supply Chains / Markets
Patrik Aspers ’ texts below can be downloaded from his
website : www . mpifg . de / people / pa / publ_en . asp
Aspers , P .  “ Ethics in Global Garment Market Chains ”  , in
Stehr , N .  , Henning , C . and Weiler , B .  ( eds .  )  ( 2006 )  , The
Moralization of Markets , London : 
Transaction Press pp . 287-307
Aspers , P .  “ Global Garment Markets in Chains ”  , European
Economic Sociology : Electronic Newsletter ( 2006 )  , 7 , 
3 : 18-22
Eriksen , T . H .  ( 2007 ) Globalization : The Key Concepts , 
Oxford : Berg
Lechner , F . J . and Boli , J .  ( eds .  )  ( 2000 ) The Globalization
Reader , Malden , MA : Blackwell
Ritzer , G .  ( ed .  )  ( 2006 ) McDonaldization : The Reader ,  
( 2nd Edition ) Thousand Oaks , CA : Pine Forge Press
CROSS-CURRICULAR
122
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Consumption
Baudrillard , J .  ( 1998 ) The Consumer Society : Myths and struc-
tures , London : Sage
Bauman , Z .  ( 2008 ) Does Ethics have a Chance in a World of
Consumers ?  , Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press
Bocock , R .  ( 1993 ) Consumption : Key Ideas , 
London : Routledge
Braham , P .  ‘ Fashion : Unpacking a Cultural Production ’ 
In Barnard , M .  ( ed .  )  ( 2007 ) Fashion Theory , NewYork : 
Routledge
Campbell , C .  ‘ I Shop therefore I Know that I Am ’ in Ekstrom , 
K . M . and Brembeck , H .  ( eds .  )  ( 2004 ) Elusive Consumption , 
Oxford : Berg , pp . 27-44
Clarke , D .  , Doel , M . and Housiaux , K .  ( eds .  )  ( 2003 ) The
Consumption Reader , London : Routledge
Dant , T .  ‘ Consuming or Living withThings ’ in Barnard , M .  
( ed .  )  ( 2007 ) Fashion Theory , NewYork : Routledge
Ekstrom , K . M . and Brembeck , H .  ( eds .  )  ( 2004 ) Elusive
Consumption , Oxford : Berg
Featherstone , M .  ( 2007 ) Consumer Culture and
Postmodernism , Los Angeles , CA : Sage
Featherstone , M .  ( 1995 ) Undoing Culture : globalization , 
postmodernism and Identity , London : Sage
Gabriel , Y . and Lang , T .  ( 2006 ) The Unmanageable Consumer ,  
( 2nd edition ) London : Sage Publications
Gardner , C . and Sheppard , J .  ( 1989 ) Consuming Passion : The
Rise of Retail Culture , London : Unwin Hyman
Lury , C .  ( 1996 ) Consumer Culture , Cambridge : Polity Press
McCracken , G .  ( 1990 ) Culture and Consumption , 
Bloomington : Indiana University Press
Miller , D .  ( 1987 ) Material Culture and Mass Consumption , 
Oxford : Blackwell
Princen , T .  , Maniates , M . and Conca , K .  ( eds .  )  ( 2002 ) 
Confronting Consumption , The MIT Press : 
Cambridge , Massachusetts
Rosenblatt , R .  ( ed .  )  ( 1999 ) Consuming Desires : Consumption , 
Culture , and the Pursuit of Happiness , Washington , DC : Island
Press
Schor , J . and Holt , D .  ( eds .  )  ( 2000 ) The Consumer Society
Reader , NewYork : New Press
Veblen , T .  ( 1970 ) The Theory of the Leisure Class : An Economic
Study of Institutions , London : Allen and Unwin
Production
Amin , A .  ( ed .  )  ( 1994 ) Post Fordism : A Reader , 
Oxford : Blackwell
Benkler , Y .  ( 2006 ) The Wealth of Networks : How Social
Production Transforms Markets and Freedom , London : Yale
University Press
Debord , G .  ( transl . Nicholson-Smith , D .  )  ( 2008 ) A Sick
Planet , London : Seagull Books
www . fairtrade . org . uk -The Fairtrade Foundation is
the independent non-profit organisation that licenses
use of the FAIRTRADE Mark on products in the UK in
accordance with internationally agreed Fairtrade standards . 
Hall , S . et al .  ( ed .  ) Modernity : An Introduction to Modern
Societies , NewYork : Wiley-Blackwell
Harney , A .  ( 2008 ) The China Price : The True Cost of Chinese
Competitive Advantage , London : The Penguin Press
www . ifat . org – World FairTrade Organisation , a network
of more than 350 FairTrade Organisations in 70 countries . 
Their mission is to improve the livelihoods and well-being
of disadvantaged producers by linking and promoting Fair
Trade Organisations , and speaking out for greater justice in
world trade . 
Livingstone , J . and Ploof , J .  ( eds .  )  ( 2007 ) The Object of Labor : 
Art , Cloth , and Cultural Production , Chicago : School of the Art
Institute of Chicago
Branding / Marketing
Aspers , P .  ( 2006 ) Markets in Fashion : A Phenomenological
Approach , London : Routledge
Klein , N .  ( 2001 ) No Logo : No Space , No Choice , No Jobs , 
London : Flamingo
Lury , C .  ( 2004 ) Brands : The Logos of the Global Economy , 
London : Routledge
123
Ethical – Workers / Trade Unions / Labour Rights
Aspers , P .  ( 2006 ) The Altruistic Donor and the Opportunistic
Well-doer : Labelling Fashion Markets in Theory and Practice , 
London : Research Centre for Fashion , the Body and
Material Cultures at University of the Arts London
Blood Sweat and T-Shirts , BBC3 , episodes May 2008 http :  /  / 
www . bbc . co . uk / thread / blood-sweat-tshirts / 
www . cleanclothes . org –The Clean Clothes Campaign is
an international campaign , focused on improving working
conditions in the global garment and sportswear industries , 
and empowering the workers in it . 
www . ethicaltrade . org –The EthicalTrading Initiative ( ETI ) is
an alliance of companies , non-governmental organisations 
( NGOs ) and trade union organisations that promotes
and improves the implementation of corporate codes of
practice covering supply chain working conditions . Their
stated goal is to ensure that the working conditions of
workers producing for the UK market meet or exceed
international labour standards . 
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org – Fashioning an Ethical
Industry is a project of Labour Behind the Label that aims
to work with educators on fashion related courses to
embed issues relating to workers in the garment industry
into curricula . 
www . labourbehindthelabel . org – Labour Behind the Label
supports garment workers ’ efforts worldwide to defend
their rights . 
Livingstone , J . and Ploof , J .  ( eds .  )  ( 2007 ) The Object of Labor : 
art , cloth , and cultural production , Chicago : School of the
Art Institute of Chicago Press
Panorama : Primark on the Rack , BBC1 , 9pm ; 23
June 2008 , 
panorama / 7461496 . stm
Rivoli , P .  ( 2005 ) The Travels of a T-shirt in the Global Economy : 
An economist examines the markets , power , and politics of
world trade , Hoboken , NJ : Wiley
Ross , A .  ( ed .  )  ( 1997 ) No Sweat : Fashion , free trade , and the
rights of garment workers , NewYork : Verso
Informal Industry
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2006 ) Factsheet 7 . Informal
Work : Short-term and Precarious
Social Audits
EthicalTrading Initiative ( 2006 ) Getting Smarter at Auditing : 
Tackling the Growing Crisis in Ethical Trade Auditing , ETI , http :  /  / 
www . ethicaltrade . org / Z / lib / 2006 / 11 / smart-audit / index . 
shtml
Hearson , M .  ( 2007 ) Lets Clean Up Fashion : The State of Pay
Behind the UK High Street , Labour BehindThe Label , http :  /  / 
www . cleanupfashion . co . uk / 
www . impacttlimited . com - Making what ’ s good for business
work for workers - Website that defines its aim thus :  
 “ Impactt helps companies to improve labour standards in
their supply chains in a way that makes business sense .  ” 
Pruett , D .  ( 2005 ) Looking For a Quick Fix : How Weak Social
Auditing is Keeping Workers in Sweatshops , Clean Clothes
Campaign resources / 
reports / quickfix / 
Slow Fashion / Slow Living / Well-Being / 
Emotional Design
Chapman , J .  ( 2005 ) Emotionally Durable Design , London : 
Earthscan
Craig , G . and Parkins , W .  ( 2006 ) Slow Living , Oxford : Berg
www . designandemotion . org -The Design and Emotion
Society raises issues and facilitates dialogue among
practitioners , researchers and industry in order to integrate
salient themes of emotional experience into the design
profession . 
Dittmar , H .  ( 2008 ) Consumer Culture , Identity and Well-Being : 
The Search For the ‘ Good Life ’ and the ‘ Body Perfect ’  , Hove 
( England )  ; NewYork : Psychology Press
Fletcher , K .  ( 2008 ) Sustainable Fashion and Textiles : Design
journeys , London : Earthscan
Honoré , C .  ( 2005 ) In Praise of Slow : How a Worldwide
Movement is Challenging the Cult of Speed , London : Orion
Johnson , D . and Foster , H .  ( eds .  )  ( 2007 ) Dress Sense : 
Emotional and Sensory Experiences of the Body and Clothes , 
Oxford : Berg
CROSS-CURRICULAR
124
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Miller , D .  ( ed .  )  ( 1998 ) Material Cultures : Why Some Things
Matter , London : Routledge
Van Hinte , E . et al .  ( 2004 ) EternallyYours : Time in design , 
Rotterdam 0_0 Publishers
Sustainability
Birkeland , J .  ( 2002 ) Design for Sustainability , 
London : Earthscan
Black , S .  ( 2008 ) Eco-Chic : The Fashion Paradox , London : 
Blackdog Publishing
Chapman , J . and Gant , N .  ( eds .  )  ( 2007 ) Designers , Visionaries
and Other Stories : A Collection of Sustainable Design Essays , 
London : Earthscan
Cudworth , E .  ( 2002 ) Environment and Society , 
London : Routledge
Datschefski , E .  ( 2001 ) The Total Beauty of Sustainable
Products , Crans-Près-Céligny : RotoVision
Eco Textile News ( periodical since 2007 ) Pontefract : 
Mowbray Communications
Fletcher , K .  ( 2008 ) Sustainable Fashion and Textiles : Design
Journeys , London : Earthscan
Giesen , B .  ( 2008 ) Ethical Clothing : New Awareness or Fading
Fashion Trend , Saarbrucken : VDMVerlag
Hethorn , J . and Ulasewicz , C .  ( eds .  )  ( 2008 ) Sustainable
Fashion - Why Now ?  : A Conversation Exploring Issues , 
Practices , and Possibilities , Oxford : Berg
Jackson , T .  ( ed .  )  ( 2006 ) The Earthscan Reader in Sustainable
Consumption , London : Earthscan
Manzini , E . and Jégou , J .  ( 2003 ) Sustainable Everyday : 
Scenarios of Urban Life , Milano : Ambiente
Manzini , E .  ,  -
Ezio Manzini ’ s blog
McDonough , W . and Braungart , M .  ( 2002 ) Cradle to Cradle : 
Remaking The Way We Make Things , NewYork : 
North Point Press
Palmer , A . and Clark , H .  ( eds .  )  ( 2004 ) Old Clothes , New
Looks : Second-hand Fashion , Oxford : Berg
Papanek , V .  ( 1995 ) The Green Imperative , London : Thames
and Hudson
Walker , S .  ( 2006 ) Sustainable by Design : Explorations in
Theory and Practice , London : Earthscan
Materials
Hibbert , R .  ( 2004 ) Textile Innovation : Interactive , 
Contemporary and Traditional Materials ( 2nd Edition )  , 
London : Line
Manzini , E .  ( 1989 ) The Material of Invention , Cambridge , 
MA : MIT Press
www . pan-uk . org - Pesticide Action Network works to
eliminate the dangers of toxic pesticides , exposure to them , 
and their presence in the environment where people live
and work . Nationally and globally , PAN UK promotes safer
alternatives , the production of healthy food , and
sustainable farming . 
www . rematerialise . org - Sustainable materials collection
based at Kingston University UK . 
Slater , K .  ( 2003 ) Environmental Impact of Textiles : Production , 
Processes and Protection , Cambridge : Woodhead
www . sustainablecotton . org - Sustainable Cotton Project
focuses on the production and use of cotton , one of
the most widely grown and chemical-intensive crops in
the world . 
www . tedresearch . net -TED : Textile Environment Design
research based at Chelsea College of Art and Design UK . 
125
e-clips [ http : eclips . cornell . edu ]  : A Video Clip
Database including Socially Responsible
Apparel Businesses
Suzanne Loker , Professor Emerita , Cornell University , USA
sl135 @ cornell . edu
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 20 seconds to 5 minutes per video clip
6 . Type of activity Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , Book related , 
Discussion and debate , Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing
8 . Topics covered Corporate social responsibility , Entrepreneurship , 
Environment , Ethical initiatives / brands , Student / 
educator defined , Textiles , Trade
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To illustrate concepts related to socially responsible business , specifically apparel , using video clips from interviews
•
•
with entrepreneurs noted for their progressive approach to socially responsible business . 
CROSS-CURRICULAR
126
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
e-clips [  ] is an open-access , 
searchable database of video clips highlighting experiences
and advice from entrepreneurs in a variety of industries , 
including the apparel industry . It was created for use in the
classroom . Cornell University ’ s Dr . Deb Streeter developed
the original concept : to create a “ virtual panel ” of experts , 
to be used to stimulate discussion , illustrate concepts , and
create a real-world feel in teaching entrepreneurship1 
. 
Streeter videotaped interviews with numerous
entrepreneurs over the past decade for the collection
and encouraged others to add videotaped interviews . I
contributed over 25 sets of video clips from interviews
with apparel entrepreneurs to the collection . With a library
technology grant , Streeter led our three-person team
in creating the e-clips database that is now available for
anyone to use in an online , searchable format . 
Cornell University Libraries support the database , 
providing access to over 10 , 000 video clips ( usually 30
seconds to 3 minutes in length ) that can be searched using
the entrepreneur ’ s name , business , 147 business topics , 
419 business themes , and special collections , including
the fiber science and apparel design industry collection , 
and 45 clips each on the social responsibility and social
entrepreneurship topics . It is accompanied by full text
transcripts that allow easy quoting for lectures , papers , and
reference . 
The most impressive part of the online site is its versatility
for instructional use . The site explains a variety of ways
to use the clips , including technical directions , and hosts
some lectures and assignments that are “ ready to go .  ” 
It has different interfaces for instructors , students , and
entrepreneurs , supporting instructor uses in lectures and
reading assignments , and students ’ applications in writing
assignments , team projects , and independent research . 
I will summarize some of these below along with examples
of interviews relating to social responsible apparel
businesses . 
Instructor Applications
The flexibility of having clips ( as opposed to feature-length
video ) allows the instructor to intersperse the digital video
material with the text-based or discussion-based exposition
in the classroom . The clips are inserted into PowerPoint
presentations and played ( when appropriate ) in combination
and alternation with other conceptual material .  
(  ) 
I . Concept-based Learning
The searchable functions of e-clips facilitate easy
development of a set of video clips based on concepts and
subject areas . It has also divided the collection into themes , 
topics , collections , entrepreneurs , and business titles . For
social responsibility , the topics include social responsibility 
( 52 clips )  , corporate responsibility ( 146 clips )  , social
entrepreneurship ( 52 clips )  , environmental management 
( 69 clips )  , sustainability and sustainable enterprise ( 435
clips )  , sustainable innovation ( 40 clips )  , and more general
topics such as mission , leadership , and ethics . Although the
clips in these topic areas range across many industries and
business types , some lessons in social responsibility can
be learned outside our industry . Collections have been
organized in apparel design and fashion ( 726 clips ) and
socially responsible entrepreneurship ( 1203 clips ) that
provide another search approach . 
The full-text transcripts accompanying the clips are also
useful for preparing lectures , quoting in papers and course
assignments , and saving the content in a second format . In
addition , the e-clips website provides several suggestions
and directions for the use of the clips , and packaged sets of
video clips for easy use . 
II . Lectures and Discussion
I have used video clips extensively in lectures and
discussion , both in the classroom and in web-based
courses to illustrate particular concepts relating to social
responsibility . The clips can easily be incorporated into a
PowerPoint presentation ( the e-clips website provides
step-by-step instructions ) or as a stand-alone media
set that highlights an individual business or a variety of
approaches to a specific socially responsible issue . 
1
content . do ? page = About
127
For example , I used clips from Michael Crooke , former
Chief Executive Officer of Patagonia , to describe the way
the company built its business based on socially responsible
practices ( e . g . adopting organic cotton , paying employees
for time spent volunteering for environmental groups , and
building a corporate headquarters with environmentally
responsible materials and strategies )  , rather than starting a
business and then incorporating several socially responsible
practices . I used clips from Natalie Chanin from Alabama
Chanin , and Bena Burda from Maggie ’ s Organics , to
describe two different approaches : a ) to develop and
structure fair labor practices ; and b ) to organize distribution
channels . 
III . Online Tutorials
During my web-based courses , I incorporated video clips
into my PowerPoint lectures , asking the students to view
the clips , and including discussion about the clips in the
lecture . I also used them as the basis for online discussion
board topics , asking the students to search the e-clips
database to find clips of interest , and then to summarize
what they learned from the topics with the other students . 
Student-accessed Applications
I . Assigned Clips
To introduce the students to the e-clips web site , I ask
students to access the site and register , select the social
responsibility topic area , find 1-3 video clips of interest , and
watch them . Then , during class or in an online discussion , 
I direct the discussion to share the ideas about social
responsibility that emerged from the clips . This has been a
very effective method based on the engaged and animated
summaries provided by the students , and the interest
expressed in questions and discussion by other students . 
This introduction also enables and encourages students to
use the site in later assignments . 
II . Student Assignments
The e-clips site recommends and facilitates a teaching
technique called “ listening lists ”  , an extension of bookmarks . 
Students can create their own listening lists to illustrate a
particular concept or as part of a multi-media assignment
related to social responsibility . These lists can be stored
and accessed by the instructor or other students . For
example , I assigned students to identify one business
that demonstrated best practices in social responsibility , 
write a short summary ( about one page ) of the social
responsibility approach and its significance , and turn in
the listening list of 5-10 clips that supports their choice . 
The assignment requires analysis of a socially responsible
practice through a particular business ’ s experience . 
III . Student Learning
I found that students accessed e-clips during the courses
to provide examples in their assignments and to investigate
topics other than social responsibility . I suspect they
use e-clips in other courses . It is a living database that
continues to grow and provide real-life examples of socially
responsible business practices among others . 
Several Suggested Clips related to Social
Responsibility in Apparel
Michael Crooke , former CEO of Patagonia 
( recorded while holding title ) 
Natalie Chanin , co-founder of Project Alabama and
currently Alabama Chanin
Bena Burda , owner and CEO of Maggie ’ s Organics
Chris Mackin , former CEO of Sweat-X 
( recorded while holding title ) 
CarolYoung , designer / owner of undesigned by CarolYoung
Amy Hall , corporate responsibility director of Eileen Fisher
CROSS-CURRICULAR
128
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Moral Development
Andrea Egger-Subotitsch , abif – analyses , consulting and interdisciplinary research , Austria
egger @ abif . at
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required . 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required . 
4 . Number of students 5 to 25
5 . Length of time required 90 minutes ( short version of 50-60 minutes also
included ) 
6 . Type of activity Group work , Student presentations , Discussion and
debate , 
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Development of moral thinking . 
•
•
129
Moral Development in Youth
Human development and growing up is a gradual process . 
Ever since the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget specified
his theory on the stages of intelligence development
in the middle of the 20th Century , most development
psychologists agree on this . The development of ‘ moral
judgement ’ and ‘ religious judgement ’ occur gradually just like
reasoning and spatial thinking . The reason moral judgement
is referred to here and not ethics or religion is that the
process of thinking is prevalent , not the resulting decision . It
is important how one argues , and which or whose norms
are being considered . 
Pre-school children already make a difference between
good and evil , and between right and wrong : Right is what
Mom and Dad say . There are no exceptions to the rule . 
Only later , in the course of growing up , and mostly through a
disruption of the previously understood worldview ( all of a
sudden mom and dad are not always right )  , new aspects are
consulted and the moral judgement is passed on to a higher
stage of development and based on different arguments . 
Lawrence Kohlberg , whose work is based on Piaget ’ s
theories , thinks that moral development does not necessarily
end on attaining adulthood , but continues throughout life . 
Accordingly , the following age statements in Kohlberg ’ s stages
of moral development are rough guidelines : 
Pre-conventional stage ( infant age ) 

Stage 1 : Orientation along punishment and obedience : 
•
Whatever is not punished is good . 

Stage 2 : Purpose-means-thinking : Whatever is rewarded
•
is good . 
Conventional stage ( school age ) 

Stage 3 : Orientation along the maintenance of good
•
relations (  ‘ I am loved , when I am a good and brave child ’  )  . 

Stage 4 : Orientation along law and order . 
•
Post-conventional , autonomous stage ( teenagers ) 

Stage 5 : Orientation along the social contract : It is good
•
to support the basic rights as well as basic values and
contracts of a society , even if they collide with specific
rules and laws of a social sub-system . 

Stage 6 : Orientation along universally valid , ethical
•
principles ( Kant ’ s Categorical Imperative )  .  
( For more details in German see : http :  /  / arbeitsblaetter . 
stangl-taller . at / MORALISCHEENTWICKLUNG / 
KohlbergTabelle . shtml ) 
The transition to a higher stage usually occurs because
of a ‘ disruption ’ of the present stage , old perceptions and
regulations no longer work , new perceptions and ways
of thinking are added , etc . This happens either in actual
situations when facing a dilemma , in the handling of them
or whenever people exchange , debate and have time to
reflect . This is exactly what lecturers can take advantage
of by having the students discuss critical situations – moral
dilemmas . The ‘ moral dilemma ’ is also a scientific method
used to determine the stages of moral development . 
Here , it is to help students develop their moral thinking by
intensively dealing with a dilemma . Through the discussion
the students can reach a higher level ( stage ) of moral
thinking , for example from stage 4 to stage 5 . 
The Dilemma – An Example
A dilemma exists when there are at least two
contradictory principles ( moral principles , values )  . A
dilemma can only be resolved if one of these principles is
violated . Such dilemmas raise the question , which principle
can be violated or restricted and by which other moral
principles is this justified ? 
The following dilemma was developed for this publication : 
Maria , a woman aged 28 , started to work for an international
fashion company four months ago . Her boss offered her the
opportunity to develop a project : she has to arrange all the
fabric for the production of the new summer collection of
women ’ s t-shirts . She has to buy all the materials , organize
transportation , and so on . This project is her big chance to
secure her future within the company and have any chance of
meeting her targets and getting her bonus . 
The project must be a success for her . But a problem occurs . 
There is US $60 , 000 left in the project budget but she cannot
afford to buy the required amount of black fabric with this . 
She has already asked her boss and colleagues where to buy
cheaper fabric . But no one knows or can help her . She has got
just two weeks to find the fabric . The only option she can find
at the right price is to buy the fabric from a factory in China , 
which is rumoured to have child labour , low wages and poor
working conditions . She can ’ t find out anything about the
CROSS-CURRICULAR
130
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
environmental impact of the dyes . The fabric is within budget
and her timescale . 
Should Maria buy the fabric or not ? 
The answer to this question can only be ‘ buy ’ or ‘ not buy ’  . 
This is the first question to start the dilemma discussion . 
Every student has to find her / his own answer . Before
beginning the discussion , the participants have to decide
whether Maria should buy the fabric or not . The discussion
happens in small groups of supporters and opponents . Later
on the discussion can be supported by questions like ‘ Why ?  ’  
 ‘ What would it mean , if everyone did that ?  ’  ‘ What will other
people say ?  ’  ‘ What consequences does this have ?  ’ etc . 
This dilemma only serves as an example to encourage
educators to create their own dilemmas for their classes . 
There is plenty of inspiration for moral dilemmas to be
drawn from the fashion sector . 
The Dilemma Discussion for Classrooms
As an educator you may have already established a set of
rules for group discussions . If not , it may be helpful to clarify
beforehand the importance of ‘ letting people finish ’ and 
 ‘ listening ’  . You can also choose one person in each group to
be an observer who writes down the arguments . 
The dilemma discussion method consists of portraying
a hypothetical dilemma to the students that can only be
resolved by deciding on competing moral positions . In the
course of an intensive discussion the students take a critical
look at their own value systems and the argumentation and
value systems of others . The important thing here is not 
 ‘ right ’ or ‘ wrong ’ decisions but the way in which decisions
are justified . 
In the following , there is a description of a short version
of the dilemma discussion of approximately 50-60 minutes
and Lind ’ s long version of 90 minutes . 
Steps for the long version
Scheme of activity of a moral dilemma discussion : 
Source : 
unterrichtsmaterialien / dilemma / index_html
131
Time 
( mins ) 
Activity Learning targets [ Motivation phase ] 
0 Learning to understand the moral dilemma ( present , read and let
students retell ) and elaborate the ‘ core of the dilemma ’  
[ Support ] 
1 . The students are acquainted with the broader
circumstances of the dilemma and
2 . Learn to understand the ( moral ) dilemma and to
put themselves into the actors ’ position . 
15 Let the students vote on the solution to the dilemma (  ‘ Who
votes for .  .  .  ?  ’  ‘ Who votes against .  .  .  ?  ’ OR :  ‘ What behaviour is right or
wrong ?  ’  )  . 
Form pro- and contra-groups ; if the groups are not equal : repeat
the presentation of the dilemma emphasising the part with fewer
votes ; if necessary , modify the dilemma so that some of the
participants switch to the ‘ smaller ’ camp .  
[ Challenge ] 
3 . Exposing one ’ s opinion on a controversy publicly . 
4 . Learning to understand the difference between
a decision made under pressure and one made
without pressure . 
5 . Learning to appreciate the diversity of opinions on
a moral problem . 
30 Form groups of 3-4 students of the same opinion , who exchange
the reasons for their opinion and gather new ones .  
[ Support ] 
6 . Learning to recognise like-minded people as a
source of support . 
7 . Learning to see others ’ arguments as a source of
strengthening one ’ s own position . 
40 Discussion of pros and cons in plenary . The lecturer explains the
rules of the discussion ; the groups of opposing opinions sit across
from each other ; one participant from each group repeats the
group ’ s opinion and some of the reasons for it . After this ,  ‘ battling ’ 
with arguments begins : when one person in one group is finished , 
he / she picks someone from the other group to present his / her
argument . 
In this phase the educator serves almost exclusively as a host ; he / 
she only makes sure the discussion rules are being observed .  
[ Support ] 
8 . Learning to recognise like-minded people as a
source of support . 
9 . Learning to see others ’ arguments as a source of
strengthening one ’ s own position .  
[ Challenge ] 
10 . Learning to appreciate public debates on real
moral issues . 
11 . Learning to make oneself heard ; learning to
present one ’ s own arguments precisely . 
12 . Learning to carefully listen to others . 
13 . Learning to differentiate between the quality of
arguments ( which is sometimes very upsetting ) and
of people 
( who should always be treated respectfully )  . 
70 Further group phase : Evaluation of the opposition ’ s arguments . 
Which of these arguments are acceptable ?  
[ Support ] 
14 . Discussing with like-minded people how far one
can / should accommodate different-minded people . 
75 Plenary : One spokesperson from each group reports on the best
argument of the opposition ; maybe rank the arguments .  
[ Challenge and Support ] 
15 . Learning to appreciate good arguments even if
they come from the opposition . 
80 Final vote to decide which decision the person facing the dilemma
should take .  
[ Challenge ] 
16 . Appreciating criticism of one ’ s own position . 
17 . Learning that controversial discussions about
serious problems can add to life quality . 
85 Enquire : How did the participants perceive the discussion ? As a
benefit ? What was the supposed objective of the lesson ? What did
the students learn about themselves and their classmates ? Clarify
that the focus is not on the final decision but on the process of
the discussion , on the mutual exchange . In dilemma situations
there is no right or wrong – otherwise they would not be
dilemmas ! Only by becoming acquainted with one ’ s own , as well
as others ’ opinions , is development possible . It is acceptable , not
reprehensible , to change your opinion , as long as you can reason it .  
[ Support ] 
18 . Realising the development oneself and others
have experienced through the dilemma discussion . 
90 End of dilemma lesson
CROSS-CURRICULAR
132
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Steps for the short version : 
1 . Explaining , presenting , reading , etc .  , the dilemma .  
( Clarify possible rules for group discussion .  ) 
2 . Let the students vote on the solution to the dilemma 
(  ‘ Who votes for .  .  .  ?  ’  ‘ Who votes against .  .  .  ?  ’ OR :  ‘ What
behaviour is right or wrong ?  ’  )  . Divide the class into two
groups , one that supports and one that opposes the
decision . The ones who cannot make up their minds at
all are nominated observers with the assignment to note
the arguments of the subsequent group discussion . The
groups consist of students with opposing opinions .  ( If
the sample vote shows that one group is much bigger
than the other , repeat the presentation of the dilemma
emphasising the part with fewer votes ; if necessary , 
modify the dilemma so that some of the participants
switch to the ‘ smaller ’ camp .  ) 
3 . Discussion in small groups . 
4 . The observers present the arguments to the class . 
You can discuss the question of what is ‘ behind ’ the
arguments with the whole class ( values , sense of justice , 
norms , laws , etc .  )  . 
5 . Finally , clarify that the focus is not on the final decision
but on the process of the discussion , on the mutual
exchange . In dilemma situations there is no right or
wrong – otherwise they would not be dilemmas ! Only
by becoming acquainted with one ’ s own , as well as
others ’ opinions , is development possible . It is acceptable , 
not reprehensible , to change your opinion , as long as you
can reason it . 
Remark : Thinking and making decisions according to certain
moral guidelines is not the same as acting according
to them . The development psychologist , Oser , regularly
noticed a difference in the stages when discussing a
hypothetical dilemma or reflecting on a dilemma of one ’ s
own experience and then arguing that decision . Moral
thinking is mostly located on a higher level than moral
behaviour . 
Tips for educators : 

Test your self-created dilemma in a small circle of
•
•
acquaintances . 

You can put your students in an emotionally affected
•
•
state before the dilemma discussion by showing a critical , 
sad , dramatic but realistic movie or documentary ; or use
newspaper articles . 

The greatest learning effect is reached when the dilemma
•
•
provokes moderate moral emotions . On the one hand
these emotions should be strong enough to make
students curious and eager to learn , but on the other
hand should not be overly strong so that protective and
defensive mechanisms interfere . Therefore , such dilemmas
usually involve fictitious persons , in order to keep the
emotional stress of the participants low . 

The dilemma should be somewhat realistic and drawn
•
•
from life . That means there should be a possibility
that the students will face such a decision themselves
sometime in the future ( i . e . purchase of a cheap batch
of textiles which have been produced under inhumane
conditions , in order to secure their own and / or their
family ’ s existence )  . 

Stay neutral as an educator and allow all arguments to
•
•
be put forward . Do not pass value judgements on the
students ’ statements . Development is a process that
starts only after the discussion ! 
Sources 
 
. 
htm # edukativ 
. 
htm # video

material / unterrichtsmaterialien / dilemma / index_html
133
Encouraging Independent Research through
Examining Contentious Issues
Colin Wilson , Programme Coordinator , BA ( Hons ) Product Design Technology , and Sarah McDonnell , Programme
Leader , BA ( Hons ) Fashion Communication , Northumbria University , UK
c . wilson @ unn . ac . uk and s . mcdonnell @ unn . ac . uk
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students 15 to 40
5 . Length of time required 6 to 12 weeks
6 . Type of activity Group work , Student presentations , Course
outlines and learning goals , Discussion and debate , 
Research related
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Design
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
T
he student will be able to conduct independent research appropriate to their discipline . 
•
•

The student will be able to articulate viewpoints and opinions regarding the range of contemporary influences
•
•
covered by the module . 
CROSS-CURRICULAR
134
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
As educationalists and interested parties in exploring the
ethical debate in all areas of design , we co-developed a
module and brief ,  ‘ Contentious Issues ’  , in July 2006 , as a
multidisciplinary tool to fit into any design programme or
school within the university . The brief has been run with
first year university students studying Product Design
Technology and Fashion Communication . The brief invites
students to identify a contentious issue and conduct
independent research . Through a series of set tasks , they
produce a fully referenced and educated argument , giving
a holistic view of the issue through a visual presentation , 
supported by a written document that highlights their
assigned role / character ’ s opinion on the subject . Students
are encouraged to develop their understanding of
professional practice in the design industries , within
the context of social , cultural , political , economic and
technological change . 
This module and brief were written to help first year
students make the transition from learning in school to
research and learning at university where they are required
to question , challenge , hypothesise and synthesise their
findings and become confident , independent , lifelong
learners . It has been observed that student intakes from
schools and further education establishments were often
unprepared for the task of carrying out independent in-
depth research in their chosen fields . An increasing reliance
on webbased research for school projects has left many
students without the knowledge to access other sources
of information and research . As well as aiding students ’ 
understanding of contentious issues , the module aims
to help prepare students to understand and partake in
research for their academic studies at university . 
The module forms part of a wider series taught within the
Design School on different programmes at Northumbria
University of Contemporary Design Influences ( CDI )  . 
It explores any influence that can have cause and effect
on the outcome of a product or service design such as
technology , sociology , politics , philosophy ( ethics )  , ecology , 
arts , media , geography or any pertaining world issues . 
These influences shift as society evolves and students are
made aware of trends and circumstances that they should
research and develop when designing and considering
different markets . 
Contentious issues that students have addressed have been
wide ranging and have included current political issues
impacting on society and different design disciplines . Issues
relating to fashion and clothing that have been discussed
include : fast fashion , size 0 , politics of fake , ethics of labour , 
trade tariffs , authenticity of brand , reporting and news , 
sustainable fashion and ecology of fashion textiles . 
A manual explaining how educators can deliver the
module of study has been developed alongside a student
workbook outlining the brief and activities required to
complete the module ( available from the authors )  . 
Outline of Student Assignment
Working in a team of between 4 and 6 members over the
module , students are asked to investigate any contentious
issue ( contemporary , political , environmental , social , ethical , 
technological or economic ) of interest to the group . 
Students are asked to make a 15 minute presentation of
their well researched and supported argument to justify
individual or shared opinions on the issue , and be prepared
to answer questions and accept debate . The presentation
should be based on both theoretical literature and factual
information such as statistics , current news and events , and
students ’ own informed opinions . The more controversial
the subject the more interesting the debate may be . Each
member of the group presents an argument from one of
the following standpoints : 
Designer
•
•
Environmentalist – Eco Warrior
•
•
Investor
•
•
Managing Director – Responsible to Shareholders
•
•
Man or Woman in the Street
•
•
Wild Card
•
•
The framework of choosing a role , whether it is of their
own ethical standpoint or not , helps them explore the
issues in safety without feeling exposed or under personal
criticism for their beliefs . 
135
Students are encouraged to practice taking on these
roles and discussing what their ‘ character ’ motives might
be within their designated groups . Students are asked to
take into account that the ‘ character ’ view may not be
their own and to consider an ‘ in their shoes ’ approach , an
empathic response , to enable a depth of research . This will
give scaffolding for students to then apply this to their own
selected contentious issue later . 
The instructor discusses with each group what contentious
issue ideas they are considering and facilitates the group in
their decision-making process . 
Students are introduced to research techniques and
examine the relevance of sources , explaining how they
make informed judgements from research carried out
with reference to the motives of each of the different
stakeholders / characters examined . Students are asked to
find one journalist or author with a slant towards their
chosen issue and one with an opposing view , and investigate
which organisations or corporations they support . Students
are invited to apply the notion of Who , What , Where , Why , 
When and How when regarding reference material and
putting together their own arguments . Who wrote the item ? 
What was their motive for writing the piece ? Where was
the article published ? Who was the designated audience ? 
Why did they write the article and who did they want to
influence ? When did they write the article and has the
article stood the test of time , has more information come
to light that would change the meaning of the initial article ? 
How can the truth of the article be checked more fully ? 
Supportive Lectures
The learning schedule takes 8 to 12 weeks to run depend-
ing on student numbers and supporting lectures chosen by
the instructor such as contextual lectures on globalisation
and ethical issues within the professional discipline . 
Learning Objectives
The student will : 

have a willingness to lay aside preconceptions to seek
•
•
and consider all arguments when investigating topics ; 

construct a personal framework of information and
•
•
references which can substantiate written , visual and verbal
debate regarding contemporary influences ( any influence
that can have cause and effect on the outcome of a
product or service design such as technology , sociology , 
politics , philosophy ( ethics )  , ecology , arts , media , geography
or any pertaining world issues )  ; 
understand and utilize research methodologies ; 
•
•

investigate the relationship between theory
•
•
and practice ; 

develop a critical understanding of the contemporary
•
•
debate concerning subjects covered by the module ; 

develop a basic understanding in the use of relevant
•
•
software . 
Assessment Criteria
The qualities looked for in students ’ work are based on
their ability : 

to carry out a thorough search for information on the
•
•
chosen topic ; 
to select , organise and present information effectively ; 
•
•
to understand and discuss relevant issues ; 
•
•
to structure an argument leading to a conclusion ; 
•
•
to answer questions intelligently . 
•
•
In addition , the following qualities are considered : 
professionalism , quality of visual presentation style , clear
and verbal delivery , basic understanding of relevant
software . 
Both formative and summative assessments are given
to students as a group and individually , as per university
guidelines . 
CROSS-CURRICULAR
136
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Reading List
Byrne , D .  ( 2003 ) Envisioning Emotional Epistemological
Information , Steidl
Ednay , A .  ( 2007 ) PowerPoint 2007 in Easy Steps , Computer
Step
Law , J .  ( 2004 ) After Method , Routledge , an imprint ofTaylor
and Francis Books Ltd
Reflections on Teaching the Module
Students have brought new and insightful approaches to
different contentious issues including fast fashion , fur , animal
testing for cosmetics , and youth crime and design . The
group presentations given to their peers enable the sharing
of material and increase the knowledge and understanding
of students in areas that they themselves have not
explored . The more diverse the areas under discussion the
more informative and captured the audience has been . 
Students have managed the process well , but still put
too much information on slides without considering the
oratory and visual imagery aspects that capture the viewer . 
Still more exposure and clarification on presentation
is needed to be put in place by the instructors to help
students convey their messages . Both instructors have been
ready to help students in aspects of respecting different
individuals ’ perspectives but have not as yet had to ‘ police ’ 
this aspect . We hope and presume that we manage these
aspects before any issues in diversity of opinion arise in
the group discussions and requests that students respect
each other . It helps that students can actually play roles
that do not reflect their own opinions to elicit deeper
understanding of all aspects of an issue covered . 
137
Implementation of an Introductory College
Course / Curriculum : Globalization and Labor
in Textiles
Stacey Skold , Graduate Student , and Wendy Weiss , Professor , Textiles , Clothing and Design Department , 
University of Nebraska , USA
Stacey Skold sskold @ yahoo . com and Wendy Weiss wweiss @ unl . edu
1 . Level UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : General understanding
of the issues related to globalization and the textile
industry , which can be obtained via the assigned
readings
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required One semester
6 . Type of activity Course outlines and learning goals , Discussion and
debate , Practical
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Design
8 . Topics covered Campaigns , Companies , Corporate social responsibility , 
Ethical initiatives / brands , Globalisation , Supply chains , 
Trade , Working conditions
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Gain insight into global issues in relation to how garments are manufactured and the experiences of the people who
•
•
make the clothes we wear . 
Express resulting views and opinions by creating artwork / a group installation . 
•
•
Learn aspects of exhibition development and management . 
•
•
CROSS-CURRICULAR
138
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Introduction
This paper outlines how to develop , structure and
implement a semester-long graduate-level course called 
 “ Globalization and Labor inTextiles ”  . The course has been
taught once in the fall of 2007 at theTextiles , Clothing , 
and Design Department at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln ( UNL )  . It was implemented in the context of a
Design Issues and Perspectives graduate-level seminar . This
paper provides others access to a successful framework
for a similar class based on how the course was actually
taught as well as student feedback . A sample syllabus and
photos from the exhibitions are available online at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / teachingresources / global
The Globalization and Labor inTextiles course integrates
theory and practice , and consists of three primary
components , which are outlined in this paper : 
1 . Reading / research , writing and discussion . 
2 . Creative object / installation development . 
3 . 	
Exhibition development . 
This combination and varied source materials are used to
enhance the students ’ understanding of the subject and
enable them to form and articulate their opinions . 
The primary goals of the course are to : 
1 . 	
Gain insight into global issues in relation to how
garments are manufactured and the experiences of the
people who make the clothes we wear . 
2 . 	
Express resulting views and opinions by creating
artwork / a group installation . 
3 . 	
Learn aspects of exhibition development and
management . 
The grading system is as follows : 
Reading and writing : 50%
Attendance of outside of class events plus reflection
paper : 5%
Group gallery installation project and individual production
of art objects : 40%
Explanatory text and didactic material to accompany the
show : 5%
Reading / Research , Writing and Discussion
The readings for the course encompass the recent history
of textiles and apparel production and labor , as well as
critical and theoretical writing on the industry as outlined in
the reading list . The reading , writing , and discussion should
enable students to reach the first goal of the class : to gain
insight into global issues in relation to how garments are
manufactured and the experiences of the people who
make the clothes we wear . 
The readings include case studies of the AlternativeTrade
Movement and individuals representing alternative business
models . Speakers attend the class to provide students
with a direct experience relating to these issues and
alternatives to mass production . Speakers who attended
the UNL class includedTeresaVictor from theTapetes de
Lana , a tapestry weaving gallery specializing in handwoven
textiles made from natural fiber yarns spun in the Sangre
de Cristo Mill using wools that are grown regionally . Other
visitors to the class were Patricia Stoddard ( via conference
call ) of who works with artisans
through the internet and correspondence ; and Mary
King who discussed the Arghand Cooperative , a non-
profit cooperative that distributes hand-crafted products , 
primarily soaps , from Afghanistan . 
Students are asked to write reflection essays or create
reflection artwork in response to the speakers , and to
complete assigned readings and writing assignments on a
weekly basis as outlined on the class syllabus . Early in the
semester , the assignments are more involved and require
a larger number of lengthy and in-depth article summaries . 
In conjunction with the increased work relating to the
object / installation and exhibition development later in the
semester , the reading and writing expectations decrease
and abstracts are required to fulfill the writing assignments . 
As the semester progresses and the students develop
specialized areas of research , they are encouraged to
conduct original research on the topics at hand and to
share them with the class . In doing so , they may substitute
alternative related readings with the educator ’ s permission . 
Students maintain a list of vocabulary because of the
challenging and specialized nature of the readings , which
introduce new concepts , worldviews , and ways of thinking
about culture , history , trade and art / design . This list should
139
be updated each week , as it will form a culmination
of words found throughout the semester . Students
alphabetize the list with definitions / explanations and source
citations for each word or phrase or name of artist , critic
or theorist . A selection of words one student had in her list
included the following : sanfordized , maquiladora , peonage , 
rote , capitalism , sweatshop , anti-sweatshop movement , 
reciprocal trade , vociferous , neo-liberal , trade liberalization , 
economic autarky , imprimatur , industrial zones , surfeit , 
fair labor standards act , industrial revolution . In addition , 
students are required to generate a list of twenty facts
from the readings that may play a role in the exhibition , 
which is due at the end of the semester . 
All the readings and writing assignments serve as a means
to prepare the students for class discussions ( as well as to
create an artwork for exhibition )  . Students demonstrate
their new understanding of , or attempts at understanding , 
concepts and issues verbally in class . While some students
may have strong opinions about issues , others may
continue to grapple with the complex issues in an attempt
at reconciling conflicted feelings . It is important that the
course meetings should be viewed as a forum to express a
struggle as well as strong opinions . 
Over the semester , it is the educator ’ s responsibility to do
her best to engage each student in the discussions . This
may be accomplished in a number of ways . The teacher
may designate a student each week to be responsible for
initiating and conducting discussion on assigned readings . 
With this approach , discussion leaders should post
questions on the group email list before class . Alternatively , 
students may simply take turns answering questions during
class , or the teacher may initiate a more free-flowing , open
discussion , asking individual students to participate as
needed . The teacher may also incorporate brainstorming / 
role playing activities to inspire critical thought and
conversations . 
During the UNL course , an effective exercise included an
interactive brainstorming / role playing exercise between
a manufacturer / factory owner , consumer , and laborer . 
The class was divided into small groups , and each group
was assigned a role . Students generated drawings and
diagrams addressing significant concepts from each of these
viewpoints . The goal of the exercise was to examine the
different priorities of manufacturer compared to a laborer
and a consumer , and to discover the tensions between
those key interests . The drawings were shared with the
class as a whole and served as a point of departure for
developing ideas for the exhibition project . 
To augment and facilitate class discussion , it is important
that students use the available internet course delivery
system provided by the institution as a vehicle for
communication . This is good for posting questions and
papers , sharing websites and resources in general , and
ultimately for communicating timely information related to
the exhibition installation . The UNL class used a delivery
system called Blackboard . In doing so , there were 43 posts
by five of the eight students enrolled in the seminar . 
Creative Component Development
As the students complete the reading , writing , and
discussion exercises , they grapple with complex issues
while considering a form of expression to embody and
reflect their ideas . Towards the middle of the course , the
reading and writing assignments begin to diminish and
students will utilize more time outside of class to reach
the second goal of the course : to express resulting views
and opinions via a creative object or installation . Students
achieve this by preparing sketches , prototypes , models , 
or drawings to present to the class . They use class time
discussing , brainstorming ideas and determining a group art
installation to be exhibited . 
The process of creating a group installation requires
communication , compromise , and consideration of the
gallery space as a whole . During this process various group
dynamics come into play , as at least partial consensus needs
to be reached . The artwork to be exhibited is determined
by the class with the educator serving as curator guiding
and critiquing the students in the class setting . Once the
artwork / installation is conceptualized , the class needs to
determine the corresponding roles of the students and the
time frame with regard to creation of the artwork . 
At UNL , the students created four group installations
and one individual installation , and included multiple walls
displaying supporting material including images and text . 
Generally , the students all participated in the creative
process , with one or two students taking on more
managerial roles . 
CROSS-CURRICULAR
140
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Exhibition Planning
In addition to planning the development of the art
object ( s )  / installation ( s )  , the students must determine the
layout of the exhibition overall , incorporating supporting
material as needed , as well as the roles and responsibilities
for the development of the exhibition itself . If funding or
donations of supplies are required to offset the expenses
of producing the exhibition , students handle seeking
support . During the latter part of the course , more time
is devoted to exhibition planning and the creation of the
installation . In doing so , students reach the third goal of this
course : to obtain a greater understanding of developing
and managing an exhibition . 
The educator continues to function as curator , determining
and guiding the overall quality of the art and delegating
other responsibilities of the exhibition as well . These
include : exhibition announcement design , press release , 
wall didactics , brochure design and essay . The students
will seek and obtain ongoing feedback from the class and
the educator regarding these elements . All the students
will participate in the actual installation of the exhibition
and will be expected to speak about her / his role at the
opening . 
Summary : Class / Exhibition Feedback and Assessment
The subject of globalization and labor in textiles is an
important and unheralded topic . Ideally it should be
included in the curriculum of any textile , clothing , and
design program . It is also relevant to students in other
areas , ranging from political science to women ’ s studies . 
In fact two students from the UNL class presented a
well-received paper about the course at a women ’ s
studies conference held in Kearney , NE , in March 2008 . 
The conference theme was transnational feminism , which
related closely to the global nature of the textile and
apparel industry , and the conference provided a forum for
the students to focus on the course exhibition . 
The course , as taught at UNL , has an optimal format
incorporating various modes of assimilating and expressing
information : reading , writing , discussion , and object
development - all of which enable students to gain
insight into global issues in relation to how garments are
manufactured and the experiences of the people who
make the clothes we wear , and to be able to express
resulting views and opinions . In addition , students gain a
better understanding of exhibition development . Due to
the nature of the course - its theoretical and exhibition
components - it is dense and fast-paced , and best suited to
a graduate program . 
Both at the close of the UNL class and four months later , 
feedback was gathered from students . Based on both sets
of responses , the following conclusions can be made : 
1 . 	
Students gained a much better understanding of the
complex relationship between the textile and apparel
industries and globalization . One student is currently
planning a small business using recycled garments rather
than relying on outsourcing labor . Others consider the
impact the consumer has on buying practices . Many
stated they have become more conscious consumers
due to their participation in the class . 
2 . 	
Reading was the primary and perhaps best means of
acquiring new information . One student wrote in her
reflection on the week ’ s reading selection fromThe
Object of Labor ,  “ Not only are textile manufacturers
taking advantage of employees , they are being forced and
encouraged to do so by the economic structures as well as
the trade options available ”  . 
3 . 	
The dynamics and logistics involved in the object and
exhibition development could be “ tedious ”  , as one
student put it , and overall challenging , but worthwhile . 
No student stated it should be excluded from the
course format . Another student viewed the exhibition
as a means of “ … increasing the public ’ s awareness of
the continued problems in the industry .  ” In addition , she
stated ,  “ I feel that our class has made a step towards
improving the situation ”  . 
Overall the class functioned successfully within its outlined
goals and , in conjunction with the resulting exhibition , 
seemed to empower the students and provide a means of
dealing with complex problems without apparent solutions . 
It is the goal of this paper to provide a framework
for other educators so that they may also inform and
empower their students . 
141
Course Resources Given to Students
1 . 	
Formats for Article Summaries , Abstracts and
Vocabulary Lists . 
2 . Reading List / Sample Case Study Subjects . 
3 . 	
Sample Syllabus ( available at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / 
teachingmaterials / globalizationandlabour
4 . 	
Photos of UNL Exhibition ( available at www . 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org )  . 
Article Summary Format
For the articles / chapters marked “ Article Summary ”  , 
complete an article summary to use in class discussion and
to hand in at the end of the period in which the article is
discussed . The five steps listed below provide a uniform
format for everybody to follow . These summaries make it
possible to have lively discussions in class and will count
towards 20% of your final grade . 
a . Indicate author , text , article title and date of text . 
b . 	
Read the entire article thoroughly at least once , jotting
down notes as you read . In your second reading , identify
what you consider to be the author ’ s thesis statement . 
Write this sentence at the top of your page . This should
be a direct quotation of the author ’ s thesis . Cite page
number . 
c . 	
In your own words , identify at least three central
themes , which the author discusses in this essay that
relate back to the author ’ s thesis identified above . 
d . 	
For three of the central themes , identify at least three
sub-points the author makes to elaborate on , clarify , or
defend the theme . 
e . 	
Consider what at least one idea discussed in this essay
means to you . Describe how it relates to how you
might feel or think about the subject , in what new ways
it might cause you to think about the subject ; or explain
why you disagree with the author ’ s position . 
Abstract Format
For the remaining articles , marked “ Abstract ”  , write a 200-
300 word abstract which summarizes the critical issues
discussed in this essay . If you have found the longer article
summary format helpful , by all means continue to write
them before you write the abstract . For tips on writing an
abstract , visit :  
. 
html

20% of final grade
Vocabulary Development Format
Most students will find these readings both challenging and
enlightening as they introduce new concepts , world views
and ways of thinking about culture and art / design . Along
with these new ideas , you will encounter vocabulary , names
of artists , critics and theorists who are new to you . Create
lists of these on your word processor as well , so you can
update and alphabetize them . 
Please complete the following for each article : 
1 . 	
List new vocabulary , noting page reference found , 
dictionary definition and contextual meaning . 
2 . 	
List names of individuals / trade agreements referred to
in text . Cite page . Based on information in text , identify
individuals as best you can . 		
10% of final grade
CROSS-CURRICULAR
142
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Reading List
Required texts - each text has an abbreviation in
parenthesis which is used to identify the book in
reading assignments : 
Grimes , K . M . and Milgram , B . L .  ( eds .  )  ( postcript by Nash
Tucson , J .  )  ( c2000 ) Artisans and Cooperatives : Developing
Alternative Trade for the Global Economy , Tucson : University
of Arizona Press ( A & C ) 
Livingstone , J . and Ploof , J .  ( 2007 ) The Object of Labor : Art , 
Cloth and Cultural Production , The MIT Press ( Labor ) 
Meredith , R .  ( 2007 ) The Elephant and the Dragon : The Rise of
India and China and What it Means for All of Us 
( Elephant and Dragon ) 
Rosen , E . I .  ( c2002 ) Making Sweatshops : The Globalization of
the U . S . Apparel Industry , Berkeley : University of California
Press ( Global ) 
Ross , A .  ( 1997 ) No Sweat : Fashion , Free Trade , and the Rights
of Garment Workers No Sweat
Optional Chapter Readings and Articles : 
Featherstone , L .  ( 2002 ) Students Against Sweatshops : 
The Making of a Movement , Verso
Rath , J .  ( ed .  )  ( 2002 ) Unraveling the Rag Trade : Immigrant
Entrepreneurship in Seven World Cities , Oxford : Berg
Publishers
Chapter 6 : Zhou , Y .  ( 2002 )  ‘ In NewYork : Caught under
the Fashion Runway ’ 
Chapter 7 : Grenier , G .  & Stepick , A .  ( 2002 )  ‘ Ethnic
Succession and Failed Restructuring : A Case Study of an
Apparel Plant in Miami ’ 
Chapter 8 : Light I , and OjedaVD . 2002 ‘ Los Angeles : 
Wearing OutTheir Welcome ’ 
Sample Case Study Subjects 
- Creative Bee 
- Fashion Design in Africa 
- Wearable Art from
New Zealand 
- Cat Mazza

in_conversation_with_cat_mazza_p . html -
In Conversation with Cat Mazza , Part I of II 
-
Ruth Marshall 
- Carson Fox 
- Patricia Stoddard
and Ralli Quilts
143
Thinking Globally , Acting Locally : School Project
Mag . Dorothea Odörfer , Project Manager and Science Teacher , Modeschule Hallein1 
, Austria
Dorothea . O- @ gmx . at
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required One year
6 . Type of activity Course outlines and learning goals
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular * 
8 . Topics covered All 
* Students from the following subjects were involved : German , English as a foreign language , Chemistry , Religious Studies , 
History and Culture , Geography and Economic Studies , TextileTechnology , Project Management , IT skills , Design and
Fashion Illustration , Workshop and Production Engineering . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
This Responsible Consumption project aimed to enable students to : 
Critically explore a social issue . 
•
•
Raise their environmental awareness and awareness of fair wages . 
•
•
Identify global interrelations relating to consumption . 
•
•
Deal with different kinds of documents such as press articles and official letters . 
•
•
Identify dependencies between workers within different working processes . 
•
•
Negotiate verbally effectively . 
•
•
Realise that not everything is accomplishable . 
•
•
Complete an activity for Global Learning as required by the Federal Ministry for Education , Science and Culture . 
•
•
Contribute to the ‘ Decade of Sustainability ’  ( UNESCO )  . 
•
•
Critically and creatively explore ethical labels . 
•
•
Apply findings to the individual social environment . 
•
•
Be aware of issues relating to responsible consumption . 
•
•
CROSS-CURRICULAR
144
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Project Summary
120 students and 13 instructors from six school classes 
( 10th 
, 11th
and 12th
grade ) were involved in a Responsible
Consumption project over one year . The main focus of the
project was textiles and food related issues referring to
sustainability and fair trade criteria . 
Students applied for positions such as researchers , 
managers and multipliers , and were involved in managing
the project through weekly meetings with the 13
instructors from different subjects . Students acted as
multipliers to ensure that knowledge about issues relating
to the aims of the project reached all participating classes . 
Local organisations , the municipal authority and businesses
were all involved in the project . 
Various events were held during the project including a
school assembly , a public event , a fashion show ( detailed
below ) and workshops for students . A panel discussion
was held with politicians from all parties in Hallein and
representatives of consumer protection , fair trade and
animal welfare organisations . In addition , 25 project
members presented the project at ‘ Go fair ’  , a competition
initiated by the province of Salzburg and other cooperation
partners ( such as Südwind ) to encourage pupils to
present projects / activities based on political development
issues . In addition , the students developed a label for local
businesses , which is described in more detail here . 
Label for Local Businesses
The label was created by 11th grade students from
different subjects ( German , Project Management , Design
and Fashion Illustration ) and processed by 12th grade
computer students . Using a questionnaire , 20 businesses
in the Hallein area were questioned to find out if , and to
what extent , stores offered products that were organic
and fairly traded . These questionnaires were evaluated by
a committee consisting of students . 16 of the companies
interviewed were publicly presented with a logo , chosen
from several designs by Fashion Design and Fashion
Marketing students . The final logo for the label , designed by
Lisa Winkler , aimed to express a close affinity to nature and
concern for future generations . The logo consists of one
tall figure and one to four small figures depending on the
rating ; the more small figures , the better the company was
considered to be . 
Fashion Show : La Lucha Sigue
For the fashion show , the criteria for textiles included : 
a . Linen , flax and cotton : pesticide-free . 
b . Wool : responsible livestock husbandry . 
c . Dyes : organic . 
d . Fair wages and no child labour . 
e . Local sourcing of products ( reduced transportation )  . 
f . 	
Silk : production in accordance with animal
welfare standards
g . 	
Weaving : wax , fats and dirt to be removed with
biodegradable detergents . 
The students were not able to find bio-fair fabrics in
Austria for their fashion show and therefore had to reduce
their expectations and source the fabric from a German
company . The students firstly participated in the workshop ,  
 ‘ Cotton and Fashion : The long journey of my jeans !  ’  , 
organised by Südwind , part of the Clean Clothes Campaign
Austria . Students then designed , produced and presented
evening gowns made from organic fabrics , dyed according
to their taste , in a fashion show ( second year Design and
Fashion Illustration , Workshop and Production
Engineering students ) 
1
Eine Schule desVereins für Bildung und Erziehung der Halleiner Schwestern
Franziskanerinne ( known as ‘ Höhere Lehranstalt für Mode und Bekleidungstechnik der
Schulschwestern von Hallein-Salzburg ’ until September 2008 ) 
145
146
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Interactive Activities Contents
146
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
147
148 Introduction
150 Further information
Interactive teaching materials available
in this Handbook
Interactive teaching materials available online
152 All together now : Piecework on an assembly line
Südwind Agentur Österreich , Austria
154 Journalists ’ journey through the world of garments
Südwind Agentur Österreich , Austria
170 Ethical fashion introductory workshop : 
Toolkit for trainers
Anna Paluszek , Polish Humanitarian Organisation , 
Poland
176 Quiz : Introducing the garment industry
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
179 I agree / I disagree : Exploring attitudes to the social
and environmental impact of the garment industry
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
181 Labels and initiatives
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
186 Garment industry initiatives to address
working conditions
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
194 Fashioning the future – where will
fashion be in 2020 ? 
Nina Baldwin , Centre for Sustainable Fashion , 
London College of Fashion , UK
196 Responsibilities of consumption : 
Educational activities plus course outline , reading
lists and essay titles
Hannah Higginson , Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
147
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
148
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The interactive activities in this chapter can be used
within any fashion discipline to introduce a range of social , 
environmental and economic sustainability issues . Most of
the activities can be adapted to a range of age groups and
give participants the opportunity to consider their own
opinions about the issues raised . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry displays examples of students ’ 
work relating to sustainability on its website at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / studentwork /  . Your own
students may find inspiration in these pages . We would also
be very happy to receive images and information about
students ’ work in your own university , college or school for
consideration for the website . 
About the Interactive Activities
In All Together Now by Südwind Agentur , Austria , 
different steps on an assembly line are playfully illustrated
as students ‘ manufacture ’ a shirt through folding , cutting , 
etc . Group members , one after another , carry out the task
they are assigned to produce as many high-quality shirts
as possible in the time available , in competition with other
groups . The ‘ supervisor ’ is responsible for quality control as
well as maintaining pressure on the workers to complete
the orders in time . 
The Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
by Südwind Agentur , Austria , is a board game that enables
learning about the garment industry in a playful way . The
game takes students , as journalists , on a research tour to
different countries and illustrates parts of the garment
production process . Players visit organic and conventional
cotton plantations , tour dyeing factories in India , interview
seamstresses in Central America , visit European design
metropolises and second-hand clothing markets in Ghana . 
The Ethical Fashion Introductory Workshop : Toolkit
for Trainers presented by Anna Paluszek of the Polish
Humanitarian Organisation , Poland , outlines a workshop for
participants to explore working conditions in the garment
industry , global interdependencies and what consumers can
do to bring about change . The toolkit includes a role play
and necessary worksheets . All the activities included in the
workshop are interactive and involve the participants in the
debate . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK , present four activities
they have tried and tested with fashion students across
the UK . Students explore some basic facts and figures
about the garment industry in the interactive Quiz , 
which is an ideal starting point for any workshop . In I
Agree / I Disagree : Exploring Attitudes to the Social and
Environmental Impact of the Garment Industry , students
respond to statements about the industry and debate
the issues raised to encourage the development of their
opinions . Garment Industry Initiatives to Address Working
Conditions ( Fairtrade , the EthicalTrading Initiative , Slow
Fashion , Social Audits , Reducing Overtime Project and
Trade Unions ) students discuss the strengths , weaknesses , 
opportunities and threats of each initiative in terms of
improving working conditions . 
Fashioning the Future – Where Will Fashion be in 2020 ? 
by Nina Baldwin , Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London
College of Fashion , UK , is an activity during which , in groups , 
Interactive Activities Introduction
149
students consider the relevance of sustainability issues
to the fashion industry in the year 2020 and develop a
creative response to the issues . 
In Responsibilities of Consumption : Educational Activities
plus Course Outline , Reading Lists and Essay Titles , 
Hannah Higginson , Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK , 
presents one activity in which students match terms and
definitions , and a second activity in which students place
key historical events on a timeline . The third part of this
contribution is the outline of ‘ The Responsibilities of
Consumption : Beyond Shopping ’ module . The objective
of the course is based on the notion that students ’ depth
of understanding regarding the ethical and sustainability
challenges facing the fashion industry , and crucially their
capacity to find solutions to these challenges when
they enter the industry , can be enhanced by teaching
the cultural , social and economic theoretical context of
consumption and production . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
150
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Interactive Teaching Materials Available in this
Handbook
Within other chapters in this Handbook , you will find the
following interactive activities :  
[ FE , UG ] Business Chapter : Buying Power Role Play : 
How decision-making in the fashion industry impacts on
working conditions - In small groups , students take on the
roles of CEO , designer , buyer , factory owner and factory
worker , and consider how the priorities and challenges
facing each of these roles impacts on workers .  
[ UG , PG ] Business Chapter : Case studies to address
impacts of purchasing practices on working conditions
by EthicalTrading Initiative , UK , are the result of a meeting
involving UK brands and retailers that explored how
business decisions affect labour standards . Questions
to enable students to fully explore the case studies are
included .  
[ UG ] Business Chapter : In What Price a Fairly Traded
T-shirt ? by Doug Miller of University of Northumbria , 
UK , students consider how garments are costed at the
factory level and how a living wage might be achieved
in global apparel supply chains . The activity is based on
actual industry figures on wages as at October 2006 and
production line balancing figures provided by corporate
social responsibility / sourcing managers from a major
multinational retailer .  
[ Pre-16 , FE ] Design Chapter : In the short activity , 
Introducing the cotton supply chain and sustainability , 
by Südwind Agentur , Austria , students learn how cotton is
cultivated and explore the social and environmental issues
associated with cultivating cotton . With a set of images and
matching descriptions about cotton cultivation , students
clarify the meaning and content of these and put them
in order . This activity can also be used as an English as a
foreign language lesson and German-English translations
are provided . 
Interactive Teaching Materials Available Online
There is information about a range of teaching resources , 
films , exhibitions and images on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website at 
resources /  . These include :  
[ Pre-16 , FE ] Labour Behind the Labels
This resource can be used to explore working conditions
in the garment industry , and can be adapted to different
ages / subjects / background knowledge . A number of
activities can be adapted for use by different ages
and focus : 

How , how , how : A simple but effective activity to get
•
•
students exploring why , when we in the UK are capable
of producing clothing for ourselves , is almost all of our
clothing manufacturing relocated overseas ? 

What are the companies doing ? Discussion questions
•
•
are suggested after students have visited brands ’ and
campaigning groups ’ websites to explore issues of
responsibility of brands , retailers , consumers in more
detail , and what is being done to change the situation . 
Further Information
151
Just Business ( nd ) Labour Behind the Labels , Just Business . 
Available to download for free from
resources / 
teachingmaterials / Labourbehindlabels /  
[ Pre-16 , FE ] Passion for Fashion
Passion for Fashion , a resource from the Reading
International Solidarity Centre ( RISC )  , includes lots of
creative and interactive ideas for running a workshop
to introduce participants to working conditions in the
garment industry . 
RISC ( 2003 ) Passion for Fashion , RISC . 
Available to download for free from 
education / teaching_resources . html 
[ Pre-16 , FE , UG ] Seeing through the Spin : Public Relations
in the Global Economy
This resource can be used to explore how public relations , 
branding and marketing influence our perceptions
of transnational corporations and non-governmental
organisations . Seeing through the Spin contains 14 activities
that explore branding , PR and marketing in depth using
case study material . Although the publication is not fashion
specific , many activities use case studies from the fashion
industry , and others can be easily adapted for use in fashion
courses . 
Babymilk Action and RISC ( 2001 ) Seeing through the Spin : 
Public Relations in the Global Economy , Babymilk Action
and RISC . 
Available to download for free or to buy at 
. 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
152
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
All Together Now : 
Piecework on the Assembly Line
Südwind Agentur - Die Agentur für Süd-Nord-Bildungs - und Öffentlichkeitsarbeit GesmbH , Vienna , Austria
www . suedwind-agentur . at
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

For students to experience the monotony and pressure of piecework . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Minimum of 6 students
5 . Length of time required 15 minutes
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Working conditions
153
Materials to be Provided by the Educator
PER GROUP : Approximately 20 sheets of A5 paper , a
packet of self-adhesive dots , two pairs of scissors , four
rulers and
ten pencils . 
Materials Provided
Instructions for workers 1-12 . 
•
•
Instructions for supervisors . 
•
•
Visual aids : Sketches 1-4 . 
•
•
Background
In order to manufacture a shirt , many steps are required . 
In garment factories , these steps are carried out by several
workers . No-one produces a whole shirt from beginning
to end but instead spends all day sewing cuffs to sleeves , 
or waistbands to skirts or trousers , or hemming individual
parts , etc . This division of labour considerably reduces the
manufacturing time of a shirt – but makes the seamstresses ’ 
work more monotonous . Workers are under time pressure
as well . Completion of a certain number of pieces each day
is expected to ensure future contracts . Workers are often
paid by piece rather than by hour – this can result in very
low pay or very long working hours to reach a minimum
salary . To compound matters , the workers deal with a
constant strain on the eyes and a continuous irritation of
the respiratory organs caused by dust and fluff , as well as
back problems . 
Through this activity , different steps on an assembly line are
playfully illustrated by ‘ manufacturing ’ a shirt through folding , 
cutting , etc . Group members , one after another , carry out
the task they are assigned to produce as many high-quality
shirts as possible in the time available , in competition with
other groups . The ‘ supervisor ’ is responsible for quality
control , as well as maintaining pressure on the workers to
complete the orders in time . 
Running the Game
1 . 	
Instructor briefs the students on the background to the
activity and explains the task to the students . 
2 . Joint trial run . 
3 . 	
Form groups of at least 6 students and assign tasks ( if
there are fewer than 12 in a group , allocate more than
one task per student )  . One student should take on the
role of the supervisor . 
4 . Groups work for at least 5 minutes . 
5 . 	
Reflection - Questions that could be asked : How
did you feel during the exercise ? How did you feel
about the working situation , your colleagues , and the
supervisor ? Did you enjoy your ‘ work ’  ? 
The activity could be followed by a film or further work to
explore working conditions in the industry . 
Instruction Sheet for Workers 1-12
Worker 1 : 	
Fold the paper in half . Place the paper with the 
 ‘ foldline ’ on the right side .  ( Sketch 1 ) 
Worker 2 : 	
Mark a 2 cm ( about 0 . 8 inch ) border on the top
and bottom using your ruler .  ( Sketch 1 ) 
Worker 3 : 	
Mark a 3 cm ( about 1 . 1 inch ) border on the left 
( open ) side using your ruler .  ( Sketch 1 ) 
Worker 4 : 	
Cut off the border marked ( top , bottom , left )  .  
( Sketch 1 ) 
Worker 5 : 	
Draw a rectangle 3 cm ( 1 . 1 inch ) wide and 7 cm
high in the bottom left corner .  ( Sketch 1 ) 
Worker 6 : Cut out the rectangle in the bottom left corner . 
Worker 7 : 	
Unfold the ‘ shirt ’ and stick one adhesive circle for
instruction care onto the bottom right corner . 
Worker 8 : 	
Draw in a neckline , 3 cm /  ( 1 . 1 inch ) wide and 1
cm /  ( 0 . 4 inches ) low .  ( Semicircle ) 
Worker 9 : 	
Sketch 8 little buttons at intervals of 1 cm ( 0 . 4
inches ) along the folded line . 
Worker 10 : 	
Turn the shirt over and fold the first side of the
shirt in half .  ( Sketch 2 ) 
Worker 11 : Fold the second side of the shirt .  ( Sketch 3 ) 
Worker 12 : 	
Fold the shirt in half and put it on the stack .  
( Sketch 4 ) 
Instructions for the Supervisors
As a supervisor you are responsible for pressuring the
subordinate workers to speed up and stop conversations . 
Using the bathroom as well as helping other workers
on the job is prohibited . At the end you will inspect the
quality of the finished shirts , and decide which shirts will be
distributed and which shirts are defective goods . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
154
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Journalists ’ Journey through the
World of Garments
Südwind Agentur – Die Agentur für Süd-Nord-Bildungs - und Öffentlichkeitsarbeit GesmbH , Vienna , Austria
www . suedwind-agentur . at
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To provide students with an overview of the environmental and social impact on the garment industry . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students 4 to 10
5 . Length of time required 45 minutes
6 . Type of activity Interactive activities , Discussion and debate
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Agriculture , Companies , Environment , Globalisation , 
Health and safety , Organic , Prices , Second hand clothes , 
Textiles , Trade , Workers ’ rights , Working conditions
155
INSTUCTORS ’ Notes
How are clothes made and where ? The globalised fashion
and clothing industry is characterised by a high degree
of division of labour , with production taking place all
over the world . This board-game , created by Südwind , 
enables learning about the industry in a playful way . The
game takes students , as journalists , on a research tour to
different countries and illustrates parts of the garment
production process . Players visit organic and conventional
cotton plantations , tour dyeing factories in India , interview
seamstresses in Central America , visit European design
metropolises and second-hand clothing markets in Ghana . 
Playing the game
The journalists go on their journey by following the route
on the board game . Rolling the dice , the players move
along the red circles on the board where they either have
to answer questions or get active . 
Players gain knowledge in a playful way through the action
cards that prompt them to perform tasks . The numbers on
the World Map Game Board correspond with the numbers
on the action cards . In some cases , the action cards lead
students to take a detour , there and back along a path
marked with yellow spots to return to the main game . 
The question cards relate to the different steps in the
production of cotton from cultivation to disposal as
well as the impact on the environment and workers in
different countries . The colours of the circles on the board
correspond with the colours of the question cards . 
Printing the question cards : If you print the answers
on the reverse of the questions , you will find the
corresponding answer prints directly behind the question . 
There are three types of questions , which require printing
on different coloured paper : 

Pink and yellow : 
•
• These questions deal with the
cultivation of cotton . Two pages of the questions should
be copied onto pink paper and one page onto yellow . 
These questions should be asked on the dark pink and
yellow spots of the map in South-East Asia on the board . 

Green : 
•
• These questions deal with free trade zones and
should be copied onto green paper . These questions
should be asked on the green spots of the map in
Central America on the board . 
Orange : 
•
• These questions deal with cotton production
and use , and should be copied onto orange paper . 
These questions should be asked on the peachy-orange
coloured spots on the map that can be found all over the
world on the board . 
As soon as somebody reaches the second-hand clothing
market in Ghana the game is over and the journalists
gather for a meeting to discuss their experiences and
consult with colleagues on how to present the results
to the public . As the facilitator , act as editor and inform
the group before they start the game what their task
will be at the meeting . This will depend on the class , but
suggestions include : 
holding a panel discussion ; 
•
writing an article ; 
•
producing an invitation for a press conference
• 1 
; 

preparing a press kit
• 
( background information , factsheets , photos , etc .  )  ; 
writing a script for aTV documentary ; 
•
creating a campaign . 
•
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
1
Additional information for participants for the preparation of a press conference : 
A press conference is a good way to inform the public about a complex theme : you can invite several speakers and representatives from different media ( newspapers , TV , radio , etc .  )  . 
The invitation should tell the media about the issue , the date and venue , and include a snappy title for the conference . The press conference could take an hour or so after the end of the
game . It should include statements from speakers at the beginning and the opportunity to ask questions afterwards . 
156
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Starting the game
Use the following script to invite the students on the
journalists ’ journey . 
You are a journalist invited to participate in a
research trip about how and where clothes
are made . 
The trend for fashion produced fairly and in an
environmentally sound way is increasing , but at the
same time , news about pollution from production
and inhumane working conditions in the garment and
sporting goods industries is increasing . 
So why is that ? 
As journalists , join us on a research trip around the
world of garments to investigate the current situation on
the ground for yourselves . 
The itinerary takes you from India to China and South-
East Asia , and from Latin America to Europe and Africa , 
where the trip finally ends . There you will have a closing
meeting , where you will discuss your experiences and
consult with your colleagues on how to present the
results to the public . Your editor ( the facilitator ) will give
you more guidance on what your task will be at the
meeting . 
Good luck and bon voyage ! 
Materials required
Downloadable from : 
resources / 
teachingmaterials / journalistjourney
1 ) World map game board . 
2 ) Action cards . 
3 ) Question cards . 
Materials required ( facilitator to provide ) 
1 ) 	
Game pieces to represent the different players / teams in
different colours . 
2 ) A dice . 
3 ) 	
Cards with questions and answers printed on different
coloured paper ( see above )  . 
4 ) 	
Pieces of plain fabric , fabric dye and fabric stamp for
action card 3 . Alternatively , if you don ’ t have fabric , dye
and a stamp , you could ask students to design a piece of
clothing . 
5 ) 	
Needle , thread , small pieces of cotton fabric and buttons
for action card 6 . 
6 ) 	
Raw cotton for action card 9 . Alternatively , if you can ’ t
find raw cotton , you could use cotton-wool , or sheep ’ s
wool , simply for the students to engage with their hands . 
Useful websites
www . suedwind-agentur . at
www . cleanclothes . at
www . labourbehindthelabel . org
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org
157
Journalist ’ s Journey through the World of Garments
Green Cards
Question G 1
The vast majority of workers in the garments and sport
shoe industry are female . What is the percentage of
women employed in production in Bulgaria ? 
Question G 2
What is the average age of a female garment worker in
Bangladesh ? 
Question G 3
What are FreeTrade Zones or Export Processing Zones ? 
Question G 4
What is a ‘ maquiladora ’ or “ maquila “  ? 
Question G 5
How do maquiladoras benefit US companies ? 
Question G 6
What are some of the major problems for a woman
working in a maquiladora ? 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
158
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Answer G 2
The age of most garment workers in Bangladesh ranges from
20 to 29 years . The average age of the female garment
workers in Bangladesh rose from 19 years to about 24 years
in the 1990s . 
Source : Hurley , J .  ( ed .  )  ( 2003 ) Garment Industry Subcontracting
and Workers ’ Rights : Report of Women Working Worldwide Action
Research in Asia and Europe , Women Working Worldwide , UK 
( p . 43 )  . 
Answer G 1
90% of the workers employed in production in Bulgaria
are women . 
Owners : 10% women
Management : 20% women
Administrative personnel : 50% women
Workers in production : 90% women
Home-based workers : 100% women
Source : Hurley , J .  ( ed .  )  ( 2003 ) Garment Industry Subcontracting
and Workers ’ Rights : Report of Women Working Worldwide Action
Research in Asia and Europe , Women Working Worldwide , UK
Answer G 4
A ‘ maquila ’ or ‘ maquiladora ’ is the Mexican word to refer to a
factory that manufactures products for export . It is a factory or
assembly plant operated in Mexico under preferential
tariff programmes established by the US and Mexican
governments to encourage the development of industry in
Mexico . Mexico allows materials to be used in maquilas to enter
duty-free , provided the finished product is then immediately
exported out of Mexico . The US in turn charges these products
a much lower tariff than products from other countries . 
Source : 
Answer G 3
EPZs or FTZs are geographical areas designated for
manufacturing that have special status when it comes to
taxation and other laws . Most of the FTZs / EPZs have been set
up in developing countries with the aim of attracting foreign
investors and reducing unemployment and poverty , and to
stimulate the area´s economy . They are regarded by companies
as good zones in which to invest and set up labour intensive
manufactoring centres , due to tax breaks and the elimination
of quotas and tariffs . Working conditions are often poor and
environmental protection rules non-existent . These zones are
often used by multinational corporations to set up factories for
the production of goods ( such as clothing or shoes )  . 
Source : 
Answer G 6
Being a woman and getting pregnant has proved to be one
of the biggest problems in maquiladoras as many women are
forced to resign because of pregnancy . There are a number of
other problems faced by women including long hours , low pay , 
sexual harassment , lack of rights to join a trade union and poor
health and safety . 
Source : 
Answer G 5
The primary advantage to US companies is the lower cost of
labour in Mexico . Labour typically costs about $21 an hour in
the United States , compared to about $5 an hour in Mexico . 
Other advantages include more favourable labour laws in
Mexico , and fewer union-driven work rules . 
Source : 
Journalist ’ s Journey through the World of Garments
Green Cards
159
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Pink and Yellow cards
Question P 1
The cotton industry relies heavily on fertilizers and
pesticides . Historically , what has been one of the most
destructive pests in cotton production ? 
Question P 2
How many people are involved in cotton production
around the world ? 
Question P 3
Why is cotton production such a big issue for
developing countries such as Benin , Chad , Burkina Faso , 
Mali andTogo ? 
Question P 4
Which countries were the world ’ s biggest cotton
producers in 2007 ? 
Question P 5
99% of the world ’ s cotton farmers live and work in
the developing world . What amount of world cotton
production do these farmers account for ? 
a . 10%
b . 50%
c . 75%
Question P 6
Which countries are the biggest exporters of cotton in
the world according to 2007 data ? 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
160
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Answer P 2
100 million rural households around the world are involved in
cotton production ( 2001 )  . 
It is grown in over 100 countries , representing approximately 50
million farmers globally . 
Sources : 
docs / 2008 / t / the_case_for_fairtrade_certified_cotton . pdf , 

Answer P 1
The boll weevil , which is a small , greyish-brown snout beetle . It
feeds on the bolls ( unopened seed pods ) of the cotton plant
and on cotton buds . It caused so much damage in cotton raising
states of the USA that farmers had to diversify their crops . 
The boll weevil is combated by dusting fields from the air with
insecticides . 
Sources :  , 

Answer P 4
The world ’ s biggest producers of cotton ( 2007 ) were : 
- China : 28% of global share . 
- India : 19 . 8% of global share . 
- USA : 14 . 9% of global share . 
Source : 
dying-fields / global-cotton-industry / cotton-production-and-
consumption-worldwide / 1946 / 
Answer P 3
Cotton exports , on average , generate between 4 and 7% of the
GDP in these countries , while for the USA it only accounts for
0 . 0004 % . 
Source : 
docs / 2008 / t / the_case_for_fairtrade_certified_cotton . pdf
Answer P 6
Cotton Exporters 2007
Note that four major producers - China , India , Pakistan and
Turkey - do not export cotton and occasionally import to
supply their textile industries . 
Source : 
dying-fields / global-cotton-industry / cotton-production-and-
consumption-worldwide / 1946 / 
Answer P 5
These farmers account for 75% of world cotton production . 
Source : EJF ( 2007 ) The Deadly Chemicals in Cotton , London : 
Environmental Justice Foundation in collaboration with Pesticide
Action Network
Cotton Exporters 2007 Global share
USA 41 . 2%
Uzbekistan 11 . 6 %
India 8 . 9%
Brazil 7 . 1%
Australia 2 . 9 %
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Pink and Yellow Cards
161
Question P 7
Cotton accounts for more insecticide usage than any
other single crop . What percentage of global insecticide
releases are used in the production of cotton ? 
a . 1%
b . 16%
c . 25%
Question P 8
What percentage of cropland is used for cultivating cotton
worldwide ? 
Question P 9
Conventional cotton cultivation needs lots of chemicals , 
especially pesticides and insecticides . Why are cotton
farmers and cotton pickers in developing countries
not normally protected against the negative effects of
pesticides ? 
Question P 10
The most important crop in Uzbekistan is cotton . 
Why ? 
Question P 11
Can you guess which country , although naturally dry , is
recognized worldwide for its efficient use of water during
the cotton production process ? 
a . Uzbekistan
b . USA
c . Australia
Question P 12
Cotton needs sun and water to grow . Many countries
have to use irrigation for their cotton fields . How many
litres of water are needed to make one t-shirt ? Guess ! 
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Pink and Yellow Cards
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
162
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Answer P 8
Cotton grows on 2 . 4% of the world ’ s arable land , yet is
responsible for the release of over US$2 billion worth
of chemical pesticides each year . Nearly half of these are
considered toxic enough to be classified as ‘ hazardous ’ by the
World Health Organisation . 
Source : EJF ( 2007 ) The Deadly Chemicals in Cotton , London : 
Environmental Justice Foundation in collaboration with Pesticide
Action Network
Answer P 7
Cotton uses approximately 25% of the world ’ s insecticides
and more than 10% of the pesticides ( including herbicides , 
insecticides , and defoliants .  )  . 
Source : Allen Woodburn Associates Ltd .  / Managing Resources
Ltd ( 1995 )  ,  “ Cotton : The Crop and its Agrochemicals Market ” 
Answer P 10
Cotton is the most important crop in Uzbekistan because it
accounts for about 50% of the country ’ s export earnings . 
Source : 
uzbekistan%20e . pdf
Answer P 9
This could be because of : 
• lack of knowledge and awareness of the risks of chemicals ; 
• non-existent or inadequate information and training ; 
• 
lack of protective clothes ( too expensive and inappropriate
for use in the tropical areas )  ; 
• 
lack of water to wash after using chemicals . 
In addition , profits are often put ahead of the needs of people
and the environment . 
Source : Bundesministerium für wirtschaftliche Zusammenarbeit
und Entwicklung ( Hg .  )  , King Cotton – Baumwolle als Schicksal , 
Medienpaket mit zwei Dokumentarfilmen von Peter Heller und
Zusatzmaterial DVD Rom , Deutschland 2006 . D1 . 1 . 
Answer P 12
On average 2 , 000 litres of water are used to produce one
t-shirt . 
Source : 
Answer P 11
Australia is the correct answer , due to its license-based system
on water controlled by the government . 
Source : 
cotton_industry_tcm43-59713 . pdf
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Pink and Yellow Cards
163
Question P 13
Where was the first organic cotton certification
programme created ? 
Question P 14
The cotton industry relies heavily on fertilizers and
pesticides . Historically what has been one of the most
destructive pests in cotton production ? 
Question P 15
How many chemicals are used to turn raw materials into
clothes ? 
Question P 16
What is the source of most pesticides and fertilizers ? 
Question P 17
Cotton is not the only fibre to be environmentally
damaging . Can you think of any harmful effects nylon
might have ? 
Question P 18
How many agricultural workers exposed to pesticides are
estimated to be poisoned every year ? 
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Pink and Yellow Cards
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
164
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Answer P 14
The boll weevil . Boll Weevil , a small , greyish-brown snout beetle . 
It feeds on the bolls ( unopened seed pods ) of the cotton plant
and on cotton buds . It caused so much damage in cotton raising
states ofThe USA that the south has to diversify its crops . 
The boll weevil is combated by dusting fields from the air with
insecticides . 
Source :  , 

Answer P 13
In the late 1980s by theTexas Department of Agriculture . 
Source : Myers , Dorothy and Stolton , Sue ( 1999 ) Organic cotton : 
from field to final product , p . 6
Answer P 16
Crude oil . 
Source : 
Answer P 15
At least 8000 chemicals are used to turn raw materials into
clothes . Pesticides are used in production , bleaching , dyeing sizing
and finishing of textiles . These chemicals include heavy metal
dyes , chlorine bleaches , formaldehyde ( to prevent creasing ) and
paraffin ( to ease weaving )  . 
Sources :  . co . uk / thread / features / how-dirty / 
Answer P 18
The Pan American Health Organization ( PAHO ) estimates
about 3% of exposed agricultural workers suffer from
an episode of acute pesticide poisoning annually—with a
population of about 1 . 3 billion agricultural workers worldwide , 
that means that as many as thirty-nine million people may suffer
from acute poisonings each year . 
Source : 
inDepthGlobalPoisoning . html
Answer P 17
Nylon manufacture uses large amounts of oil , produces nitrous
oxide , a greenhouse gas that ’ s 310 times more potent than CO2 
, 
and the fabric isn ’ t biodegradable . 
Source :  . co . uk / thread / features / how-dirty / 
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Pink and Yellow Cards
165
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Orange Cards
Question O 1
How many kilos of clothing are thrown away per person
in the USA each year ? 
Question O 2
How much bigger is the world supply of women ’ s used
clothing compared with that of men ’ s ? 
Question O 3
Can you think of three different ways in which a piece of
clothing can be recycled or reused ? 
Question O 4
Most used clothing collected in Europe is sent to Africa . 
Name some arguments in support of the transport of
used clothing to Africa . 
Question O 5
Most used clothing collected in Europe is sent to Africa . 
State some reasons against the transport of used clothing
to Africa . 
Question O 6
What percentage of worldwide cotton production does
organic cotton represent ? 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
166
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Answer O 2
Seven times bigger , due to American and European women
buying many more clothes than men and disposing of them
more frequently . 
Source : 

Answer O 1
30 . 8 kg ( 68 pounds )  , which represents 4% of municipal solid
waste . 
Source : 

Answer O 4
• Reduction of waste in Europe . 
• Clothes are re-used . 
•The sale of clothes by charities can fund social projects . 
• Creation of jobs for traders and entrepreneurs in Africa . 
You may have other ideas . 
Source : Pietra , R .  ( 2005 ) The travels of a t-shirt in the global
economy , New Jersey : John Wiley and Sons .  , Chapter 11 . 
Answer O 3
Here are some ideas . You may have other suggestions : 
1 . It can be resold to another consumer at a lower price . 
2 . It can be exported in bulk for sale in developing countries . 
3 . 
It can be chemically / mechanically recycled into raw material
for other products . 
4 . It can be swapped with friends . 
5 . It can be customised and transformed into a new garment . 
Answer O 6
Organic cotton represents only 0 . 03% of worldwide cotton
production . 
Source : 
focus . html ; also in 
page / 111812202
Answer O 5
• 
Low prices of used clothing mean that people do not buy
locally produced garments and textiles , which weakens the
African textile industry and results in fewer jobs . 
•
Traditional clothing is replaced by European style clothing . 
• 
Garments that arrive in better condition are out of reach for
the poor and only accessible to the upper classes , therefore
increasing the gap between rich and poor . 
Source : Pietra , R .  ( 2005 ) The travels of a t-shirt in the global
economy , New Jersey : John Wiley and Sons , Chapter 11
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Orange Cards
167
Question O 7
How many tonnes of clothing per annum are consumed
in the UK ? 
Question O 8
Cotton fibre is the most significant raw textile in the
world . Among other purposes , it is used for clothing , 
home furnishings , industrial and medical uses . What
percentage of the total cotton consumption is used in the
textiles industry ? 
a . 30%
b . 60%
c . 45%
Question O 9
What percentage of the world ’ s fibres is made
from cotton ? 
Question O 10
We use different fibres to produce garments . What are
two main differences between a natural and a
synthetic fibre ? 
Question O 11
What are the raw materials in the main
synthetic / artificial fibres ? 
Question O 12
Cotton is used to make jeans , t-shirts and towels . What
do you think are the characteristics that make it such a
popular fibre ? 
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Orange Cards
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
168
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Answer O 8
Since the early 2000s , cotton has accounted for roughly 39%
of world fibre consumption . In contrast , the share of synthetic
fibres rose to 58% , up from 5% in 1960 . 
Source : 

Answer O 7
UK textiles and clothing consumption was approximately two
million tonnes per annum between 1996 and 2005 , with a value
of £38 billion pounds . 
Source : 
products / clothing . htm # impact
Answer O 10
1 ) 
Natural fibres usually come from plants or animals , whereas
synthetic fibres are man-made and manufactured using plant
materials and minerals . 
2 ) 
Natural fibres are usually short staple fibres ( that need to
be spun into yarn )  , whereas synthetic fibres tend to have
continuous filament fibres ( that don ’ t need spinning )  . 
Source :  . co . uk / schools / gcsebitesize / design / 
textiles / fibresrev1 . shtm
Answer O 9
40% of the world ’ s fibres are made from cotton . 
Source : 
Answer O 12
For example , cotton has a soft feel , good drape , is comfortable , 
can be washed and ironed , is durable and very absorbent . 
Source :  . co . uk / schools / gcsebitesize / design / 
textiles / fibresrev2 . shtml
Answer O 11
The manufacture of polyester and other synthetic fabrics is an
energy-intensive process requiring large amounts of crude oil , 
and releasing emissions that can cause or aggravate respiratory
diseases . 
Source : 

Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Orange Cards
169
Journalists ’ Journey through the World of Garments
Action Cards 
( 1 ) 
You are out of pesticides . 
Get some ! 
To find some , you have to take a little detour . 
8 ) 
Spin some cotton until the next round !  
( 4 ) 
You have to get indigo dye ! 
You have to take a little detour to find some . 
Bon voyage !  
( 3 ) 
Choose a fabric stamp and print a piece
of fabric in an interesting way .  
( 5 ) 
You have arrived in Latin America . 
What is “ faster ” in Spanish ?  
( 7 ) 
There ’ s no pumice stone for stone-washing jeans
on site . Buy some in Greece ! Unfortunately , 
you have to take a detour for this .  
( 2 ) 
Bad luck ! The stock market has
declined – return to Start !  
( 6 ) 
Attach a button to your fabric . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
170
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Ethical Fashion Introductory Workshop : 
Toolkit for Trainers
Anna Paluszek and Katarzyna Szeniawska , Polish Humanitarian Organization , Poland
anna . paluszek @ pah . org . pl and kasiasz @ post . pl
This workshop is based on materials from Suedwind Agentur and Labour Behind the Label , who are partners
in the European Fashioning an Ethical Industry project . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To gain knowledge and understanding of the consequences of globalisation on working conditions in the
•
•
garment industry . 
To develop an understanding of the role of big brands and consumers in a garment supply chain . 
•
•
To encourage participants to be involved in actions to improve working conditions in the garment industry . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students 10 to 25
5 . Length of time required Two and a half hours
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities , Discussion and
debate , 
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Campaigns , Companies , Consumers , Corporate social
responsibility , Globalisation , Prices , Supply chains , Trade , 
Workers ’ rights , Working conditions
171
Background
A workshop outline is set out in which participants
explore working conditions in the garment industry , 
global interdependencies and what consumers can do to
bring about change . The toolkit includes a role play and
necessary worksheets . All of the activities included in the
workshop are interactive and involve the participants in
the debate . The workshop is designed for high school and
college level students . The training set enables educators to
facilitate the workshop even if they do not have previous
experience of the issues . 
In the first part of the workshop participants track the
production of a pair of jeans , think about how its cost is
split between different stages of production , and discuss
the realities of work in a garment factory and the role of
consumers in the garment supply chain . 
The second part of this workshop is a role play called 
 “ Global Interdependencies ” involving different actors in
the global supply chain :  ’ garment workers ’  ,  ’ the owner
of a garment factory ’  ,  ’ international clothing company ’ 
and ’ consumers ’  . Each group discusses their situation
based on information on role cards and presents the
results of their discussions to the other groups . Then the
trainer announces that the factory is found to be using
child labour , and asks the “ consumers ” for their reaction .  
 “ Consumers ” come up with ideas about what they can
do ( e . g . boycott , make demands for improvements in
working conditions , etc .  )  . Then they wait for the response
of the brand and factory owner and , at the end , the
reaction of the workers . The role play highlights a chain of
interdependencies between consumers ’ decisions and the
working conditions of the workers . 
Participants respond to this exercise in many different
ways . More advanced groups , aware of working conditions
and garment supply chains , tend to react in more engaged
ways , which is why the first part of the role play is so
important to introduce less informed participants to the
situation of garment workers in the factory . The main goal
of this role play is to encourage participants to believe
that they can ( as consumers ) take action and influence
the big brands . You should keep this goal in mind when
facilitating the discussion between the groups . You can give
some additional examples of successful actions , to inspire
the participants . The discussion should give participants a
space to put forward their own ways of thinking , but they
shouldn ’ t forget that they have been given a “ role ”  . 
Resources Required

One pair of jeans cut according to the photo diagram
•
contained in the worksheet
Map of the world
•
5 pieces of flipchart paper
•
Marker pens
•

Some leaflets with information about working conditions
•
in the garment industry such as those from the Polish
Humanitarian Organisation , the Dutch Clean Clothes
Campaign , Labour Behind the Label , Sudwind in Austria , 
or similar organizations . 
Materials Provided in this Pack
Workshop outline
•
Worksheet showing the stages of garment production
•

Worksheet showing ‘ who gets what from the final price
•
of a pair of jeans ’ 
4 role cards for the role play
•
Ethical Fashion Introductory Workshop Outline
Objectives : 

To gain knowledge and understanding of the
•
•
consequences of globalisation on working conditions
in the garment industry . 

To develop an understanding of the role of big brands
•
•
and consumers in a garment supply chain . 

To encourage participants to be involved in actions to
•
•
improve working conditions in the garment industry . 
Relevant Websites
www . modnieietycznie . pl – Fashioning an Ethical Industry
project website in Polish
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org – Fashioning an Ethical
Industry project website in English
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
172
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Time Exercise Materials
0 : 00-0 : 10 Welcome and get to know each other : 

Trainers introduce themselves and briefly present the objectives and outline of the
•
•
workshop . 

Participants introduce themselves : each person should say their name and favourite
•
•
piece of clothing ( e . g . favourite skirt , t-shirt ) etc . 
Participants write their name on a label . 
•
•
Labels for name
badges . 
0 : 10-0 : 30 To understand the stages of garment production and interdependencies between
South and North : 
Trainer hangs the map . 
•
•
Trainer gives participants worksheets describing the stages of production . 
•
•

Ask participants to mark the location of the stages of production shown on the
•
•
worksheet on the map .  ( Trainers ’ Notes ,  ‘ The Journey of the Jeans ’  , have been
provided for guidance .  ) 

Trainer briefly describes each stage of production and gives participants the following
•
•
questions : 
Why does one pair of jeans need to travel so much in its production ? 
•
•

How does global production affect the environment , country economies or people in
•
•
each country ? 
How does global production influence working conditions in factories ? 
•
•
Worksheet : Stages
in the Production of
Jeans showing the
stages of garment
production . 
Map of the world
0 : 30-0 : 40 
Trainer shows the pieces of jeans and asks someone to suggest which supply chain
•
•
actor receives which percentage of the final cost of the jeans as represented by the
pieces . 

Once each piece has been allocated to a supply chain actor , ask the students if they
•
•
are happy with that distribution . 

Trainer presents the right answers noting that this is just one example of how the final
•
•
price is divided : 
Retailer – 50%
•
•
Trademark – 25%
•
•
Transport , taxes , duties – 11%
•
•
Materials , profit wages for sub-contractors - 13%
•
•
Worker ’ s wage – 1%
•
•
Trainer asks : Who makes the most profit from the global production in garments and
•
•
is this situation fair ? 
Jeans ( or picture ) 
cut to show who
gets what ( shown in
handout )  . 
Worksheet :  ‘ Who gets
what from the final
price of a pair of jeans 
( in per cent )  ?  ’ 
0 : 40-1 : 00 What is behind this 1% for worker ? Discussion about working conditions : 

Participants brainstorm what it is like to work in a factory . Trainer makes notes of the
•
•
discussion . Then the trainer comments on the discussion and tries to arrange the ideas
into categories on a flipchart , for example : 
Working hours . 
•
•
Health and safety . 
•
•
Harassment and violence . 
•
•
Trade unions . 
•
•
The flipchart notes will be helpful in the next part of the workshop . 
You may want to show a short film during this section ( see http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / ChinaBlue /  ) 
You can use some
photos to show the
reality in factories . 
Flipchart . 
1 : 00-1 : 10 Break
Workshop Plan
173
1 : 10-1 : 20 Role Play : Global Interdependencies : 
Trainer introduces the role play . 
•
•

Trainer divides participants into four groups : Factory workers , factory owner , 
•
•
international clothing company and consumers . 
Each group receives one role card , flipchart paper and marker pen . 
•
•
4 role cards . 
4 pieces of flipchart
paper . 
4 marker pens . 
1 : 20-1 : 40 Work in groups : 
Trainer asks groups the following questions : 
•
•

Describe , using three adjectives , what your life and work is like
•
• 
( e . g . sad , amusing , exhaustive , etc .  ) 
What ’ s important to you ? 
•
•
Who are you reliant on ? 
•
•
Who is reliant on you ? 
•
•

Each group discusses the four questions for around 20 minutes . Groups should answer
•
•
questions in role and write or draw answers on flipchart paper . 

Each group should choose a spokesperson , who will present the group ’ s response to
•
•
the rest of the participants . 
1 : 40-2 : 00 Feedback : 

Groups present their work in the following order : factory workers , factory owner , 
•
•
international clothing company , consumers ( around 5 minutes per group )  . 
Adhesive tape to fix
flipcharts on the wall . 
2 : 00-2 : 15 Discussion : 

Discussion in whole group about the causes of the poor situation facing garment
•
•
workers in the garment industry and the unfair split of income . Participants should stay
in small groups and remain in role . 

Trainer should moderate the discussion and , as far as possible , respond to participants ’ 
•
•
questions . 
2 : 15-2 : 25 What we can do : 

Participants discuss in small groups what they can do to change the situation for
•
•
workers and present back in the following order : consumers , international clothing
company , factory owner , factory workers . One way to introduce the topic of
consumer responsibility would be for the trainer to ask : Consumers find out from
newspapers that there is child labour in a factory supplying the international clothing
company . What should they do ? 

The consumers brainstorm ideas about what they can do in this situation ( e . g . 
•
•
research brands , write to the brands , support the Clean Clothes Campaign ’ s email
requests for action , learn more about being a responsible consumer , boycott , etc .  )  . 
Then they wait for the response of the other groups : international clothing company , 
factory owner and workers . 

All participants then discuss what consumers can do and what their responsibility is . 
•
•
Trainer writes down ideas for individual actions on flipchart to show the possibilities
for taking action to improve workers ’ rights and encourage the participants to take
action themselves . 
Flipchart . 
Marker pen . 
2 : 25-2 : 30 Conclusion : 
In a circle , each participant says what surprised him / her today . 
•
•

Trainers distribute information about working conditions , and thank participants . 
•
•
Leaflets with
information about
working conditions in
the garment industry . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
174
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Role Cards
✁
✁
Factory workers
You live in Bangladesh . You are 18 years old ; you ’ ve worked since you were 8 years old . You work a dozen or so hours a
day , one-third of it constituting compulsory overtime , not always paid . You work all these hours so you can survive on your
salary , which is below the legal minimum at around 15 € per month . From this money you have to pay rent for one room
in a tin house where you live with your family , which you support . In your region there is no other work and each day new
people from surrounding or distant villages arrive looking for work . When there are too many workers in the factory you
are fired and then you have to work from home , for lower wages . Last year workers who tried to establish a trade union
to fight for better working conditions and higher salaries were fired . Since that time , nobody has tried to fight for better
conditions . From time to time inspectors ( auditors ) come to check what the working conditions are like . The factory
owner tells you what questions the inspectors will ask and the answers you should give . 
✁
✁
Factory owner
You employ people from the local area in Bangladesh . You are the main employer in your town , but there is still great
competition between other factory owners in the region . As your main advantage is a cheap workforce , you try
everything you can to keep wages low , overtime high and workers on short-term contracts so that you don ’ t have to pay
them when there is no work . Your prices are also low because you circumvent rules relating to environmental protection . 
The government turns a blind eye because foreign investment is one of the main sources of income for the country . The
inspectors ( auditors ) sent by the brands and retailers to check on working conditions rarely , if ever , get in touch with your
workers . You keep two types of documentation ( authentic and fake ) about working hours and pay so that you don ’ t have
problems from the inspectors . To be competitive ( the buyers are always asking for lower prices and faster production )  , 
you can ’ t pay the workers higher wages or reduce their hours so you need to cover up what you actually pay . You ’ re not
threatened by trade unions because you have established your own trade union which you control ( yellow trade union ) 
and which supports your company ’ s actions . 
✁
✁
International clothing company
Every year you try to gain a larger market share , but consumers are more and more demanding , wanting to buy good
quality clothes at cheaper prices . You have marketing specialists working for your brand , but the price is the factor that
attracts consumers ’ attention , especially discounted products , which also need to make a profit to satisfy investors . The
most profitable way forward is to move production to a poorer country with fewer employment regulations , where
governments are willing to give tax concessions and don ’ t seem concerned about the environment or working conditions
in factories so they can remain in power . Generally , you don ’ t care about the working conditions in factories . 
✁
✁
Consumers
You live in a city of average size . You are a student and you have a Saturday job . What do you care about ? What is
important to you when shopping for clothes ? 
175
Trainers ’ Notes : The Journey of the Jeans
COUNTRIES AND STAGES OF PRODUCTION
The jeans are designed in Switzerland . 
The cotton is cultivated in Uzbekistan , Burkina Faso or USA , and sent to China . 
The thread is spun in China using Swiss machinery . 
The thread is dyed indigo in the Philippines . 
The material is woven in Poland . 
The labels are made in Portugal and the buttons in France . 
The material and other parts are sewn together in the Philippines . 
The jeans are sent to the wholesaler in Switzerland and sold there . 
You take the jeans wherever you go . 
The jeans are reused in Ghana as second-hand clothes sent from Europe . 
✁
✁
Worksheet : Stages in the Production of Jeans
Design Weaving the fabric
Cultivation of cotton ( 1 ) Sewing
Cultivation of cotton ( 2 ) Label production
Cultivation of cotton ( 3 ) Button production
Spinning the threads Retail
Dyeing the threads Post consumer use : second-hand
Production of sewing machines Post consumer use : landfill
✁
✁
Worksheet : Who Gets What from the Final Price of a Pair of Jeans ( in per cent ) 
Retailer – 50% Brand – 25%
Transport , taxes , duties – 11% Worker ’ s wage – 1%
Materials , profit & wages for factories - 13%
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
176
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Quiz : Introducing the Garment Industry
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To introduce participants to the garment industry and some basic facts and figures about workers in an
•
•
interactive way . 
To consider the negative and positive impacts the garment industry could be seen to have on garment workers . 
•
•
Summary
Fashioning an Ethical Industry has devised a seven question quiz with accompanying presentation to introduce
participants to working conditions in the garment industry . The presentation is available to download from http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / teachingmaterials / quiz
Instructions
Ask students to complete the quiz in pairs or small groups . Reassure students that this is not a test and that it does not
matter if they know the answers or not – the aim is to get them thinking about the issues raised . An alternative way of
running the quiz , if there is space for students to move around , is to ask them to find a different person to answer each
question . This is particularly useful to get groups mixing . 
Once students have had enough time to work through the questions , go through the answers one at a time using the
PowerPoint presentation , and giving students the opportunity to discuss the answers and ask questions . 
You can follow the quiz with a discussion about what students know about working conditions in the industry . Then
ask them to consider what positive impact the garment industry can have on workers , their communities and country . 
Suggested answers include : Wages , employment , infrastructure ( roads , ports , etc .  )  , related industries ( packaging , 
transportation , etc .  )  , women ’ s empowerment and foreign investment )  . 
Student evaluations have been extremely positive about this activity as it enables them to discuss the answers with
partners and engages them . Students also appreciate the facts and figures element of the activity . 
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required 30 minutes
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Companies , Consumers , Corporate social responsibility , 
Gender , Globalisation , Prices , Wages , Workers ’ rights , 
Working conditions
177
QUIZ QUESTIONS
1 . How much is spent on clothes each year across the world ? 
a . US$ 1 trillion b . US$ 50 billion c . US$ 10 million
2 . How much is the Nike brand estimated to be worth ? 
a . US$ 2 . 7 million b . US$ 12 billion c . US$ 50 billion
3 . What percentage of the final price of a pair of jeans does a factory worker earn on average ? 
a . 10% b . 5% c . 1%
4 . What is the monthly minimum wage for a garment worker in Bangladesh ? 
a . £113 . 53 / US$169 b . £32 . 82 / US$48 . 92		c . £12 . 41 / US$24
5 . What percentage of garment workers are women ? 
a . 10% b . 55% c . 75%
6 . How long might it take for a catwalk design to be seen on the high street ? 
a . Six months b . Six weeks c . Six days
7 . What percentage of clothes are bought at value ( low-cost ) retailers in the UK ? 
a . 10% b . 40% c . 70%
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
178
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
QUIZ ANSWERS
1 . How much is spent on clothes each year across the world ? 
US$ 1 trillion in 2000
Source : Trading Away our Rights , Oxfam , 2004
2 . How much is the Nike brand estimated to be worth ? 
In 2003 the value of Nike ’ s brand was estimated at US$ 12 billion . 
Source : 
3 . What percentage of the final price of a pair of jeans does a factory worker earn on average ? 
About 1%
Source : Sudwind , 2002
4 . What is the monthly minimum wage for a garment worker in Bangladesh ? 
	
The legal minimum wage for a Bangladeshi garment worker rose to 1 , 662 . 50 Taka ( £12 . 41 / US$24 at 2006
exchange rates ) a month in October 2006 . This is between two-thirds and half the amount a single garment
worker needs to spend just to fulfil basic needs . 
Source :  . org / urgent / 06-09-22 . htm # wages
5 . What percentage of garment workers are women ? 
More than 75% of jobs in the industry are held by women . 
Source : 
6 . How long might it take for a catwalk design to be seen on the high street ? 
The latest styles can be on the high street just six weeks after they first appear on the catwalk . 
Source : Fashioning an Ethical Industry , 2006
7 . What percentage of clothes are bought at value ( low-cost ) retailers in the UK ? 
We now buy 40% of all our clothes at value retailers - with just 17% of our clothing budget . 
Source : Who Pays For Cheap Clothes ? Labour Behind the Label , 2006
179
I Agree / I Disagree : Exploring Attitudes to
the Social and Environmental Impact of the
Garment Industry
Adapted by Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK , for the garment industry from an existing activity . 
The author of the original idea for this type of activity is unknown . 
info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

This activity enables participants to explore their own attitudes towards working conditions in the garment industry . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students 5 to 20
5 . Length of time required 20 to 40 minutes
6 . Type of activity Discussion and debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
180
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Summary
Students indicate their opinion about a particular
statement by moving towards one side of the room or the
other . The activity is useful for initiating discussion ; engaging
students with an issue from their own personal perspective ; 
enabling students to recognise that there are a range of
opinions about an issue ; and for introducing complex
arguments . The activity also gets participants moving
around and encourages involvement in the debate . 
Resources Required

Two signs : one saying ‘ I AGREE ’ and the other
•
• 
 ‘ I DISAGREE ’ in large writing on A4 paper . 
A room in which people can move about freely . 
•
•
Statements . 
•
•
Method
1 . 	
Clear space in the room so that participants can move
from one side of the room to the other . 
2 . 	
Stick a piece of paper on one wall saying ‘ I agree ’  , and ‘ I
disagree ’ on the opposite wall . 
3 . 	
Read one of the statements . Statements vary in their
complexity so choose ones that suit the group . 
4 . 	
Ask participants to listen to the statements and
then move towards one or other sides of the room
depending on how strongly or not they agree with
the statement . If they are very close to one wall , this
is an indication they feel strongly about the statement . 
The further they move towards the middle of the
room indicates they feel less strongly . Those who are
undecided can stay in the middle of the room . 
5 . 	
Draw out why participants either agree or disagree
with the statements . Ask two or three participants why
they are standing where they are . Try to ensure that
all participants have a chance to share their opinions
during this exercise . Participants can move towards
one side of the room or the other as they listen to the
arguments put forward by other participants . Enable a
discussion to take place if you have time and want to
explore a particular issue . It is important not to judge
participants ’ responses but allow them to explore the
issues . 
6 . 	
Repeat with a different statement . Four or five
statements are usually sufficient . Do adapt or add your
own statements as appropriate for the group . 
Suggested Statements ( you can add your
own or adapt these ) 

Workers in the garment industry should be grateful for
•
•
the jobs fashion companies provide . 

I would pay more for my clothes if the workers got a
•
•
better wage . 

Homeworking is better for women than working
•
•
in a factory . 

Low pay is fine for workers in developing countries
•
•
because the cost of living is lower there . 

If children are found working in a factory , the factory
•
•
should be closed . 

Trade unions are a bad influence on workers and simply
•
•
cause trouble . 

It is entirely companies ’ responsibility to make
•
•
sure that the workers who make their clothes are
treated fairly . 

It is better to buy clothes made in Britain because it
•
•
protects British jobs . 

It is better to buy garments from China because it
•
•
creates jobs for Chinese people . 

The workers who make clothes really do not worry me . 
•
•
My concern is that I look good and can afford to buy the
latest fashion . 

It is better to buy clothes from independent retailers
•
•
than from high street chains . 
Background reading
Fashioning an Ethical Industry have produced over twenty
factsheets and frequently asked questions that may enable
educators to stimulate discussions . Please visit : 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry factsheets : 
resources / factsheets / 
Frequently Asked Questions : 
faq / 
181
Labels and Initiatives
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Participants are introduced to some of the most common ‘ ethical ’ labels and initiatives and what they stand for . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators Specific knowledge required : Facilitators are ideally
familiar with the different initiatives presented 
( suggested reading has been listed below ) 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students Specific knowledge required : Some understanding of
workers ’ rights issues in the garment industry
4 . Number of students Groups of 6 , up to 24 students
5 . Length of time required One hour
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities , Discussion
and debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Marketing , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Corporate social responsibility , Fair trade , Ethical
initiatives / brands , Multi-stakeholder initiatives , Organic , 
Trade unions
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
182
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Summary
Fashioning an Ethical Industry developed this activity to
introduce students to some of the more commonly used
labels and initiatives relating to social and environmental
issues in the garment industry . In groups , participants
consider what an ethical label or initiative would mean to
them , match labels / logos to descriptions and consider if any
of the labels or initiatives presented match their ideas . 
FacilitatorS ’ Role
Facilitators move amongst the groups checking that
students understand the task and answering any questions . 
Facilitators should instruct participants to move through
tasks on time , and facilitate the plenary discussion in
task 4 . Facilitators are ideally familiar with the different
initiatives ( suggested reading has been listed below )  . 
Inevitably , questions will arise that the facilitator is unable
to answer . We suggest students follow up the workshop by
researching any unanswered questions . 
Materials Required ( provided ) 
Instructions for participants
•
•
Participants ’ sheet : Descriptions of labels and initiatives
•
•
Logos and labels ( images ) 
•
•
Facilitator ’ s sheet
•
•
Equipment Needed for Each Group
Scrap paper and pens
•
•
One copy of the participants ’ instruction sheet per pair
•
•

One set of the six logos / initiatives images and one set of
•
•
each logo / initiative description per group . These should
be cut up in advance and placed in a sealed envelope
and should not be opened until task 2 . 
Labels and Logos : Instructions for Participants
Task one :  ( 5-10 minutes ) 
Within your group , divide into pairs . Imagine that you are
responsible for developing an ethical standard or initiative . 
What would you want it to stand for ? How would you
anticipate it being monitored and checked ? Jot key words , 
sentences or an image that represents your ideas . 
Task two :  ( 25 minutes ) 
Look at the various logos and descriptions in the envelope
on your table . Read each description in turn out loud and
as a group try and match the description to one of the
logos . When you have matched the descriptions with the
logos discuss some of the following questions : 

Is there anything about the logos or descriptions that
•
surprises you ? 

What do you feel are the positive elements of the
•
various logos / initiatives ? 

What are the limitations of the various initiatives in
•
improving conditions for garment workers ? 

What other information do you need in order to make
•
this analysis ? 
Task three :  ( 10 minutes ) 
Come back together in your pairs . Choose one of the
logos and discuss how the initiative does or does not meet
the ‘ ideal ’ standard you devised at the beginning of the
exercise . 
Task four :  ( 20 minutes ) 
Plenary feedback : The following questions could guide the
plenary discussion : 
Do you have any observations about the exercise ? 
•

In what ways did your ideal scenario differ from the
•
initiative you looked at ? 
What did you learn ? 
•
Do you have any questions ? 
•
183
Participants ’ Sheet : Descriptions of the Labels / Initiatives
Description number 1
This is an independent product certification label guaranteeing that cotton farmers who meet international social and
environmental standards are getting a better deal . Farmers involved receive a fair and stable price for their cotton , as well as a
financial premium for investment in their community , receiving pre-financing where requested and benefiting from longer-term , 
more direct trading relationships . The label is applicable so far only to cotton production , and not to the other stages of textile
and garment manufacture , although there is a requirement for documentary evidence of efforts to ensure worker rights within
the rest of the supply . The focus is on addressing the imbalances of global trade for farmers in the developing world . 
✁
✁
Description number 2
This organisation brings together companies , non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) and trade union organisations . The
organisation exists to promote and improve the implementation of corporate codes of conduct in company supply chains . To
join the organisation , companies make a public commitment to adopting international labour standards and implementing them
in their supply chains , but membership does not mean the standards are being met . Companies must make an annual report
to the organisation . These company reports are not publicly available but they are summarised in this organisation ’ s own annual
report . 
✁
✁
Description number 3
This is a global network of organisations that seeks to enable producers to improve their livelihoods and communities through
fairer trade . Members of the network can include producer cooperatives , export companies , importers , retailers and individuals . 
Members ’ trading practices are monitored through self-assessment every two years against the organisation ’ s principles , that
relate to fair prices , working conditions , child labour and the environment . The logo applies to FairTrade organisations , but not
their products . 
✁
✁
Description number 4
In fashion , this label is applied to natural textile products to certify that they are grown and made using methods that cause the
least amount of harm to humans and the environment , replenish and maintain soil fertility , reduce the use of toxic and persistent
pesticides and fertilizers , and build biologically diverse agriculture . Social justice and rights , and high standards of animal welfare
are an integral part of the principles of this manufacturing process . There is no place for genetically modified organisms or their
derivatives within this certification scheme . 
✁
✁
Description number 5
This is a standard that can be applied to business practices in all industrial sectors including fashion . The production facility , such
as a garment factory , is inspected by external auditors . The inspections , similar to many social audits , are largely based on a
snapshot of conditions on a particular day . Issues that need to be remedied may be highlighted and a plan of action put in place
to meet the standard . Once the production facility has made the necessary improvements , it will then be certified to show they
meet this standard . 
✁
✁
Description number 6
Workers gain representation through these organisations , which negotiate wages , hours of work and working conditions with
employers . They also intervene on matters such as health and safety , complaints or grievances made by workers on unfair
treatment etc . These organisations negotiate collective agreements , and often join together across different sectors to form
national centres which represent their interests to governments and the public . They also join international organisations in their
sector , and the national centres join an international confederation , to deal with issues at the regional , international and global
levels . The logos are of the international organisation for the sector , and the international confederation . 
✁
✁
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
184
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
There are 9 elements of Social Accountability 8000 ( r )  ; the entire text is available on SAI ’ s
website at : ww . sa-intl . org / SA8000 / documents . html
Used with permission by SOCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY INTERNATIONAL
TM
185
ANSWERS / Suggested Reading
Description number 1 : Fairtrade

Questions and Answers about Fairtrade certified cotton
•
by the Fairtrade Foundation

docs / 2008 / c / cotton_qanda . pdf

Background to FairTrade Initiatives by the
•
Clean Clothes Campaign 
. org / companies / fair_trade . htm
Description number 2 : Ethical Trading Initiative

Interview with Dan Rees , director of the
•
EthicalTrading Initiative
danrees / 

Introduction to the EthicalTrading Initiative at
•
www . ethicaltrade . org ( direct URL in English : 
abteti / index . shtml ) 
Description number 3 : IFAT - the World
Fair Trade Organization logo

About IFAT at www . ifat . org
• 
( direct URL in English :  . 
php ? option = com_content & task = blogcategory & id = 8 & Ite
mid = 4 ) 

Background to FairTrade Initiatives by
•
the Clean Clothes Campaign 
. org / companies / fair_trade . htm
Description number 4 : Organic ( Soil Association logo )  : 

Organic textiles - some common questions answered at
•
www . soilassociation . org 
( direct URL in English : 
web / sa / saweb . nsf / 89d058cc4dbeb16d80256a73005a286
6 / 31e42c978eab86c280256dde003a8719 ! OpenDocum
ent ) 
Description number 5 : SA8000 logo : 

Frequently Asked Questions in the About Us section at
•
www . sa-intl . org 
( direct URL in English :  . 
cfm ? fuseaction = Page . 
viewPage & pageId = 488 & parentID = 472 & nodeID = 1 ) 

About social audits on the Labour Behind
•
the Label website : 

responses / social-audits
Description number 6 : Trade Unions

Global Unions : Frequently Asked Questions at
•
www . global-unions . org 
( direct URL in English :  . 
php ? rubrique2 ) 

InternationalTextile , Garment and Leather Workers ’ 
•
Federation : About Us section at www . itglwf . org 
( direct URL in English : 
DisplayDocument . aspx ? idarticle = 110 & langue = 2 ) 

InternationalTrade Union Confederation : General
•
Information section in the About Us section at 
 ( direct URL in English :  
/ spip . php ? rubrique57 ) 

Labour Behind the Label ’ s perspective on trade unions : 
•
rights / 
trade-union-rights
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
186
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Garment Industry Initiatives to Address
Working Conditions
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Objectives / Learning Outcomes
The aims of this activity are : 

To introduce students to six initiatives to improve working conditions in the garment industry ( Fairtrade , the Ethical
•
•
Trading Initiative , Slow Fashion , Social Audits , Trade Unions and Reducing Overtime Project )  . 

For students to reflect on the strengths and weaknesses of the initiatives in terms of improving working conditions
•
•
in garment manufacture . 
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : It would be useful for
educators to be familiar with the subject matter of the
case studies
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required One to two hours
6 . Type of activity Group work , Discussion and debate
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Companies , Corporate social responsibility , Fair trade , 
Multi-stakeholder initiatives , Purchasing practices , Slow
Fashion , Trade unions , Wages , Workers ’ rights , Working
conditions
187
Summary
Students are given case studies about Fairtrade , the Ethical
Trading Initiative , Slow Fashion , Social Audits , Trade Unions
and the Reducing Overtime Project , and are asked to
reflect on their strengths , weaknesses , opportunities and
threats . 
Materials enclosed
Six case studies . Copy enough case studies so that each
student has just one of the six case studies and so that the
six are divided equally . 
A presentation to introduce the activity is available
online at resources / 
techingmaterials / initiatives in pdf form ( go to ‘ View ’ then
select ‘ Full ScreenView ’ to use the pdf as a presentation )  ; 
or request a Powerpoint version from
info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org . 
Running the Activity
Choose which case studies to cover in your session . 
Students are divided into groups so that each group
examines one case study : 
Fairtrade
•
•
the EthicalTrading Initiative
•
•
Slow Fashion
•
•
Social Audits
•
•
Reducing Overtime Project
•
•
Trade Unions
•
•
In small groups , students discuss the strengths , weaknesses , 
opportunities and threats of the initiative they have been
given , in terms of improving working conditions . 
The following questions are aimed at focusing the students ’ 
discussions but do not all need to be discussed or
reported back on : 
Does the initiative involve workers ? 
•
•
Is it a long-term approach ? 
•
•

Does it address the root causes of poor working
•
•
conditions in factories ? 
Does it address the overall behaviour of companies ? 
•
•
Does it change behaviours and attitudes ? 
•
•

Do you have different criteria to assess the impact of the
•
•
initiative on working conditions ? 
After around 15 minutes , the facilitator should introduce
the case studies one at a time ( the presentation highlights
some of the key points from each of the case studies )  , 
and then allow the relevant group to feedback from
their discussions ( approx 10 minutes per case study for
feedback )  . Allow other students to ask questions and share
their views . 
Once all case studies have been considered , a plenary
discussion could be held around the following questions : 

Can company practices alone improve working
•
•
conditions ? 
Do we also need to address the way we consume ? 
•
•
Do governments have a role ? 
•
•

What else needs to happen to improve working
•
•
conditions ? 
… ( use this space to add your own questions ) 
•
•
Reflections on Using the Activity
Most students have enjoyed having detailed case studies , 
although some have found the level of information difficult
to manage in a relatively short space of time . Comments
from participants show they value the time to debate the
strengths and weaknesses of the material . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
188
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The ETI ’ s NGO , trade union and corporate members work
together to identify what constitutes “ good practice ” in relation
to the implementation of its Base Code , a set of standards
relating to workers ’ rights , and then share this good practice . 
The following excerpt is from Eco-Chic : The savvy shopper ’ s
guide to ethical fashion ( 2007 ) by Matilda Lee published
by GaiaThinking ( p141 -3 )  :  “ Now the UK ’ s biggest
multi-stakeholder initiative , the ETI , established in 1998 , 
represents [ 57 ] companies with a combined annual
turnover of £107 billion . Retailer members include Gap
Inc .  , Marks & Spencer , Primark , Tesco and Zara . These
companies are brought to the table with trade unions , 
development charities and campaigning organisations such
at theTUC , the InternationalTextile Garment and Leather
Workers ’ Federation , Oxfam and Christian Aid ”  . 
All companies that join ETI are required to adopt the Base
Code and the accompanying Principles of Implementation , 
which they must progressively introduce throughout their
supply chain to ensure that they gradually improve workers ’ 
conditions . The aim is for continual improvements . They are
required to submit a report to the ETI board every year , 
detailing their progress . 
Verdict : ETI media relations manager Julia Hawkins says ,  
 ‘ One of the benefits of initiatives like ETI is that companies
can talk openly , honestly among each other and with the trade
unions and NGOs . For companies it offers a sense of not
being alone in trying to effect change ’  . She says that ETI is
aspirational :  ‘ The principles are tricky to implement but there
has to be a commitment to the principles .  ’ An ETI factsheet
says that being a member of the ETI ‘ does not necessarily
mean that workers ’ rights are fully protected throughout their
supply chain . It does mean that member companies have
made serious commitments to improving conditions over time ’  .  
[ … ] So is ETI a shield or does it result in improvements ? 
According to Sam Maher of Labour Behind the Label ,  ‘ It
depends on how you look at it . None of the companies can
guarantee that all parts of their supply chain implement the
ETI Base Code . The main issue is that there is no transparency
– the reviews , criteria for inclusion and exclusion in ETI are all
confidential , so as a pressure group it is hard to know what
to try and hold them to . What is useful is that when there is
an urgent issue involving a specific violation , it ’ s much easier
for us to get the companies involved to sit around a table
and discuss the issue – we just ring up ETI and they ask
the companies . Companies like Next are putting work into
improving practices ”  . 
Ethical Trading Initiative ( ETI ) 
189
When brands and retailers responded to consumer
pressure by publishing their codes of conduct , campaigners
told them they needed independent evidence that these
codes were observed in their supply chains . Thus was born
the social audit , an inspection of working conditions in
factories . Tens of thousands of audits are now performed
every year . 
A typical audit will involve three things : 

Document review : 
• looks at wage sheets , timekeeping , 
personnel records , etc . 

Site inspection : 
• walking through a factory to check for
health and safety problems and to observe the workers
at work . 

Interviews : 
• usually this includes interviews with
managers , supervisors and workers . 
Some audits are better than others . Most audits take
just a few hours , while some take several days . There are
important distinctions between audits where warning
is given and those that are unannounced . Better audits
place a strong emphasis on worker interviews conducted
off-site and by someone who has the workers ’ trust ( a
local person of the same gender with experience of
interviewing )  . Respected local NGOs and trade unions will
be involved in the audit process . 
In fear of losing their contracts , some suppliers hide
anything that might mean they fail the audit . They may keep
two sets of records of wages and hours worked - one
which shows the real information and one to show the
auditors . The factory is tidied up and prepared in advance
so that it meets health and safety criteria . Under age
workers are given the day off . Home-based workers are
often totally passed over in the audit : out of sight , out of
mind . Workers may be coached and intimidated to ensure
that they say the right thing . One factory manager in north
India admitted ,  “ We hold meetings with the workers , train
them , before the audit . We tell them what may be asked and
what should be answered ”  . 
However they are conducted , the evidence shows that
audits are not the solution that many companies treat
them as . Whilst improvements to visible , easy wins such as
health and safety may be made , the difficult issues such as
harassment , discrimination and trade union freedom are
left unaddressed . Social audits can be valuable , if they are
conducted in a credible way . But audits remain only one
small part of ensuring workers ’ rights are respected . 
Summary taken from www . cleanupfashion . co . uk by Labour
Behind the Label . 
Social Audits
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
190
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Eleven brands and retailers including Debenhams , H & M , 
New Look , Marks & Spencer and Next took part in
a three year project in China where , as in many other
garment exporting countries , garment workers often work
12-13 hours per day seven days a week to increase their
pay packet . The companies worked with local Chinese
partners to see if it was possible to reduce overtime
without cutting workers ’ monthly take home pay , improve
efficiency and reverse worker dissatisfaction . The project
aimed to tackle root causes of overtime and create a
win-win-win result for workers , factories and buyers by
addressing poor management and communication , buyers ’ 
purchasing practices and the poor quality and / or late arrival
of inputs ( raw materials )  . 
Case study of a project factory : Basic people
management training was given to factory management
and supervisors , and workers were given skills training . 
Communication skills workshops were provided for
workers , managers and supervisors . New ideas and
techniques gained during the project led to better
production planning in this particular factory . By the end
of the project , productivity in the factory had improved . 
Only 5% of the workers who had received skills training
had left a year later and workers no longer worked on
Sundays or past 8 pm during the week . A system of
incentives and production bonuses were introduced , 
which made it possible for 95% of workers to earn
the minimum wage by working just their basic hours , 
compared to 40-50% before the project . 
The experience of the project in a number of factories in
China showed that workers need to have a strong voice
and be allowed some negotiating power for the project
to succeed . Bigger factories were more successful in this
project than smaller ones , which could be put down to
availability of resources . 
Half the factories involved in the project at some stage
presented false or inaccurate records . This fact was assigned
to the pressure factory management are under from all
buyers to demonstrate compliance with codes of conduct , 
not just those involved in the project . Buyers also need to
address their purchasing practices so that , for example , low
prices and short lead times don ’ t result in low wages and
overtime to meet tight deadlines . In addition , long-term
trading relationships need to be in place to create security
among suppliers . 
Summary taken from Factsheet 11 : Reducing Overtime Hours
resources / factsheets /  # 
Project : Reducing Overtime Hours
191
Slow fashion is about designing , producing , consuming
and living better . Slow fashion is not time-based but
quality-based . Slow is not the opposite of fast – there is
no dualism – it is simply a different approach in which
designers , buyers , retailers and consumers are more aware
of the impacts of products on workers , communities and
ecosystems . The concept of slow fashion borrows heavily
from the Slow Food Movement , which links pleasure and
food with awareness and responsibility . Slow fashion is all
about choice , information , cultural diversity and identity . Yet
perhaps most critically , it is also about balance . Slow fashion
is a combination of rapid imaginative change and symbolic 
( fashion ) expression as well as material durability , quality
making and long-term engaging products . 
Slow fashion supports our psychological needs ( to form
identity , communicate with others , be creative through
our clothes ) as well as our material needs ( to keep us
warm and protect us from extremes of climate )  . Slow
fashion shifts from quantity to quality . It allows suppliers
to plan orders , predict the numbers of workers needed
and invest in the longer term . It gives companies time to
build mutually beneficial relationships . Of course , quality is
going to cost more . A fairer distribution of this ticket price
through the supply chain is an intrinsic part of this quality-
driven agenda . Slow design is about a richer interaction
between designer and maker ; maker and garment ; garment
and user . Slow fashion is a glimpse of a different - and
more sustainable - future for the textile and clothing sector , 
and an opportunity for business to be done in a way that
respects workers , environment and consumers in equal
measure . 
Further reading on slow fashion : 
Fletcher , Dr . K .  ( 2007 ) Sustainable Fashion and Textiles : Design
Journeys , Earthscan
Fletcher , Dr . K .  ( 2007 ) Fashioning an Ethical Industry
Factsheet : Slow Fashion , 
slowfashion / 
This article is taken from Sense Vol . 1 , the Fashioning an
Ethical Industry magazine for students , and is based on an
article by Dr . Kate Fletcher written for The Ecologist in June
2007 . 
Slow Fashion
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
192
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The Fairtrade Mark for cotton was launched in 2005 in
the UK and is the only independent certification for cotton
farmers in the developing world . The need for a Fairtrade
label for cotton production is clear : Cotton prices have
been in long-term decline , falling to $0 . 92 / kg in season
2001 / 02 , the lowest level in 30 years . Subsidies to U . S . 
cotton farmers have led to unfair competition for African
and Asian producers . Cotton uses 10% of the world ’ s
pesticides and , of this , 25% of the world ’ s insecticides . Many
cotton farmers are struggling to survive . The Fairtrade
Mark for cotton is lifting the lid on these injustices at the
start of the supply chain . It provides disadvantaged farmers
with a better deal and opportunity to trade their way out
of poverty and provide for their families and communities . 
As well as numerous smaller fair trade companies , many
high street companies have so far stocked lines made
with Fairtrade cotton . The Fairtrade Mark applies to the
cotton used in a growing number of product lines in the
high street retailers . As factories manufacturing clothes in
general for many of the high street brands and retailers
have been implicated in serious workers ’ rights abuses
in recent years , this is not without controversy . Martin
Hearson from Labour Behind the Label explains that these
companies need “ to convince us that their commitment
to workers ’ rights is real and that Fairtrade cotton is not
just a fig leaf to cover the embarrassment of exploitation
in their supply chains . We welcome these commitments to
Fairtrade cotton and hope they will be accompanied by
improvements in working conditions throughout the rest of
these companies ’ supply chains ”  . 
The Mark is an independent product certification label
applicable only to cotton production , and not to the other
stages of textile and garment manufacture . There is full
transparency of supply chains and traceability of the cotton
for a product to be able to carry the Fairtrade mark , along
with the requirement for documentary evidence of efforts
to ensure worker rights within the rest of the supply
chain to be submitted for approval . This however is not a
guarantee of working conditions within the supply chain . 
Work to investigate standards for the rest of the supply
chain are underway , with the hope that the benefits of the
Fairtrade system can be extended to more workers in the
supply chain in the future . 
References and further information : 
Fairtrade Foundation ( 2005 ) Redressing a Global Imbalance : 
The Case for Fairtrade Certified Cotton www . fairtrade . org . 
uk / includes / documents / cm_docs / 2008 / t / the_case_for_
fairtrade_certified_cotton . pdf
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2007 ) Factsheet
14 : Alternative , ethical and fair trade clothes http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / resources / factsheets / 
completelist / factsheet14 / 
Fairtrade Labelled Cotton
1
Fairtrade Foundation , 2005
193 
 “ Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for
the protection of his interests .  ” - United Nations Universal
Declaration of Human Rights Article 23 . 4
Trade unions allow workers to stand together to defend
their rights and allow them to say things collectively that
they are too scared to say on their own . Through
collective bargaining1 
, workers can negotiate with their
employers on wages and working hours they believe
are decent . In contrast , efforts by fashion companies to
ensure that workers ’ rights are respected are based on
a top-down model referred to as ‘ compliance ’  , which
relies on a code of conduct and audits imposed on
suppliers . Respecting freedom of association – a core
labour convention – and permitting workers to form a
trade union is potentially a more sustainable approach to
ensuring workers ’ rights are respected because workers
are given a real voice in the process . 
Only a tiny percentage - probably somewhere between
5 and 10% - of garment workers are unionised , and
many of these are in ‘ yellow ’ unions established by factory
managements . Workers across the world are fighting to
gain their rights to organise . Managers often respond by
adopting ‘ union-busting ’ tactics to prevent workers from
forming unions . The International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions ( ICFTU ) estimates ( across all industries ) that
in 2005 , 115 trade unionists were murdered for defending
workers ’ rights , 9 , 000 arrested , and nearly 10 , 000 workers
sacked2 
. These dramatic figures are the tip of an iceberg
of anti-union rhetoric and threats that are used to stop
workers from trying to organise . 
A combination of the use of casual labour and short-term
contracts by suppliers , and tighter lead times , lower cost
and flexible production demanded by fashion companies
undermines freedom of association . An organised
workforce would protest at the long working hours and
low pay necessary to meet these orders and so , to keep
business , factories are likely to crack down on workers
who try to organise . Home-based workers face specific
difficulties . They may not enjoy the same legal protection
as on-site workers , and many trade unions are not in a
position to organise homeworkers at present . 
More and more production is taking place in parts of the
world where the rights to freedom of association are
either prohibited , as is the case in China , or simply not
implemented , as is the case in numerous export processing
zones . Not all garment workers who are aware of their
rights choose to take them up by joining a union , but the
fact remains that tens of millions have never been given
that choice . 
Based on Clean Up Fashion ( 2006 ) http :  /  / www . 
cleanupfashion . co . uk / images / pdf / letscleanupfashion . pdf
Trade Unions
1 
In general this refers to the negotiations between the trade union and management , 
although collective bargaining has a specific meaning in a legal context
2 
ICFTU ( 2006 ) Annual Report onViolations ofTrade Union Rights

INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
194
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Fashioning the Future –
Where will Fashion be in 2020 ? 
Nina Baldwin , Project Coordinator , Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion , UK
n . baldwin @ fashion . arts . ac . uk
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To have an awareness of the breadth and complexity of the sustainability issues in fashion ; and to be able to think
•
•
creatively to respond to these issues . 
1 . Level FE , UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students 3 to 80
5 . Length of time required 60 minutes
6 . Type of activity Group work , Interactive activities , Discussion and
debate , 
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
195
Summary
The fashion industry ’ s seasonal nature and reliance on the
power of consumption make for a tricky dilemma when
considering its ethical and environmental impact . Fashioning
the Future is an exercise that allows students to explore
the many issues surrounding sustainability and fashion , and
develop creative visions in response to these issues . Our
students are the professionals and decision makers of the
future , and by gazing forwards and debating the major
ethical and environmental issues , fashion students can
understand the importance of their roles whilst highlighting
the relevance of creativity in developing solutions . 
This workshop was developed by London College
of Fashion staff , and ran during Pathfinding Week in
September 2007 with approximately 50 arts students of
varied disciplines . The workshop could work with small or
large groups , up to around 80 students . The workshop lasts
approximately one hour . 
Materials required
Flipcharts ( 1 per group ) 
•
Coloured pens ( selection per group ) 
•
Glue
•
Selection of magazines and newspapers
•
Scissors
•
Outline
1 . 	
Introduction : Workshop leader invites students to
introduce themselves . Students are sat at tables in
groups of 4-8 people . 
2 . 	
Leader asks each group to come up with three key
issues affecting fashion in relation to ethical and
environmental consequences . Suggestions may include : 
pesticide use in cotton production ; 
•
labour conditions in garment factories ; 
•

air miles and carbon footprint associated with air
•
freighting and shipping long distances ; 
fast fashion ; 
•
care and repair of clothing ; 
•
end of life , e . g . textiles going to landfill , recycling . 
•
3 . 	
Leader collates answers from groups and initiates
discussion , using flipchart or whiteboard to chart ideas
and issues . Encourage debate and discussion within the
group , and ask whether these issues are likely to have
more or less relevance in the year 2020 . Think about
the all encompassing nature of fashion and the many
forms that it takes in society – media , retail , journalism , 
photography , advertising , music , product , etc . 
Suggested questions : 
How will we buy fashion in 2020 ? 
•
How will fashion products be advertised ? 
•

What role will the Internet play in the retailing and
•
promotion of fashion ? 
Which big brands will still be around ? 
•
What relevance will big brands have ? 
•
Will we be paying relatively more or less for fashion ? 
•
How important will magazines be ? 
•

What will we do with our clothes when we no longer
•
want them ? 
How will clothes make us feel ? 
•
4 . 	
Ask each group to think about all the issues discussed . 
Fast forward to the year 2020 and ask each group
to imagine how the fashion industry may be working
differently by then . Using the materials provided , 
develop an idea that may be a reality in 2020 , in
response to the issues discussed . It may be a fashion
product , a retail concept , form of media or advertising
campaign , how things are designed , or consumed . The
materials provide stimulus and allow the students to
offer a visual representation of their concept . 
5 . 	
Each group presents back and others have the
opportunity to ask questions and debate the concepts . 
6 . 	
Each group offers a score out of ten for each concept , 
and the overall winner is awarded a prize ( optional )  . 
Feedback
On running this workshop in September 2007 , I was
struck by the enthusiasm of the group . We had around
50 newly enrolled students from across the University
of the Arts , London , so not exclusively fashion but also
fine art , graphic design , textiles and broadcasting students . 
The group ’ s reaction to the issues involved was positive , 
however the ideas and responses were less developed
than originally anticipated by the group leaders . A strong
emphasis on the discussion and sharing of ideas seemed
to evolve the group ’ s arguments and I would recommend
allocating plenty of time for point 3 of the workshop . 
This section also seemed to be the most rewarding . The
responses to point 4 were varied and visually exciting , 
ranging from new retail concepts to clothes recycling
programmes . The groups worked well together given
that they hadn ’ t met before . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
196
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Responsibilities of Consumption : Educational
Activities Plus Course Outline , Reading Lists
and Essay Titles
Hannah Higginson , Joint Project Coordinator , Fashioning an Ethical Industry , and Associate Lecturer at
Central St . Martin ’ s College of Art and Design , part of the University of the Arts , London , UK
hannah @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

Students critically reflect on whether sustainable development is an achievable goal within our postmodern , 
•
•
consumer driven society . 
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required One semester
6 . Type of activity Group work , Course outlines and learning goals , 
Interactive activities , Ideas for projects , assignments and
briefs , Discussion and debate , Research related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Interactive
8 . Topics covered Branding , Campaigns , Companies , Consumers , 
Corporate social responsibility , Environment , Fair trade , 
Ethical initiatives / brands , Globalisation , History , Multi-
stakeholder initiatives , Purchasing practices , Supply
chains , Trade , Trade unions , Workers ’ rights , Working
conditions
197
Contents
Part One - Jargon Busting : An activity to build
understanding of key terms ( sustainable development , 
consumerism , globalisation , discourse , communism , 
capitalism , postmodernity , postmodernism , modernism )  , and
encourage the student group , who may not have previously
met , to work together . 
Part Two – Timeline : An activity to enable students to
chart the rise of consumer society and discuss key events
in its development . 
Part Three - Course outline prepared for second year BA
students at Central St . Martin ’ s College of Art and Design , 
autumn 2007 : The Responsibilities of Consumption –
Beyond Shopping
Abstract
Two participatory educational activities are presented , 
which were developed for a cultural studies module . 
They encourage critical reflection and enable students
to place ethics and sustainability within a historical and
theoretical context . An outline of ‘ The Responsibilities of
Consumption : Beyond Shopping ’ course offered to all BA
second year Central St . Martin ’ s students in autumn 2007 , 
along with the reading list and essay titles for the course , 
are also included . 
Introduction 
 ‘ The Responsibilities of Consumption : Beyond Shopping ’ 
was a cultural studies module which looked at ethics and
sustainability within the context of cultural , social and
economic theory . In this course , students examined current
consumption , sourcing and production patterns within
the fashion industry by exploring the historical context in
which consumer society has developed , and considering
the impact of the current economic system - dominated
by multinational corporations concerned with maximising
profits - on producer countries and the environment . 
Students then considered whether ‘ sustainable ’ 
consumption that is socially just , environmentally sound
and economically viable is an achievable goal within the
postmodern , consumer driven society . The course outline , 
reading list and essay questions are presented below . 
The objective of the course is based on the notion that
students ’ depth of understanding regarding the ethical and
sustainability challenges facing society , and their capacity
to find solutions to these challenges when they enter
the workplace , can be enhanced by teaching the cultural , 
social and economic theoretical context of consumption
and production . A fashion design student who appreciates
that consumerism is a defining feature of postmodern life , 
and is central in the construction of an individual ’ s sense
of identity , is better positioned to create garments that try
and reduce levels of consumption , and therefore waste , 
whilst feeding an individual ’ s needs . This could be achieved
by designing something more durable or that can be used
in multiple different ways , whilst maintaining the aesthetic
qualities of the garment . Similarly , a fashion business student
who understands that , in the capitalist economic model a
business is primarily concerned with growing profits for
the benefit of company shareholders will have a greater
notion of the root cause of the need to ‘ squeeze ’ suppliers
to reduce costs . Armed with this knowledge , they may then
be able to think about whether business could operate in
a different way – in a way that is economically viable but
does not maximise profits at the expense of those further
down the supply chain . 
Most of the students taking the course came from an
arts background and had little understanding of cultural , 
economic and political ideas . Many of the students
responded well to being introduced to ideas that enabled
them to analyse their chosen disciplines - from advertising
to fashion – from a historical and theoretical perspective , 
but some struggled with these new abstract ideas . In
order to make the ideas accessible , and encourage critical
reflection , the course was taught using participatory
educational activities , which sought to build on participants ’ 
existing knowledge and experience and engage the
students actively in the sessions . The following activities are
examples of the approach used . The first is an activity in
which students match terms and definitions . The second is
an activity in which students place key historical events on
a timeline . The third part of this contribution is the outline
of ‘ The Responsibilities of Consumption : Beyond Shopping ’ 
module . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
198
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Part One : Jargon BustING Activity
Objective
To build understanding of key terms ( sustainable
development , consumerism , globalisation , discourse , 
communism , capitalism , postmodernism , modernism ) and
encourage the student group , who may not have previously
met , to work together . 
This activity was used in the first seminar - Introduction to
the Course - of the 10 week module . 
Method
Divide students into small groups of around four people . 
Give each group a set of words on small cards and a
set of cards with corresponding definitions . Together , 
the group discusses and matches each word with the
correct definition . Once all the groups have matched the
definitions to the words , come back together as a class and
discuss the different terms . 
The following are suggested questions to ask in the group
discussion : 
1 . Does everyone understand what the definitions mean ? 
2 . Would you change the definitions in any way ? 
3 . Were you surprised by any of the definitions ? 
4 . 	
Do any of the words provoke a particular reaction
or feeling ? 
5 . 	
Where have people come across the words before , 
either in their courses or their personal life ? 
Outcomes
The activity de-mystifies terms at the beginning of the
course . This understanding can empower students , allowing
them to confidently use and reflect on the various terms
throughout the rest of the course . 
Different terms could be used when discussing other
issues . For example in a session about ethical sourcing , the
following could be used : Multi-stakeholder Initiative , Ethical
Trade , FairTrade , Trade Union , Living Wage , etc . 
199
Words and definitions : These terms are by their na-
ture contentious and student should be encouraged to
debate and question the definitions provided . 
Modernism This term is linked to many political , cultural and artistic movements rooted in the changes in western society
that took place at the end of the 19th
and beginning of the 20th
century . It is a loose collection of ideas that
largely rejected history and applied ornament , and which embraced abstraction . People defined by this term
had a utopian desire to create a better world . They believed in technology as the key means to achieve social
improvement . All these principles were frequently combined with social and political beliefs ( largely left-
leaning )  , which held that design and art could , and should , transform society ( Victoria and Albert Museum )  . 
Postmodernism The term can be applied to a wide-ranging set of developments that took place in different disciplines from
around the 1960s as a reaction to an earlier set of developments . This term tends to refer to a cultural , 
intellectual or artistic state lacking a clear central hierarchy or organizing principle and embodying extreme
complexity , contradiction , ambiguity , diversity and interconnectedness . Jameson describes this term as ’ a
movement in arts and culture corresponding to a new configuration of politics and economics ,  " late capitalism ”  . 
transnational consumer economies based on global scope of capitalism ’  ( Jameson , 1991 )  . 
Capitalism A political-economic system where the means of production are privately owned and operated for profit . 
Investments , income , production , pricing and services are determined through the operation of a free market
economy ( Meiksins Wood , 2002 )  . 
Communism An economic system and ideology that is based on the common ownership of the means of production . 
Karl Marx believed that this system would replace capitalism when the working class rose up and created a
classless society ( Marx and Engels , 1848 )  . 
Discourse One of the definitions of this word in the Merriam and Webber dictionary defines it as a mode of organising
knowledge , ideas or experience that is rooted in language and its concrete contexts such as history or
institutions ( Merriam and Webster Dictionary )  . 
Globalisation A contentious term increasingly used in the last ten years . Ambassador Eizenstat , member of the Overseas
Development Council Board , refers to it as ‘ the unprecedented rapid flow of private capital , ideas , technology , 
goods and services across the world ’  . 
Consumerism To some people this ‘ is the essence of the good life…a vehicle for freedom , power and happiness . All of these
things lie in an individual ’ s ability to choose , acquire , use and enjoy material objects and experiences ’  ( Gabriel and
Lang , 2006 )  . 
Sustainable
development
The most famous definition comes from the Bruntland report in 1987 and refers to progress that meets 
 ‘ the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs ’  ( United
Nations , 1987 )  . 
References
Eizenstat , S .  ,  . 
htm , accessed 2 January 2009
Gabriel , Y . and Lang , T .  ( 2006 ) The unmanageable consumer , 
London Sage Publications
Jameson , F .  ( 1991 ) Postmodernism , or the cultural logic of late
capitalism , Duke University Press
Marx , K . and Engels , F .  ( 1848 ) The communist manifesto
Meiksins Wood , E .  ( 2002 ) The origins of capitalism : A longer
view , London : Verso
Merriam and Webster Dictionary 
, 
accessed 2nd January 2009
United Nations ( 1987 ) Report of the World Commission on
Environment and Development , General Assembly Resolution
42 / 187
Victoria and Albert Museum

the_exhibition . html , accessed 2nd
January 2009
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
Words and definitions : These terms are by their nature contentious and student should
be encouraged to debate and question the definitions provided . 
200
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Part Two : Timeline Activity1
Objective
For students to chart the rise of consumer society and
discuss key events in its development . 
This activity was used in the second seminar , The Era of
Consumerism - of the 10 week course . 
Method
Divide the students into groups of 5-8 . On the wall or
floor draw a line marked at intervals with dates from
1600 to today . Write the titles of the key events shown
below in the development of consumer society on small
cards . Give each group some of the cards and ask them to
discuss the significance of each event and when they think
it may have happened . Ask each group in turn to place an
event on the timeline . You may also want to give out blank
cards so students can suggest other relevant events . As
students place events on the timeline , discuss the following
questions as a group : 
1 . What is the event ? 
2 . Is the date correct ? 
3 . 	
What was the significance of the event in relation to
the development of consumer society ? 
4 . How does the event link to other events ? 
5 . 	
How important is this event in the development of
consumer society ? 
Outcomes
This activity creates a visual representation of diverse
historical events . It encourages debate and enables students
to see connections between events . 
Events
Note : Give out cards with the names of the events to
students . The description and date is for use by the
educator in the discussion and should not be on the cards
given to students . For more background reading about
some of these events , please see : 
publications / no-nonsense-guides / globalization /  . 
The term ‘ North ’ refers to industrialised countries such as
the UK , Australia and USA .  ‘ South ’ is used to refer to the
less developed countries such as Malawi and India . 
1600 : East India Company Established
Notes for educators : Britain ’ s first commercial corporation
or ‘ joint stock company ’  , which held a monopoly over
trade with India . Corporations , which are bound by law
in many countries to make profits for their shareholders , 
have become the dominant global institutions in consumer
society . 
1619 - 1680 : The Slave Trade in Africa
Notes for educators : Ships from Africa took slaves to
Caribbean ports . These ships then took sugar , indigo , raw
cotton and later coffee on to Europe . Fortunes were
accumulated in the USA and Europe as a result of this
trade , fortunes that could be spent on luxury
consumer goods . 
15th
– 19th
Century : Colonisation in Africa and Asia
Notes for educators : As a result of colonisation , trading
patterns were established in which Southern countries
export raw materials to the North . This has contributed
to an un-level playing field in global trade . Colonial powers
transported primary commodities , such as cocoa beans , to
the North for domestic manufacture , where value is added
to the commodity . This pattern persists today , which means
that some Southern countries have not been able to
develop their manufacturing base and benefit from trading
the more profitable manufactured goods . 
Late 17th
– Early 18th
Century : 
Industrial Revolution in Britain
Notes for educators : The mechanisation of production
led to the mass manufacture of consumer goods . New
industries provided employment and wealth – leading to
an expansion in the number of people who could afford to
buy consumer goods . 
1841 : First Advertising Agency
Notes for educators : This agency was established byVolney
Palmer in Boston . Advertising is designed to increase
demand for products and services and is an essential
feature of consumer society . 
1
This activity has been adapted from training materials produced byVoluntary Services
Overseas ( VSO )  . 
201
1844 : Cooperative Movement in Northern England
Notes for educators : Cooperatives were set up in
opposition to companies who monopolised a market and
conspired to provide basic commodities at high prices to
maximise their own profits . Consumer cooperatives are
a different way of doing business – consumers join the
cooperative , buy products from the cooperative and share
in the profits of the cooperative . 
19th
Century : Arts and Crafts Movement
Notes for educators : This design led movement was a
reaction against mass consumption and the soulless man-
made goods produced in the industrial revolution . It is only
one of many movements throughout history that have
offered a critique of consumer society . 
1913 : First Henry Ford Model T Automobiles
Notes for educators : Henry Ford was the pioneer of mass
production . The factory management model he developed
for producing cars has been used in the manufacture of
goods across the globe . Ford realised that in order to
increase the market for his cars , it was to his advantage to
pay his workers a high wage so that they could consume
Ford cars . We are now in a post–Ford era where most
companies out-source their manufacture to countries
where wages are low . 
1930 : Great Depression
Notes for educators : In the great depression , the stock
market crashed , the volume of trade reduced and there
were massive job losses . Causes of the great depression
are disputed but the general agreement is that a crisis in
consumer confidence meant people stopped spending , 
which led to a downturn in economic growth . In light of
the great depression , consumption came to be seen by
economists and politicians alike as essential for healthy
economic growth . 
1947 : First Round of GATT
Notes for educators : The General Agreement ofTariffs
andTrade ( GATT ) led to the establishment of the World
Trade Organisation ( WTO ) in 1995 , which covers service
sector and intellectual property rights in addition to trade . 
International trade takes place within the legal framework
established by the WTO . Power within this organisation lies
with industrialised countries . 
1950s to 1980s : Cold War
Notes for educators : In the post Second World War
era , two political and economic systems emerged . In the
simplest terms these could be described as communism , 
where the state decides people ’ s needs and provides
accordingly ; and capitalism , where the market is left to
provide for people ’ s needs . 
1950s : Sales ofVolkswagen Soar after Helmut Krone ’ s
Advertising Campaign
Notes for educators : The advertising campaign ‘ Think Small ’ 
embodied a modern creative approach to advertising . 
1950s onwards : Move ‘ Downtown ’  : Out-of-town
Shopping Centres
Notes for educators : Shopping complexes and malls
started to spring up in the USA , which in some towns and
cities led to the destruction of local shops and services . 
These vast shopping centres were later called ‘ cathedrals to
consumerism ’ by postmodern writers . 
1950s : Post-war Keynesianism
Notes for educators : Keynesian economics was adopted by
the British government . It promotes a mixed economy , in
which both the state and the private sector are considered
to play an important role . This approach to economics
differs from laissez-faire economic liberalism , which
advocates that markets and the private sector operate best
without state intervention . 
1950s : Modernisation Theory
Notes for educators : Influenced by writers such as Singer , 
modernisation theory was the idea that , in order to
develop , countries should industrialise , mechanise and
urbanise . The goal of development was to become like
the North . Institutions like the World Bank supported this
idea by providing financial backing for large-scale modern
development projects . 
1970s Onwards : Increasing
Power of Multinational Companies
Notes for educators : The global power base shifted so that
the economic power of transnational corporations became
greater than many nations . By the end of the 20th
century , 
just 200 corporations accounted for a quarter of the
global economy . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
202
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
1970s-1980s : Relocation of Mass Production to the Far
East and Other Developing Countries
Notes for educators : Businesses began moving their
production in search of cheaper labour . This was the
beginning of the post-Ford era . 
1971 : Friends of the Earth Founded
Notes for educators : There was a growing awareness
amongst some sections of society that the excesses
of consumer society were having a negative impact on
the planet . 
1980s : Thatcherism
Notes for educators : The British prime minister Margaret
Thatcher championed liberalisation of the economy
and less state intervention . She believed that individual
consumers could make decisions about their own needs
rather than the state providing for their needs . 
1987 : Brundtland Commission Report
Notes for educators : It was within this report that the
term sustainable development was first coined . Awareness
started to grow that the capitalist system as it currently
operates is unsustainable . 
1989 : Collapse of the Berlin Wall and the Demise of the
Soviet Union
Notes for educators : The collapse of the Berlin Wall
signalled the demise of communism , the main alternative
economic system to capitalism . This was the moment when
liberal democracy and consumer capitalism triumphed . 
1990s : Growth of Consumerism in India and China
Notes for educators : Emergence of these markets
extends the reach of contemporary consumerism to
developing nations . 
1990s : Growth of the Brand
Notes for educators : In the 1990s , companies stopped
selling just products and started selling brands , lifestyles
and identities leading to changes in consumption patterns . 
Consumers did not just buy a product , they were buying
into an idea or an identity . 
2003 : Iraqi War
Notes for educators : Oil underpins the consumer driven
economy . Some theorists suggest that the Iraqi war was
about securing oil for Northern interests . 
Part Three : Course outline prepared for second
year BA students at Central St . Martin ’ s College of
Art and Design , autumn 2007 : The Responsibilities
of Consumption – Beyond Shopping
The clothes we wear , the food we buy and the equipment
we use have long journeys across the world , through
time and history , continuing into the future after we
have finished with them . The journeys are guided and
constrained by , and in turn influence , the political economy , 
public policy , corporations and the physical environment . 
Within complex supply chains , people with names and
faces create the systems of production and consumption , 
creating a direct relationship between producer and
consumer . 
The industrial revolution , the political economies of the
colonial age and the rise of super-consumption in the post
World WarTwo era set on track a journey that has led
to unparalleled economic growth and a rise in the power
of multinational companies . The inequalities that exist
within global supply chains , and degradation of the natural
environment caused by patterns of over-consumption , 
have given rise to the language and practices of ethical
consumerism and sustainable development . 
Is sustainable consumption an achievable goal in the brand-
dominated , globalised political economy of the twenty-first
century ? Can we continue to enjoy consumption whilst
learning to become responsible shoppers ? In this module , 
created for Central St . Martin ’ s students , we draw on
food , fashion and other industries for case study material , 
examine fair trade , corporate social responsibility ,  “ eco ” and
organic production and the rising awareness of ‘ slow ’ and
changing consumption patterns which could lead to more
local sourcing ,  . 
203
The weekly timetable included the following topics : 
The era of consumerism . 
•
•
Capitalism , the corporation and consumption . 
•
•

The environmental and social impacts of consumption : 
•
•
a case study of the fashion industry . 
Ethical consumerism : the answer ? 
•
•
Designing for sustainability . 
•
•
1 . The Era of Consumerism
Consumerism , the purchasing of goods and services
in excess of our basic needs , is a defining feature of
postmodern life . In the last century , we have witnessed a
growth in consumer society “ in which choice and credit are
readily available , in which social value is defined in terms of
purchasing power and material possessions , and in which there
is a desire , above all , for that which is new , modern , exciting
and fashionable2 
.  ” 
This session will look at the ideological and historical
context in which different meanings have been attached to
consumerism . It will go on to examine the circumstances
that have led to the development of consumer society . 
Key Reading
Gabriel , Y . and Lang , T .  ( 2006 ) The Unmanageable Consumer 
( 2nd
Edition )  , London : Sage Publications , pp . 1-24 , 
Lyon , D .  ( 1994 ) Postmodernity , Open University Press , 
pp . 69 -89
Further Reading
Bauman , Z .  ( 2005 ) Work , Consumerism and the New Poor 
( 2nd
Edition )  , London : Open University Press
Bocock , R .  ( 1993 ) Consumption : Key Ideas , London : 
Routledge
Edwards , T .  ( 2000 ) Contradictions of Consumption : Concepts , 
Practices and Politics in Consumer Society , Buckingham : OUP
Lury , C .  ( 1996 ) Consumer Culture , Cambridge Polity Press
Packard , V .  ( 1951 ) The Hidden Persuaders , London : Penguin
Books Ltd
2 . Capitalism , the Corporation and Consumption
Consumption driven capitalism is the dominant global
economic model . Economies are geared towards personal
consumption in order to keep businesses growing and
tax revenues flowing . Capitalism is the most effective
mechanism the world has seen for providing goods
and services and creating financial wealth , but nearly one
billion people still survive in abject poverty on less than
$1a day and the world ’ s natural resources are rapidly being
depleted . 
This session will look at what we mean by a consumption
driven capitalist economy ; and consider the implications
of this system , where corporations are concerned with
maximising profits and accumulating capital . 
Key Reading
Hertz , N .  ( 2002 ) The Silent Takeover : Global Capitalism and
the Death of Democracy , London : William Heinemann
Porritt , J .  ( 2005 ) Capitalism as if the World Mattered , London : 
Earthscan , pp . 65–87
Spencer , R .  ( 2004 ) Corporate Law and Structures : Exposing
the roots of the problem , Corporate Watch , http :  /  / www . 
corporatewatch . org . uk /  ? lid = 2592
Further Reading
Bauman , Z .  ( 1998 ) Globalization : The Human Consequences , 
Cambridge : Polity Press
Blythman , J .  ( 2004 ) Shopped : The Shocking Power of British
Supermarkets , London : Harper Perennial
Durning , A .  ( 1992 ) How Much is Enough : The Consumer
Society and the Future of the Earth , London : Earthscan
Klein , N .  ( 2000 ) No Logo , London : Flamingo
Schumacher , E . F .  ( 1973 ) Small is Beautiful : A Study of
Economics as if People Mattered , London : Vintage
Wheen , F .  ( 2007 ) Marx ’ s “ Das Kapital ”  : A Biography - A Book
That Shook the World , Atlantic Books
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
2
Benson , J .  ( 1994 ) The Rise of Consumer Society in Britain , London : Longman
204
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
3 . Social and Environmental Impact of Consumption : A
Case Study of the Fashion Industry
The fashion industry is hugely significant - in the year
2000 , consumers worldwide spent approximately US$1
trillion buying clothes ; the industry accounts for 7%
of world exports ; and around 26 . 5 million people are
employed in textile and clothing production ( Allwood
et . al .  , 2006 )  . As in so many other sectors , the way the
fashion industry currently operates is environmentally
and socially unsustainable . 
This session will use the fashion industry as an example
of the effects of consumption on people and planet . 
Different areas of the industry ’ s supply chain will be
considered , from textile production to the impact of fast
fashion on working conditions . 
Key Reading
Allwood , J .  , Laursen , S .  , de Rodriguez , C . and Bocken , N .  
( 2006 ) Well Dressed ? The present and future sustainability
of clothing and textiles in the UK , Cambridge : University of
Cambridge Institute for Manufacturing
resources / reports / 
welldressed / 
Forum for the Future ( 2007 ) Fashioning Sustainability 2007

page542 . aspx
Swedish FairTrade Centre ( 2003 ) We Shop , Who pays ?  , 
Video :  ( 35 minutes ) Watch online : 
videoplay ? docid = -3076138835044484743
Further Reading
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2006 ) Factsheet 3a : The
fashion industry and poverty reduction , 
factsheet3 / 
Oxfam International ( February 2004 ) Trading Away Our
Rights : Women working in global supply chains ’  , Oxford : 
Oxfam , resources / 
reports / taor / 
The Ecologist ( 2007 ) Ethical Fashion Special – Sacking the
Sackcloth Image , The Ecologist
4 . Ethical Consumerism
Consumers have started to question the conditions in
which products are made and their impact on the planet , 
and a new wave of consumption has emerged - ‘ ethical ’ or 
 ‘ green ’ consumerism . This trend takes a variety of forms –
fair trade products , organic certification , ethical investment , 
buying local , corporate social responsibility , boycotting
companies and use of recycled materials . 
This session will look at what has led to the emergence
of this new type of consumption , and consider whether
shopping ‘ ethically ’ or ‘ green ’ can solve the pressing social
and environmental problems our world faces . 
Key Reading
Fashioning an Ethical Industry Factsheet 19 ( 2008 ) Ethical
Consumerism , available at
resources / factsheets / 
issues / factsheet19ethicalconsumerism / 
Gabriel , Y . and Lang , T .  ( 2006 )  ‘ The Unmanageable Consumer 
( 2nd
Edition )  , Sage Publications , pp 166-176
Worth , J .  ( November 2006 )  ‘ Buy now , pay later ’  , 
New Internationalist , 
features / 2006 / 11 / 01 / keynote / 
Further Reading
Fauset , C .  ( 2006 ) What is Wrong with Corporate Social
Responsibility ?  , 
Harrison , R .  , Newholm , T . and Shaw , D .  ( eds .  )  ( 2005 )  ‘ The
Consumer as Economic Voter ’ In The Ethical Consumer , SAGE
Publications Ltd . Chapter 2
Klein , N ,  ( 2000 )  ‘ Conclusion : Consumerism versus
Citizenship ’ in No Logo London : Flamingo
Monbiot , G .  ‘ Eco-junk ’  , 
archives / 2007 / 07 / 24 / eco-junk /  # more-1074
The Co-operative ( 2006 ) The Ethical Consumer Report
2006 [ online ]  , available at : 

andcid = 1170748475331andpagename = CB%2FPage%2Ftpl
Standardandloc = l , accessed 26th July 07
205
5 . Sustainable Design
The way in which we design , manufacture and consume
has an environmental and social impact . Can we design
places , products and services in a way that reduces
consumption and leads to greater sustainability ? 
Key Reading
Walker , S .  ( 2005 ) Sustainable by Design – Explorations in
Theory and Practice , London : Earthscan
Van der Ryn , S . and Cowan , S .  ( 1996 ) Ecological Design , 
Washington DC : Island Press
Further Reading
Chapman , J .  ( 2005 ) Emotionally Durable Design , 
London : Earthscan
Fuad-Luke , A .  ( 2005 ) The Eco-Design Handbook : A Complete
Sourcebook for the Home and Office , London : Thames and
Hudson Ltd . 
van Hinte , E . and Bakker , C .  ( 1999 ) Trespassers : Inspirations
for Eco-efficient Design , Rotterdam : 010 Publishers
Papanek , V .  ( 1995 ) The Green Imperative , London : Thames
and Hudson Ltd . 
6 . Conclusions and Questions
Essay Questions

What had led to the emergence of Western
•
•
consumer society ? 
Consumer driven capitalism is unsustainable . Discuss . 
•
•

Does ‘ ethical ’ and ‘ eco ’ consumerism offer an answer to
•
•
the social and environmental problems facing our world
today ? 

Discuss the ethical issues raised by the way that clothes
•
•
in the fashion industry are manufactured and marketed . 

What do you consider to be the scope of sustainable
•
•
design ? Identify your particular area ( s ) of interest and
explore the key issues with examples . 
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
206
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
207
208
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Pedagogy And Institutional Approaches
Contents
208
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
209
210 Introduction
212 Further information
Teaching materials
Publications
213 An institutional approach to
sustainable fashion education
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
219 Proposed learning goals for social responsibility
and sustainability
Marsha Dickson on behalf of Educators for Socially
Responsible Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , USA
222 Approaches to research and writing for
BA dissertations relevant to Fashioning
an Ethical Industry
Caryn Simonson , Chelsea College
of Art and Design , UK
229 Problem-based learning : The perfect tool
for a creative curriculum
EfratTseëlon , School of Design , 
University of Leeds , UK
237 Collaborating across universities and industry to
offer online educational opportunities for social
responsibility
Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware , Suzanne
Loker , Cornell University , and Molly Eckman , 
Colorado State University , USA
244 Educating for a socially responsible fashion industry
at AMFI , Amsterdam
Patricia Brien , Linnemore Nefdt , Jan deVries and Jan
Piscaer , AMFI , The Netherlands
247 New course units on ethical fashion
Caroline Gilbey , University of the Creative Arts 
( Epsom )  , and Heather Pickard and Dilys Williams , 
London College of Fashion , University of the Arts , 
UK
249 Student experiences of raising ethical issues
during placement
Caroline Gilbey , University of the Creative Arts 
( Epsom )  , UK
209
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
210
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Pedagogy and Institutional
Approaches Introduction
The Pedagogy and Institutional Approaches section brings
together case studies of experiences of teaching about
sustainability , development of new courses and curricula , 
approaches to teaching for sustainable development
and reflections on dissertations and placements as tools
for teaching . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry displays examples of students ’ 
work relating to sustainability on its website at http :  /  / 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org / studentwork /  . Your own
students may find inspiration in these pages . We would also
be very happy to receive images and information about
students ’ work in your own university , college or school for
consideration for the website . 
About the Contributions in the Pedagogy and
Institutional Approaches Chapter
An Institutional Approach to Sustainable Fashion
Education by Fashioning an Ethical Industry , a project of
Labour Behind the Label , UK , is divided into two sections : 
The first section is aimed at educational institutions wishing
to respond to the key sustainability questions facing
the fashion industry in the 21st
century by integrating
sustainability issues into the teaching of fashion education
to enable students to develop skills , knowledge and values
they can take forward into industry . The second section
relates to the development of a sustainability policy
in a more wide reaching sense , beyond the teaching of
sustainability issues . 
In November 2007 , Educators for Socially Responsible
Apparel Business ( ESRAB ) convened a special session
at the annual conference of the InternationalTextile and
Apparel Association with the aim of creating learning goals
related to social responsibility and sustainability . Groups
were formed around four sub-topics - labour compliance , 
environmental sustainability , consumer issues / materialism , 
body image / disordered eating - and were given the
question : What should apparel / textile students be able to
do ( regarding each sub-topic area of social responsibility / 
sustainability ) upon graduation ? The results of the special
session can be found in Proposed Learning Goals for
Social Responsibility and Sustainability , by Marsha Dickson , 
on behalf of Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel
Business ( ESRAB )  , USA . 
Approaches to Research and Writing for BA
Dissertations Relevant to Fashioning an Ethical Industry
by Caryn Simonson , Chelsea College of Art and Design , 
UK , summarises the experiences of educators in teaching
and supervising dissertations at undergraduate level , 
with a focus on issues around design , sustainability and
responsibility , on BA ( Hons ) Textile Design at Chelsea
College of Art and Design . It includes the College ’ s
experience of the strengths and pitfalls of student
dissertation work in this area , case studies of student
dissertations , and a selected reading list . It is not intended
as a guide as such , but as a way of sharing their experience . 
The article , Problem-based Learning : The Perfect Tool
for a Creative Curriculum by EfratTseëlon , School of
Design , University of Leeds , UK , provides a summary of
the rationale and procedure of the Maastricht model
of Problem-based Learning ( PBL )  . PBL is a method that
privileges learning over teaching . The method provides
intellectual tools as well as the teamworking experience
for conducting independent research . Four examples of
211
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
problems relating to the social and environmental impact
of the fashion industry are presented . 
In Collaborating across Universities and Industry to
Offer Online Educational Opportunities for Social
Responsibility , Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware , 
Suzanne Loker , Cornell University , and Molly Eckman , 
Colorado State University , USA , describe the development
of an online series of courses ,  ‘ Socially Responsible Apparel
Production and Sourcing ’  , for post-baccalaureate students
and industry professionals , initially offered to students
from the three universities . The types of courses created , 
their formats , the challenges of offering courses across
universities , and how they are sustaining the courses
beyond the funding period are discussed . 
Educating for a Socially Responsible Fashion Industry at
AMFI , Amsterdam summarises the institutional approach
taken to teaching about the social and environmental
impact of the fashion industry . Patricia Brien , Linnemore
Nefdt , Jan deVries and Jan Piscaer , AMFI , The Netherlands , 
describe some of the key aspects of the curricula . 
We present two examples of New Course Units on
Ethical Fashion , offered at the London College of Fashion
and University of the Creative Arts , UK , within fashion
courses . Full summaries of these courses are available
online . 
Caroline Gilbey , University of the Creative Arts ( Epsom )  , 
UK , describes Student Experiences of Raising Ethical
Issues during Placement in her contribution . Many
students felt frustrated at companies ’ lack of understanding
about social responsibility and found it difficult to obtain
information . 
212
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Further Information
Teaching Materials
There is information about a range of teaching resources , 
films , exhibitions and images on the Fashioning an Ethical
Industry website at
resources /  . 
Ones you may find useful related to Pedagogy and
Institutional Approaches are : 
Resources for Rethinking 
 ‘ Resources for Rethinking ’ is a database of resources for
teaching sustainable development , managed by Canadian
organisation , Learning for a Sustainable Future . As well as
reviews by educators of educational activities , a summary
of some of the pedagogical approaches is provided on this
webpage . 
Publications
Information about additional books , reports and factsheets
is available on the Fashioning an Ethical Industry website at
resources /  . 
Piecing it Together : 
Understanding Ethics on Placement
Industry placements can form an important part of
student learning about social , environmental and economic
sustainability issues in the garment industry . Fashioning an
Ethical Industry have produced a handbook for students to
work through before , during and after student placements
to help them understand working conditions and what
is being done to improve them . The handbook is about
working conditions in the fashion industry . It ’ s full of
questions for students to explore , whether their placement
is with a small company , a high street brand retailer or an
organisation working to improve working
conditions in the fashion industry . These questions will
give students the background knowledge to ask about
things they see on their placement and to interpret what
they learn . In addition to the Handbook , information
about placements that give students the opportunity to
learn about working conditions in the garments industry is
circulated on the Fashioning an Ethical Industry
website : 
fashioninternships / placements /  . 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( 2008 ) Piecing it Together : 
Understanding Ethics on Placement , Fashioning an
Ethical Industry
Please email info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org for a copy
of the Student Placement Handbook . 
Sustainable Education : 
Revisioning Learning and Change
In this briefing , Stephen Sterling points out that progress
towards a more sustainable future depends on learning , 
yet most education and learning takes no account of
sustainability . Sterling argues that , while the emergence
of environmental education , and latterly “ education for
sustainable development ”  , are important trends , they are
not sufficient in themselves to reorient and transform
education as a whole . Sterling argues how ‘ sustainable
education ’ – a change of educational culture towards the
realisation of human potential and the interdependence
of social , economic and ecological well-being – can lead to
transformative learning . 
Sterling , S .  ( 2001 ) Sustainable Education : Revisioning Learning
and Change ( Schumacher Briefing )  , Greenbooks . 
213
An Institutional Approach to Sustainable
Fashion Education
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK , with comments gratefully received from Arran Stibbe from the
Environmental Association for Universities and Colleges , Maria Skoyles from Oxford and
Cherwell Valley College , and Heather Witham from the Higher Education Academy –
Education for Sustainable Development . 
info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To institutionalise sustainable fashion education . 
•
•
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required . 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required . 
4 . Number of students Whole school / college / university
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Institutional approach
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered All
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
214
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
An Institutional Approach to Sustainable
Fashion Education
Many universities , colleges and schools teaching fashion
related courses are engaging with some aspects of the
sustainability1
agenda . It is now almost impossible not
to be aware that the fashion industry has a significant
sustainability ‘ footprint ’  . Poverty wages , excessive hours , 
use of fuel in transportation and operations , mistreatment
of animals , water pollution and heavy chemical use are
widely reported on . In addition , at the beginning of the 21st
century , the world population ’ s ever increasing reliance on
oil puts in doubt the potential of the planet to maintain
current levels of consumerism . 
The biggest apparel brands and retailers are now taking
some responsibility for their impact , for example :  
 “ At Gap Inc .  , we believe we should go beyond the basics of
ethical business practices and embrace our responsibility to
people and to the planet . We believe this brings sustained , 
collective value to our shareholders , our employees , our
customers and society ” 2 
. 
How can fashion schools , colleges and universities respond
to these global challenges and a changing industry ? 
What role does the fashion education system have in
bringing about a sustainable industry , one that respects
the people and planet involved , meets the multiplicity
of needs consumers have from clothes , whilst remaining
economically viable ? 
The first section is aimed at educational institutions wishing
to respond to these questions by integrating sustainability
issues into the teaching of fashion education to enable
students to develop skills , knowledge and values they can
take forward into industry . The second section relates to
the development of a sustainability policy in a more wide
reaching sense , beyond the teaching of sustainability issues . 
There isn ’ t a fixed formula ; we hope that each educational
institution will be able to draw an appropriate approach
from these suggestions . 
Integrating Sustainability Issues into the Teaching
of Fashion Education

Get buy-in from top-level management or
•
•
administration
Having commitment from top-level management will
be essential for accessing resources and ensuring full
integration of sustainable fashion education . Management
should indicate how they intend to support this work and
integrate sustainability issues into school / college / university
policies . 

Create the case for sustainable fashion education to
•
•
stakeholders
Stakeholders could include students , admin staff , support
staff , teaching staff , university management team , business
school , the environment , future generations and alumni . 
The case could : 

Draw on a school / college / university ’ s sustainability policy
• 3 
. 

Outline the opportunities to develop the school / college / 
•
university ’ s profile in sustainability fashion and attract
more investment , students and high profile expertise . 

Build interdisciplinary collaboration between the other
•
departments ( e . g . business ) and fashion-related courses . 

Respond to the evidence that many major brands and
•
retailers now acknowledge the responsibilities they have
towards workers in their supply chains and the impact
their operations have on the environment . 

Build on the notion that part of the role of the
•
educational institution is to prepare students for their
individual lives and to act with responsibility within
their communities . At the beginning of the 21st
century , 
sustainability is no longer seen as a niche issue but one that
pervades all areas of students ’ future lives , and therefore
educational institutions have a responsibility to ensure
students build the relevant skills , values and knowledge . 

Reference the Higher Education Funding Council for
•
England ’ s vision “ that , within the next 10 years , the higher
education sector in England will be recognised as a major
contributor to society ’ s efforts to achieve sustainability -
through the skills and knowledge that its graduates learn
and put into practice , and through its own strategies
and operations ”  . 
1
The terms ethical , sustainable , eco and others can mean very different things depending on who is asked . In this contribution , we have used the term sustainability to embrace the social , 
environmental , ecological , animal welfare and economic viability issues that affect our industry in their most general sense . 
2 
Accessed 24th November 2008 . 
3
See final section on developing an sustainability policy . 
215

Draw on the rise in demand for sustainable fashion by
•
consumers , the increasingly high media profile of working
conditions , fair trade and the environment within the
fashion industry , and the growing interest in these issues
from students and staff . 

Reference the Department for Environment , Food and
•
Rural Affairs ’  ( DEFRA ) research into sustainability in the
garment industry : 
consumerprod / products / clothing . htm
To be inspired by the work taking place at other
higher education institutions in the UK , see the Higher
Education Funding Council for England ’ s Thinking
Sustainably film available at 
events / 2008 / sustain / video /  . In the film , the Director of
the Centre for Sustainable Fashion at London College
of Fashion , theVice-Chancellor of Bradford University , 
DeputyVice Chancellor at Kingston , and Head of Finance
at the London School of Economics , among others , share
their experiences and why they consider sustainability to
be important . 

Get ownership by key stakeholders including support , 
•
•
teaching and admin staff , and students
	
It will be important to ensure ownership of changes
by teaching and non-teaching staff ( e . g . technicians , 
library staff ) to enable the integration of sustainability
issues . Aligning staff values with their own work can
lead to a far greater motivation than if sustainability is a
tick-box exercise forced on them . This could be done
through mandatory meetings , staff training , surveys , and
direct contact with students and staff . Whilst getting
ownership is more complicated than consulting staff , a
comprehensive consultation should take place to find out
what staff are already doing in this area , what the barriers
to integrating sustainability issues are , and how staff can
be supported to ensure the issues are integrated . 

Communicate the school / college / university ’ s
•
•
commitment to sustainable fashion education and how
stakeholders can get involved

Ideas for how to communicate the institution ’ s
•
commitment to sustainable fashion education and to
encourage greater involvement : 

Distribute information during the first weeks of term
•
to new students . 
Organise clothes ’ swaps or a ‘ sustainable ’ fashion show . 
•
Set up MySpace / Facebook pages . 
•

Publish information on the institution ’ s
•
website / intranet . 

Produce information packs for students , educators and
•
support staff who wish to find out more . 

Introduce a section on sustainability issues in the staff
•
newsletter / alumni magazine . 

Identify an international role model to engage
•
international students . 
Produce merchandise such as mouse mats . 
•

Create a strategic plan with priorities , targets and a
•
•
time-frame and commit resources
	
Having consulted with stakeholders , it will be important
to establish a plan of action with clearly defined targets , 
time-frame and resources allocated . Targets should be
realistic and the plan should include a process to monitor
and evaluate progress . 
Dedicate staff time to take recommendations forward
•
•
	
Developing sustainable fashion education requires
dedicated staff time . This may mean creating new
positions or freeing time within existing post-holders ’ 
roles to : 
Integrate these issues into the curriculum . 
•

Ensure that educators and support staff have their
•
training needs met . 
Produce regular reports of progress in this area . 
•

Ensure that the school / college / university ’ s
•
commitment is reviewed and updated . 
Develop teaching resources and materials . 
•
Organise events . 
•

Network with educators at other educational
•
institutions . 
Facilitate knowledge transfer between institutions . 
•
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
216
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Your institution may also wish to explore the options of
team teaching or having one educator teaching across
different courses . 

Build the school / college / university ’ s work on
•
•
sustainability fashion around a unique selling point
	
Your educational institution could establish a reputation
as a leader in sustainable fashion , but it will first need
to define what sustainability fashion means for the
institution , which areas it will focus on or whether it
aims to develop expertise in all areas of sustainability
fashion . There are a number of subject areas related to
sustainable fashion which are not being comprehensively
researched or taught in fashion educational institutions . 
These include : 

The impact of the buying process on working
•
conditions and the environment , and ways to re-
structure the buying process to mitigate this impact . 

Marketing , promotion and journalism in relation to
•
sustainable fashion . 

Ethical consumerism and ways to reduce
•
material consumption . 
Support for fair trade companies and producers . 
•

How legislation , international regulation and national
•
laws impact on garment supply chains , workers and
the environment . 
Slow fashion . 
•
A strong research base , professorships , courses , etc .  , 
could be built around these areas of work could filter
through to other courses . 
Using industry links as a way of increasing knowledge
•
•
	
Many schools , colleges and universities have strong
industry links that could be built on to increase
knowledge of the issues , create case studies and invite
industry speakers , and for staff training . Communication
with industry need not be just one way ( i . e . industry
telling students what it needs )  ; students also need to tell
industry how it must change . 

Decide whether the starting point is integration of
•
•
sustainability issues across the board , a separate area of
teaching , or a combination of the two . 
	
The starting point could be to ensure sustainability
underpins as many courses as possible , for example by
integrating sustainability into the assessment criteria for
all courses . This could meet with resistance from teaching
staff who may not feel equipped to teach these issues
and may therefore be something that happens at a later
stage . An alternative could be to offer students optional
or compulsory modules of study . A risk here is that the
issues become ghettoised but it could be a good way to
enhance specialist knowledge and ensure that sustainability
is clearly identifiable within the curricula . There are other
pros and cons of taking either of these approaches and , 
ideally , the institution will combine the two . 

Set up a steering group for ensuring integration of
•
•
sustainability issues into the curriculum
	
This could involve representatives of support and
teaching staff , students and administration team . 

Ensure resources are available to students
•
•
and educators

Develop educational tools and resources
• 
( see the teaching resources section of www . 
fashioninganethicalindustry . org )  . 

Ensure library staff have the necessary resources and
•
time to build a sustainable fashion resource section 
( see resources / 
for information about resources and how to order
from Fashioning an Ethical Industry )  . 
Organise extra-curricular events that support
•
•
educators , support staff and students
Suggestions for these events include : 

Freshers ’ Week – Events could be held during this
•
week to highlight the university ’ s commitment to
sustainability fashion education from the outset of
the student ’ s career . 
Exhibitions . 
•

Seminars , see , for example , the University of
•
Delaware ’ s Fashioning Social Responsibility
lecture series ( 
lectureseries . html )  . 

Run sustainability fashion weeks or events throughout
•
the year ( see 
for information about London College of Fashion ’ s 
 ‘ Green is the New Black ’ week of events )  . 

Provide staff training and opportunities for professional
•
•
development in sustainable fashion

Offer mandatory and optional training sessions for
•
support staff ( including technologists ) and educators . 
Creating staff development exercises that encourage
217
participants to reflect deeply on their identities and
responsibilities as lecturers within an industry with
deep-rooted sustainability impacts is a significant task
to be tackled with care as it ’ s easy for staff to be put
off . 

Inform new staff about the institution ’ s commitment
•
to sustainable fashion in staff inductions . 

Create a mentoring system for staff . 
•

Involve curriculum development teams and
•
professional staff in this process . 
Offer opportunities to students
•
•
Placements could have a sustainability focus and be
•
offered across different courses . 
Competitions could be organised . 
•
Ideas could be developed with student unions and
•
student societies . 
Useful links
•
•
There are a number of organisations that support
educational institutions to bring sustainability issues into
their teaching , including : 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , a project
•
of Labour Behind the Label ( UK )  
. 
Higher Education Academy – Education for Sustainable
•
Development ( UK ) 
ourwork / learning / sustainability . 
Environmental Association for Universities and 		
•
Colleges ( UK )  / home . 
Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business 		
• 
( USA )  . edu / esrab /  . 
Modnie i Etycznie , a project of Polish Humanitarian 		
•
Organisation ( Poland )  . 
Fair Fashion , a project of Schone Kleren Campagne 		
• 
( Netherlands )  . 
My Design . My Responsibility .  , a project of Südwind 		
•
Agentur ( Austria )  . 
Developing a Sustainability Policy
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ’ s area of expertise is working
conditions in garment production within fashion education
and not in sustainability policies . However , we wanted to
share our experience of corporate sustainability policies
and of developing our own as Labour Behind the Label . 
Please see the five recommendations as above which
are important in establishing a sustainability policy for the
school / college / university . It is important to : 
Have buy-in from top-level management . 
•
Create the case for a sustainability policy . 
•

Have ownership by key stakeholders including support , 
•
teaching and admin staff and students . 

Ensure dedicated staff time to take recommendations
•
forward . 

Communicate the school / college / university ’ s
•
commitment to its sustainability policy and how
stakeholders can get involved . 
Learn from the experience of others
•
•
	
Your institution is not alone in developing a sustainability
approach ; for many companies and organisations it
is now considered as essential as having an equal
opportunities policy . Publicly listed companies now have
to report on certain social and environmental impacts
of their businesses by law . Other companies , including
the major high street brands and retailers , voluntarily
publish social and environmental reports . Organisational
approaches to sustainability policies vary dramatically –
some start small and are built on each year , others are
launched across the organisation . 
Within higher education , the following universities have taken
an institutional approach to change or have departments to
engage on these issues : 
University of Bradford
• 

University of Plymouth ’ s Centre for Sustainable Futures
•


University of Gloucestershire
• 
sustainability / index . cfm

University of Bournemouth
• . 
ac . uk / about / the_global_dimension / global_perspectives / 
global_perspectives . html
Kingston University
• 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
218
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
For examples of social and environmental policies and
reports see : 

Oxford Brookes University
•


Michigan State University
•


Gap
• 
. 
shtml

Develop priorities , targets and a time-frame , and
•
•
commit resources
The school / college / university ’ s sustainability policy may
include : 
Standards and targets relating to : 
•
Teaching sustainable fashion . 
•
•

The environmental impact of buildings , resource
•
•
use , and staff and student practices . 
Impact of the college ’ s activities on stakeholders . 
•
•
Community involvement . 
•
•
Health and safety within the college . 
•
•

Employees ( terms and conditions of
•
•
employment , etc .  )  . 

Procurement and impact on people and the
•
•
environment along the supply chain of products
and services bought by the college . 
Socially responsible investment . 
•
•
Information technology . 
•
•

Management systems for implementation of , 
•
communicating on , reporting about and reviewing the
policy . 

Core organisational values such as trust or integrity
•
to provide an overarching framework for the
sustainability policy . 

Mission statement outlining the college ’ s commitment
•
to its sustainability policy . 
Useful links
•
•
There are a number of companies and organisations
offering information and assistance to companies wishing
to develop and implement a sustainability policy . FEI cannot
endorse any of the services offered by these organisations , 
but we hope they will prove to be useful in your research : 

Environmental Association for Universities and Colleges
• 
/ home

Oxford Brookes University
•


Ethical Property Foundation
•

Green the building
•
•
There are a large number of resources available from the
government and other environmental advisory bodies
concerning how to make buildings more environmentally
sound . These can include : 
Auditing use / waste of electricity , gas and water . 
•

Developing a staff / student transport system for
•
sustainability ( e . g . secure and safe bicycle parks and
car-share schemes )  , including for transport to and from
exhibitions ( i . e . full coach loads )  . 

Encouraging staff to utilise information technology to
•
reduce travel ( e . g . video conferencing )  . 
Introducing a recycling , low waste and reducing policy . 
•

Encouraging re-use by putting out requests for other
•
people ’ s ‘ waste ’  ( fabrics , trims ) on Freecycle4 
( http :  /  / www . 
freecycle . org /  )  . 

Developing a sustainable procurement policy and
•
carefully selecting resources ( particularly textile
chemicals ) and considering the sustainability value of
these goods . 
4
Freecycle is a grassroots and entirely non-profit movement of people who are giving ( and getting ) stuff for free in their own towns . Membership is free . 
219
Proposed Learning Goals for Social
Responsibility and Sustainability
Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware , USA , and President and Founder of Educators for Socially Responsible
Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , on behalf of ESRAB
Dickson @ udel . edu
1 . Level Pre-16 , FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Whole school / college / university
5 . Length of time required N / A
6 . Type of activity Course outlines and learning goals
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Pedagogy , 
Interactive
8 . Topics covered All
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
220
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
In November 2007 , Educators for Socially Responsible
Apparel Business ( ESRAB ) convened a special session
at the annual conference of the InternationalTextile and
Apparel Association with the aim of creating learning
goals related to social responsibility and sustainability . Co-
conveners of the special session included the following , 
listed by the topic area around which they led discussion : 
Labor Compliance
Dr . Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware
Dr . Molly Eckman , Colorado State University
Environmental Sustainability
Dr . Suzanne Loker , Cornell University
Dr . Jana Hawley , Kansas State University
Consumer Issues / Materialism
Dr . Sharron Lennon , University of Delaware
Dr . Leslie Davis Burns , Oregon State University
Dr . Margaret Rucker , University of California-Davis
Body Image / Disordered Eating
Dr . Jennifer Paff Ogle , Colorado State University
Dr . Nancy Rudd , The Ohio State University
Dr . Mary Lynn Damhorst , Iowa State University
The popularity of the session and interest in the topic
was clear as we had over 60 participants from 34 colleges
and universities across the United States and Canada . 
Attendees first considered as a group the role of students
as change agents in a presentation made by Drs . Hawley
and Loker . Next the attendees broke into four groups to
identify learning goals for their sub-topic ( labor compliance , 
environmental sustainability , consumer issues / materialism , 
body image / disordered eating )  . 
The following question was posed to the groups to
facilitate their work : 

What should apparel / textile students be able to do
• 
( regarding each sub-topic area of social responsibility / 
sustainability ) upon graduation ? 
The following draft learning goals were identified . We left
it with each institutional participant to refine the goals that
they wanted to implement in their programs . 
Labor Compliance
1 . Describe key stakeholders in apparel supply chains . 
2 . 	
Analyze the role of stakeholders in improving labor
standards and working conditions . 
3 . 	
Describe major labor problems found in the production
of apparel . 
4 . 	
Analyze the relationship between worker rights and
human rights . 
5 . 	
Describe the decisions for which buyers / merchandisers
and designers are responsible that have implications for
social responsibility and labor compliance . 
6 . 	
Explain the standards on which respected codes of
conduct for labor standards and working conditions
are based . 
7 . 	
Define social responsibility as it relates to labor
standards and working conditions . 
8 . 	
Analyze strategies commonly used by apparel brands
and retailers for improving labor standards and working
conditions in apparel factories . 
9 . 	
Use theories to evaluate apparel brand and
retailer efforts to address labor standards and
working conditions . 
10 . 	
Create a social responsibility strategy for an apparel
brand or retailer to address labor problems in
apparel factories . 
Environmental Sustainability
1 . 	
Present an increased awareness and consciousness
about environmental responsibility and sustainability . 
2 . 	
Define basic environmental information , definitions , 
terminology , and codes of conduct . 
3 . 	
Describe the relationship between the environment , 
people , and the apparel supply chain . 
4 . 	
Analyze from a whole systems perspective , how
the apparel supply chain impacts people and the
environment . 
5 . 	
Take actions toward environmental sustainability . 
6 . 	
Act as a change agent toward environmental
sustainability to inform , engage , and impassion others . 
7 . 	
Embrace professional responsibility to join the
debate about environmental responsibility in the
apparel industry . 
8 . 	
Engage in discussion and actions outside their comfort
zone within and outside their spheres of influence . 
9 . 	
Apply design and innovation concepts to the
environmental debate . 
221
10 . 	
Define how they can make a difference in sustaining the
environment within their own sphere of influence AND
what makes them angry about what ’ s happening . 
11 . 	
Analyze the product development system as a lifecycle
and a closed system with cradle to cradle approaches . 
12 . 	
Develop a global view of social and environmental
responsibility . 
13 . 	
Develop ethical courage and apply it at work and
in everyday life . 
14 . Explore LEED-like systems for apparel . 1
15 . 	
Explore profitability within an environmentally
sustainable system . 
Consumer Issues / Materialism
1 . 	
Analyze cultural and social contexts as they relate to
individuals ’ value systems associated with the availability
and use of consumer products . 
2 . 	
Outline consumer decision-making and purchasing
behavior as related to ethical decision-making and
unethical / illegal decision-making . 
3 . 	
Analyze the impact of consumer product use and
maintenance on social and environmental sustainability . 
4 . 	
Analyze the role of fashion product lifecycles in social
and environmental sustainability . 
5 . 	
Apply consumer issues of social responsibility as they
relate to decisions made by industry professionals . 
6 . Empower students to be consumer change agents . 
Body Image / Disordered Eating
1 . 	
Explain the ways in which body image is conditioned
by social relationships , cultural and historical ideals , 
normative prescriptions , and moralistic meanings
regarding self-control and discipline . 
2 . 	
Deconstruct and critique dominant Western cultural
ideals , ideologies and discourses about the body ( e . g . 
the “ beauty is good ” stereotype ; the myth of bodily
perfection ; the assumption that the human body is
infinitely malleable ; the assumption that attaining a
given body ideal will bring happiness and success ; the
equation of thinness with healthfulness ; the notion that
everyone can and should be thin ; the sexualization , 
objectification and commodification of the human
body )  . 
3 . 	
Explain and critique the potential impact of Western
cultural ideals , ideologies , and discourses about the body
on the self ( i . e . on body image )  . 
4 . 	
Apply critical thinking to analyze why consumer culture
decision-makers invoke exclusionary , unrealistic , and / or
objectifying body imagery and discourses to promote
goods and services . 
5 . 	
Apply critical thinking to analyze the implications of the
global dissemination of Western culture ’ s body ideals , 
ideologies , and discourses on people from diverse
cultures and geographic regions . 
6 . 	
Construct strategies to promote positive body
images among various consumer groups ( e . g .  , create
advertisements that include representations of the
human body designed to engender positive self-esteem
and body image among diverse populations ; design
educational programming to mediate negative media
influences on body image ; develop social marketing
campaigns designed to prevent eating disorders ; 
participate in the National Organization for Women ’ s
LoveYour Body Day activities )  . 
General
1 . 	
Analyze whether there is an inherent conflict between
commercial successes and social responsibility as
related to labor compliance , environmental sustainability , 
consumption , body image / disordered eating . 
1
LEED stands for a Green Building Rating System referred to as Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design . LEED provides third party certification that universally accepted
environmental standards were met in design , construction , and operation of buildings
claiming to be “ green .  ” For more information see . 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
222
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Approaches to Research and Writing for BA
Dissertations Relevant to Fashioning an Ethical
Industry
Caryn Simonson , Member of Textile Environment Design Research Group , Senior Lecturer and
Theory Co-ordinator , BA ( Hons ) Textile Design , Chelsea College of Art and Design , 
University of the Arts , London , UK
c . simonson @ chelsea . arts . ac . uk
1 . Level UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : Experience of
dissertation tutoring and assessment . 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students D . Specific knowledge required : Experience of essay
research and writing at undergraduate level , Stage One
andTwo , building up to StageThree . 
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Ideas for projects , assignments and briefs , 
Research related , 
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered All
Follow Up / Related Activities 
 ‘ Reading Lists According toTheme ’ by Caryn Simonson in the Cross-curricular section of this Handbook . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To share experiences of teaching and supervising dissertations with a focus on issues around design , sustainability
•
•
and responsibility . 
223
This contribution contains elements that are not covered
by the Creative Commons licence
Aim
This resource gives a summary and overview of the
experiences of educators in teaching and supervising
dissertations at undergraduate level , with a focus on
issues around design , sustainability and responsibility , on
BA ( Hons ) Textile Design at Chelsea College of Art and
Design . It includes our experience of the strengths and also
the pitfalls of student dissertation work in this area , case
studies of student dissertations and a selected reading list . 
It is not intended as a guide as such , but as a way of sharing
our experience . 
Context
Whilst environmental issues have been on the curriculum
in several colleges for over a decade , drawing upon
seminal texts such as Papanek ’ s The Green Imperative or
Datschefski ’ s The Total Beauty of Sustainable Products , the
focus has often been on design in general . The 21st
century
has seen a growing involvement within education and also
within the industry itself , to identifying concerns and issues
specific and relevant to designers and emerging designers
in fashion and textiles . 
Students at undergraduate level are developing a body of
theory and practice that is emerging and continuing to be
defined and re-defined . The field is a field in process . Kate
Fletcher ’ s book , Sustainable Fashion and Textiles ( 2008 )  , has
been a very valuable recent contribution to the field . 
Critical Writing and Research on Ethical and
Environmental Responsibility Issues : 
The Strengths and the Pitfalls
Some of the most successful dissertations embody both
primary and secondary research . Dissertations often focus
on case studies and cite key practitioners working within
the field . As emerging designers , it has been important
and relevant to students ’ studio practice for them to
be forward-thinking and to look for design solutions . 
This can result in a speculative approach which requires
the research not only to be underpinned by excellent
primary research – on where we are now – but to be
combined with excellent secondary research that provides
theoretical and historical context . It is important that
this balance is achieved for students to demonstrate an
understanding of the broader issues that have contributed
to the development of the fashion and textiles industry . 
For example , a dissertation that frequently refers to 
 ‘ consumerism ’ and ‘ shopping ’ and ‘ fast fashion ’ will benefit
from research around critical theories of consumption and
shopping , and then applying and interpreting these within
their context . 
The range of books available on ethical issues and
sustainability is increasing all the time . These texts can be
read in conjunction with existing texts from a broader
range . We encourage students to seek out relevant texts
from a wider subject area . This has been part of the
approach that critical thinkers have been using for years
– for example , the fields of Cultural Studies or Material
Culture Studies draw upon texts from a wide range of
perspectives : anthropology , philosophy , psychology , etc . 
Synthesis of Primary and Secondary Research
Good dissertations have drawn upon a broad range
of reading that includes theoretical texts , government , 
marketing and industry reports , articles from magazines
and academic journals , TV documentaries , exhibition
visits , interviews with companies , designers , buyers , 
spokespeople , campaigners , etc . We have found that , if the
research focuses too much on reports within the field , 
the dissertation can become more ‘ report-like ’ in its style
and needs to be balanced with critical evaluation , analysis
and context – cultural , social , economic , etc . If there is a
significant imbalance between primary and secondary
research with a heavier weighting on primary research , 
the work can become too subjective . The strongest
dissertations marry both well . Equally , if the research
focuses too heavily on a campaigning approach , and
presents only one side , it can lose credibility as an objective
piece of work for some readers . Whilst students are
encouraged to ‘ position ’ themselves with their viewpoint , 
it is important that this is done through a reasoned
argument and debate , presenting different points of view
and then arriving at a conclusion . Some dissertations we
have supervised can be very enthusiastic in style and we
have experienced students actively engaging in a significant
amount of primary research , some of which has been at a
level higher than undergraduate . This can sometimes result
in work that is of a very high standard and has
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
224
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
real currency , but would benefit further from substantial
secondary research to underpin the empirical research . 
Examples – Case Studies of Dissertation
Questions and Research
TheTextile Environment Design ( TED ) research group led
by designer and Reader , Rebecca Earley , has been influential
in supporting students at Chelsea College of Art and
Design and externally in their research into sustainability
and textiles . Emphasis is on research into teaching , where
TED members deliver part of the theory programme . This
is complemented by visiting practitioners working in the
field of ethical approaches to design , who are invited to
give talks about their work in Stage One and StageTwo
of the course . TheTED archive has a very good selection
of reading material , books , and CDs . Expert staff offer
students advice on locating up-to-date reports within the
field and guide students towards potential avenues for
primary research . 
Following is a selection of dissertations and a reading list on
key themes that have recently been explored by students
who have graduated from BA ( Hons ) Textile Design at
Chelsea College of Art and Design . The selective reading
list below offers a ‘ taster ’ and a starting point for students
researching particular themes that are currently of issue
within discussions around sustainability and responsibility
in fashion and textiles . Examples of student dissertation
titles are given alongside a synopsis of their key focus and a
selected reading list from their bibliography to demonstrate
the kinds of research materials they
have used . 
The following case studies are quoted from synopses
written by the students . As part of their final theses , 
this work is subject to the usual copyright laws and the
authors ’ ideas must be acknowledged and must not
be altered . 
Case Study 1
Student : Frances Conteh 
 “ The Devil Wears .  .  . Can We Afford An Unethical
Manufacturing Industry ? 
This dissertation explores ‘ Fast Fashion ’ and the capitalist
ideology of mass consumerism . It questions the West ’ s
role in the perpetration and perpetuation of modern day
slavery ( sweat-shop case study : documentary , China Blue ) 
in the third world and the consequent unethical sourcing of
labour and materials as both opportunistic and exploitative
and considers the practice as clearly immoral . It looks
to solutions , citingThe Slow Movement as a progressive
model , alongside activism , NGOs ( nongovernmental
organisations ) and Fairtrade . The dissertation also covers
consumer fetishism and draws onTheodor Adorno ’ s
philosophical teachings , which propose that a commodity
is a ‘ deception ’ as it conceals the way it is produced behind
an attractive veneer .  ”  ( Frances Conteh , 2008 ) 
Selected key texts and other research : 
Adorno , T . W .  ( 1991 ) The Culture Industry : Selected essays on
mass culture , London : Routledge
Alam , K . and Hearson , M .  ( 2006 ) Fashion Victims : The true
cost of cheap clothes at Primark , Asda and Tesco , London : 
War on Want
Craig , G . and Parkins , W .  ( 2006 ) Slow Living , Oxford : Berg
Miller , D .  ( 1987 ) Material Culture and Mass Consumption , 
Oxford : Basil Blackwell
Ross , A .  ( 1997 ) No Sweat : Fashion , free trade , and the rights
of garment workers , London ; NewYork : Verso
Klein , N .  ( 2001 ) No Logo , no space , no choice , no jobs , 
London : Flamingo
225
Articles
McDougall , D .  ( 2007 )  ‘ Child Sweatshop shame threatens
Gap ’ s ethical image ’  [ Internet ] The Observer . Available
at : 
ethicalbusiness . india
Newell , C . and Winnett , R .  ( 2007 )  ‘ Revealed : Topshop
clothes made with ‘ slave labour ’  ’  [ Internet ] The Sunday
Times . Available at : 
life_and_style / women / fashion / article2241665 . ece
Film
China Blue ( 2005 ) Dir . Micha X Peled , Teddy Bear
Films Production
Web
www . cleanclothes . org
www . nosweat . org . uk
Primary Research - Interviews
Carried out with designers and manufacturing companies
Case Study 2
Student : Carolina Gomez-Aubert 
 “ Old Rules to New Gems : Can El Salvador Sustain and
Develop Home Grown Design ? 
This thesis evaluates the current textile industry in El
Salvador ,  ‘ maquilas ’  ( factories ) closing down , thirty thousand
unemployed women and lack of product differentiation
in the craft sector . The possibilities for the industry to
survive and thrive are juxtaposed with successful craft / 
handmade driven businesses in Brazil and the United
States . The analysis uncovers other underlying issues such
as bootlegging and monetary consignments from abroad
as a deterrent for the development of Salvadorian design . 
Resulting in a strategy that not only combines the mass-
produced with handmade elements but also empowers
women in the Salvadorian economy .  ”  ( Carolina Gomez-
Aubert , 2008 ) 
Selected key texts and other research
Fatemi , K .  ( 1990 ) The Maquiladora Industry : Economic
solution or problem ? NY : Praeger Publishers
Glanville , A .  ( 2002 ) Economics from a Global Perspective , 
London : Routledge
Howard , A .  ( 2007 )  ‘ Labor , history and sweatshops in the
new global economy ’ in Livingstone , J . and Ploof , J .  ( eds .  ) The
Object of Labor : Art , cloth and cultural production , Chicago : 
School of the Art Institute Chicago Press , pp . 31-50
Marx , K .  ( transl . Fowkes , B .  )  ( 1992 ) Capital Vol . 1 : A critique of
political economy , London : Penguin Publishing
Root , R .  ( ed .  )  ( 2005 ) The Latin American Fashion Reader , 
Oxford : Berg
SubRosa ,  ( 2006 )  ‘ Can you see us now ? Ya nos PuedenVer ?  ’ 
in Livingstone , J . and Ploof , J .  ( eds .  ) The Object of Labor : Art , 
cloth and cultural production , Chicago : School of the Art
Institute Chicago Press , pp . 80-88
Primary Research
Interviews with : the owner of Los Capellanos , San Salvador , 
El Slavador ; a former owner of a maquila ; an employee of
Los Capellanos , San Salvador , El Salvador . 
Case Study 3
Student : Rebecca Hole 
 “ Putting The Love Back Into Fashion :  ‘ How can fashion / 
textile designers use ‘ Emotionally Durable Design ’ to help
slow down fashion ? 
This study looks at how you can develop empathy for
special items of clothing , and how designers could use
Emotionally Durable Design to prolong the life of a
garment to help slow down fast fashion by increasing the
durability of relationships established between users and
product . This could be through relating to the individual ’ s
experience of a garment , producing something unique and
well made , through traceability of stories and histories or
just something that makes the consumer feel special…
hopefully resulting in a wardrobe full of cherished clothes .  ”  
( Rebecca Hole , 2008 ) 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
226
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Selected key texts and other research
Baker , A .  ( 2000 ) Serious Shopping : Essays in psychology and
consumerism , London : Free Association Press
Braungart , M . and McDonough , W .  ( 2002 ) Cradle to Cradle : 
Remaking the way we make things , NewYork : North
Point Press
Chapman , J .  ( 2005 ) Emotionally Durable Design , London : 
Earthscan
Dunseth , K .  ( 1998 ) A Second Skin : Women write about
clothes , London : The Women ’ s Press
Waddell , G .  ( 2004 ) How Fashion Works : Couture , ready-to-
wear and mass production , Oxford : Blackwell Publishing
Web
www . treehugger . com
www . traid . org . uk
www . katefletcher . com
www . keepandshare . co . uk
Primary research - Questionnaires 
 ‘ Understanding Current Shopping Habits ’ questionnaires ,  
 ‘ Treasured Clothing ’ questionnaires sent out and analysed . 
Case Study 4
Student : Rebecca Moore 
 “ Cheap Chic is the New Black ’ - A Discussion of Who is
Responsible for Sweatshops ’ 
This thesis explores the responsibility of the five main
stakeholders in the garment industry regarding sweatshops
and the new fad for cheap , fast fashion . The realisation of
my own contribution to the existence of sweatshops as a
consumer fuelled a desire to raise my own awareness of
the unethical conditions which are prevalent throughout the
industry . The study examines the present and potential roles
played by retailers , contractors , the government , consumers
and workers in this complex multidirectional system . With
each stakeholder liable to both blame and praise - who is
it that holds the greatest responsibility for the employment
and welfare of this child ?  ”  ( Rebecca Moore , 2008 ) 
Selected key texts and other research
Blanchard , T .  ( 2007 ) Green is the new Black : How to change
the world with style , London : Hodder and Stoughton Ltd
Bonacich , E . and Appelbaum , P . P .  ( 2000 ) Behind the Label : 
Inequality in the Los Angeles Apparel Industry , Berkeley , CA : 
University of California Press
Fung , A .  , O ’ Rourke , D . and Sabel , C . F .  ( 2001 ) Can we put an
end to Sweatshops ?  : A new democracy form on raising global
labour standards , Boston : Beacon Press
Ross , R . J . S .  ( 2004 ) Slaves to Fashion : Poverty and abuse in the
new sweatshops , USA : The University of Michigan Press
Articles
Given , O .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Frequently Asked Questions About
Sweatshops and Women Workers ’  , Feminists against
sweatshops [ Internet ] Available at : 
other / sweatshops / sweatfaq . html
Raworth , K .  ( 2004 ) Trading away our right : Women working
in global supply chains , Great Britain : Oxfam International . 
Available at : 
downloads / trading_rights . pdf
Sweatshop Watch : Empowering workers , informing
consumers . Why do sweatshops exist ?  [ Internet ] Available at : 

Universal Declaration of Human Rights [ Internet ] Available at : 

Primary Research - selected
Letters to large retailers , consumer questionnaire sent out
and analysed , Bagging a Bargain conference . 
227
Case Study 5
Student : Emily Skinner 
 “ Smart Textiles : An Innovative Future for
Sustainable Design
The aim of this thesis was to give an in-depth insight
into the recent innovation of smart textiles , questioning
their uses and the present sustainable textile market to
discover what purpose smart textiles could serve in the
future of sustainable design . Both discussions of technology
and ecology are extremely prevalent in today ’ s society , 
shaping numerous facets of our daily lives , from our
cultural experiences to the way in which we communicate
with one another . Therefore , in my opinion it appeared a
natural course of evolution for these ideas , technology and
sustainability to combine and pave the way for the future
of design , with the aim of creating new and functional
design which addresses our needs as well as our desires ”  .  
( Emily Skinner , 2008 ) 
Selected key texts and other research
Braddock Clarke , S . E . and O ’ Mahoney , M .  ( 2005 ) Techno
Textiles 2 : Revolutionary fabrics for fashion and design , 
London : Thames and Hudson
Braungart , M . and McDonough W .  ( 2002 ) Cradle to Cradle : 
Remaking the way we make things , NewYork : North
Point Press
Featherstone , M .  ( 1991 ) Consumer Culture and
Postmodernism , London : Sage Publications Ltd
Lee , S .  ( 2005 ) Fashioning the Future : Tomorrow ’ s wardrobe , 
London : Thames and Hudson
Papanek , V .  ( 1984 ) Design for the Real World : Human
ecology and social change ( 2nd
Edition )  , London : Thames and
Hudson
Papanek , V .  ( 1995 ) The Green Imperative : Ecology and ethics
in design and architecture , London : Thames and Hudson
Articles
Baurley , S .  ( 2005 ) The Emotional Wardrobe [ Internet ] 
London : Central Saint Martin ’ s College of Art and Design . 
Available at : 
emotional%20wardrobe . pdf
Berzowska , J .  ( 2005 )  ‘ ElectronicTextiles : Wearable
computers , reactive fashion and soft computation ’ in Textile : 
The journal of cloth and culture , Vol . 3 ( 1 ) pp . 58-75
Küchler , S .  ( 2003 )  ‘ RethinkingTextile : The advent of the 
 ‘ smart ’ fiber surface ’ in Textile : The journal of cloth and
culture , Vol . 1 ( 3 ) pp . 262-272
Lee , M .  ( 2007 ) The Ecologist at Estethica , Ethical Fashion
Special : Sacking the sackcloth image ,  [ pamphlet ] London : 
Tyler Moorhead
Primary Research - Interviews / Debate Chaired
Interview carried out with designer Elena Corchero , debate
initiated and chaired by Emily Skinner with MATextile
Futures students ( at Central St . Martin ’ s College of Art and
Design )  , interviewed authors such as Suzanne Lee . 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
228
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Case Study 6
Student : Anna Vening 
 “ Designing Happiness
Consumerism can be understood as a way of life that
is excessively preoccupied with the consumption of
economic goods , equating personal happiness with
consumption . We consume in an attempt to satisfy
our fundamental human needs , mainly our social needs
of esteem , companionship and community .  ‘ Designing
Happiness ’ aims to explore how designers could satisfy
these needs in other ways , not by creating the latest
fast fashion garment , but by encouraging people to get
together with friends , establish communities , appreciate the
world around us and learn and create new things .  ”  ( Anna
Vening , 2008
Key texts
Chapman , J .  ( 2005 ) Emotionally Durable Design , London : 
Earthscan
Clarke , D . B .  , Doel , M . A . and Housiaux , K . M . L .  ( 2003 ) The
Consumption Reader , London : Routledge
De Botton , A .  ( 2004 ) Status Anxiety , London : Hamish
Hamilton
Gorman , P .  ( 2004 ) Motivation and Emotion , London : 
Routledge
Papers
Manzini , E .  ( 2005 ) Enabling solution , social innovation and
design for sustainability , DIS-Indaco , Politechno di Milano
Manzini , E .  ( 2006 ) Design ethics and sustainability : Guidelines
for a transition phase , DIS-Indaco , Politechno di Milano
Web
www . howies . co . uk
www . keepandshare . co . uk
www . loop . ph
Primary Research
Questionnaires sent out on happiness and analysed . 
Interviews with designers . 
AcknowledgEments
Rebecca Earley , Designer and Reader , Textile Environment
Design ( TED ) research group , who supervises dissertations
and contributes the eco design , sustainability and
responsibility issues to theTheory programme , and leads
theTED research group ; Course Director of BA ( Hons ) 
Textile Design , Professor Kay Politowicz ; and ClaraVuletich , 
Research Assistant ( TED ) - all at Chelsea College of Art
and Design , University of the Arts , London . Thanks to Dr . Jo
Turney , External Examiner forTheory at Chelsea College
of Art and Design 2004-8 for her comments which have
contributed to the course team ’ s development of the
theory element of the programme . 
229
Problem-based Learning : The Perfect Tool for a
Creative Curriculum
Professor Efrat Tseëlon , Chair in Fashion Theory School of Design , University of Leeds , UK
e . tseelon @ leeds . ac . uk
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To develop independent learning , self-directed thorough exploration of complex dilemmas involving problem solving
•
•
skills as well as teamwork , communication and high cognitive skills . 
1 . Level FE , UG , PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators D . Specific knowledge required : How to become a
PBL learner ( an introductory session prior to start of
course ) 
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students D . Specific knowledge required : How to become a
PBL learner ( an introductory session prior to start of
course ) 
4 . Number of students 6 to 9
5 . Length of time required Each PBL problem requires two meetings over two
weeks : one for introducing and analysing the new
problem , another for the “ reporting back ” that students
do after “ self-study ”  . 
6 . Type of activity Discussion and debate , Research related
7 . Discipline Cross-curricular , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered Student / educator defined
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
230
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Abstract
The article provides a potted summary of the rationale
and procedure of the Maastricht model of Problem-based
Learning ( PBL )  . PBL is a method that privileges learning over
teaching . The method provides intellectual tools as well as
the teamworking experience for conducting independent
research . It consists of systematically analysing a set of PBL
problems ( non-directive prompts )  . Each problem ( text or
image stimulus ) is worked through using a protocol of 7
steps that engage the participants in abstracting common
themes , expanding them into a broad mind-map , reducing
them to underlying elements and generating a focused set of
researchable goals . Though the protocol is rigid , the content
is open-ended and interdisciplinary . The PBL process equips
the learner with academic as well as transferable skills , and
is well placed to address the challenges of the 21st
century
global market . Four examples of problems relating to the
social and environmental impact of the fashion industry are
presented here . 
What is PBL ? 
A student centred learning method which provides a
unique experience unlike any other ( Edens , 2000 ; Knowlton
and Sharp , 2003 ; Oker-Blom , Teodora , 1998 ; Otting & 
Zwaal , 2006 ; Schmidt , Vermeulen andVan der Molen , 2006 ; 
Ryan , 1997 ; Smith et . al . 1995 ; Sternberg , 2008 )  . 
Origin
PBL was developed in the new medical school
of McMaster University in the 1960s by medical
educators disenchanted with the excessive emphasis on
memorisation and fragmentation in traditional health
science education . In particular , they were disappointed
with its failure to equip graduates with the problem-solving
skills required for a lifetime of learning . In the 1970s and
1980s other medical schools as well as the professions
followed ( e . g . Newcastle in Australia , University of Hawaii , 
Harvard University , and the University of Sherbrooke in
Canada )  . Today , over 250 universities worldwide employ
PBL . The University of Maastricht runs entirely on PBL
principles . 
Process
PBL is grounded in modern cognitive psychology theory 
( cognitive constructivism ) which suggests that learning is a
constructive , not a receptive process , in which the learner
actively constructs new knowledge on the basis of current
knowledge . As such , this approach to knowledge is uniquely
suited to a digital age where knowledge and technologies
are fast changing and where learning of principles is more
important than memorising content . 
Method
PBL is based on two essential principles : 

A paradigm shift fromTEACHING ( which is a passive
•
process ) to LEARNING ( which is an active and reflective
process )  . 

Learning takes place in a group process based on
•
interrogating and making sense of a series of stimuli ( the
PBL PROBLEMS ) through a well-defined and rigorous
protocol . 
The Maastricht Model
There are many varieties of PBL . The version I advocate
is the Maastricht model . I was trained to use it at the
University of Maastricht , and subsequently trained other
colleagues , and implemented the method at University
College Dublin where I won the President ’ s award for
innovation in teaching for introducing the method and
adding it to the university ’ s teaching strategy mission . 
The Maastricht curriculum is structured by the problems to
be worked through rather than by discrete units of content
to be covered . The problems lead rather than follow the
learning . This involves converting the course material into a
series of prompts to provide a focal point or a springboard
for debating the underlying issues . Those prompts are
the PBL “ problems ”  . The PBL problem functions like
an inspiration in a creativity challenge . It allows group
members to develop flexible , cognitive strategies , make
interdisciplinary connections , and use appropriate learning
resources to analyse unanticipated situations and produce
viable solutions . 
Students discuss the problems in small groups ( stable
throughout the course , not ad hoc ) that are facilitated by
a ( rotating ) student chair whose role is that of monitoring
231
the process , and a scribe who records the highlights of the
conversation . The students work systematically through a
series of seven stages designed to interrogate the problem , 
opening up as many possibilities and links as can be
generated , and distilling a set of focused research problems
that the group wants to investigate . Each group member
then takes on a “ learning task ” to search for reading
materials that address it . In the subsequent session each
member reports to the group what they have learned . 
Throughout , the process is student driven and the
educator is present in the background , responding only to
interventions requested by the students ( e . g . to explain an
unfamiliar concept )  . 
The reason I am a keen supporter of this method is simply
that it works . The University of Maastricht , which has been
using PBL throughout all its programs with effective results , 
is a live laboratory that provides the definitive testimony to
the remarkable potentialities of the method in a range of
disciplines . 
Apart from the principle that “ you don ’ t argue with
success ”  , I have experienced its impressive results with the
rather savvy PBL learners at the University of Maastricht
who were the most sophisticated I have ever encountered
in my academic experience . I have also witnessed the
nearly miraculous transformation while importing the
method to University College Dublin where previously
passive , disengaged students became involved and
resourceful almost overnight . I wholly support the view
that I heard in Maastricht that once traditional lecturers
experience PBL they become converts , while students , 
once they get the hang of it , have nothing but praise for it
-- as the feedback reports I have kept of the classes I run
clearly document . 
The PBL Problem
The PBL process uses the vehicle of the “ PBL problem ” 
which is not necessarily a “ problem ” to be “ solved ”  . Rather , 
it is a trigger to provoke and to stimulate thought . 
A good PBL “ problem ” is concrete , complex , open-ended
and ill-structured . Such problems help to ensure that
there is no one ‘ right answer ’  , and they lend themselves to
many routes of exploration and investigation . Additionally , 
complex problems often allow for the integration of
interdisciplinary solutions .  “ Problems ” that are constructed
with a specific learning goal in mind are not really “ open ” 
but “ lead ” the student to particular information or
approach the educator has in mind . In contrast , a good PBL
problem does not invite convergent thinking to produce
a “ solution ”  . Rather , it is a description ( or visual depiction : 
printed or electronic ) of a set of phenomena or events
in need of explanation in terms of an underlying process , 
mechanism or principle . 
Maastricht 7 Step Protocol
1 . Clarifying concepts
2 . Defining the problem ( s ) underlying the stimuli
3 . Brainstorming
4 . Systematic classification
5 . Setting learning goals
6 . Self-study
7 . Briefing the group
The protocol takes place over a two session unit . In the
first session , students are given the problems and analyse
them collectively working through stages 1-5 . The first
session ends with every student choosing one of the
learning goals that the group identified for further study . 
Between the first and second sessions , students search
for materials relevant to their chosen learning goal . In the
second session , students share the information they found
with the group by short presentation . At the end of the
second session , a feedback form is filled in about each
member ’ s contribution to the group . 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
232
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
How does PBL Differ from Conventional Learning ? 
Conventional Learning Problem-based Learning
Educator-centred : knowledge is transmitted by an educator
through educator driven lectures , seminars or assignments . 
Knowledge is acquired by the students through a self-directed
search . 
Teaching is subject-based : it works from a body of knowledge to
applications . 
Teaching is problem-based : it works from a problem to define
the ( interdisciplinary ) frameworks required . 
Teaching is disciplinary and disjointed . Teaching is multi- and inter-disciplinary : it integrates and
connects across disciplinary boundaries . 
Students learn how to pass exams , and are given specific
direction ( of sources , topics , etc .  ) on how to search for the
correct answer . 
Students learn to identify what information is needed to solve 
( or make sense of ) the problem , how to frame questions about
this information , formulate problems , explore alternatives , 
where and how to search resources , how to organise the
information into a meaningful conceptual framework , and how
to communicate the information . 
The learning that takes place is mostly context-specific and
short-lived . It is not adequate for preparing students to
encounter new applications or formulations . 
The methods learned during problem-based learning are not
context-specific . They allow students to transfer knowledge
to approach new and different problems . They develop
employability skills . 
Evaluation emphasises the quality of product , based on some
elaboration of the material given or directed by the educator . 
Evaluation emphasises the process of the learning and the
quality of the integration of knowledge reflected in the 
 " solution "  . 
Traditional assessment is dominated by an exam or an essay
type assignment . 
Assessed by " a portfolio " which contains a diary of contribution
to the PBL process , self-evaluation , and evaluation of team
mates or exam questions resembling the PBL process . 
How Does PBL Differ from Workshop-style
Learning ? 
In order to derive the benefit of a PBL curriculum , the
method has to be applied systematically and not in a
haphazard or “ pick and mix ” fashion . Most of us have
experimented with small group teaching and various styles
of creative and interactive seminars . However , there is a
world of difference , despite surface similarities between
any other small group tutorials and PBL . One essential
difference is that even in a small group setting the educator
remains in charge . In PBL the educator is the “ behind the
scenes ” facilitator ; in a class setting s / he takes a back seat . It
is the students , not the educators , who run the show and
set the agenda . It is important to emphasise this - because
often , the most important obstacle that the traditional
lecturer has to overcome is that of relinquishing control . 
Another major difference between PBL and any other
small group teaching is that the PBL process is more open-
ended . Within a certain framework , the students chart their
own path , so that “ targets ” in the sense of a particular body
of knowledge that has to be “ covered ” are not relevant . 
Unlike “ problem-solving ” teambuilding-style activities , no
particular “ correct answer ” is expected , even implicitly , 
as a result of the learning process which consists of the
interrogating of the PBL problem . The process is as much
part of the learning as the content . 
Finally , a major difference between PBL and some kinds
of small group teaching of the “ case study ” variety is that
PBL starts from the PROBLEM . The problem does not
serve as an illustration of material already studied , nor is
it a means of applying already familiar material . Rather , it is
the first encounter with a topic , and it is the results of that
encounter which guide the learning . 
233
Academic Requirements of Higher Education
A significant body of research over the last 20 years
identified considerable agreement about a core set of
desirable skills that employers seek when recruiting
graduates . Those skills consist of interactive attributes -
communication , interpersonal , team-working - and personal
attributes ( intellect and problem solving , analytic , critical and
reflective abilities , willingness to learn and continue learning , 
flexibility , adaptability , risk-taking )  ( Harvey , 2003 ; Knight and
Yorke , 2002 ; Lees , 2002b )  . 
Employers do not want graduates “ trained for a job ”  , not
least because jobs change rapidly . In a fast changing world
in terms of market conditions and technologies , specific
skills do not have high currency . Rather employers want
self-motivated , self-reliant , educated individuals who have a
toolkit of independent learning , thinking and research skills
- who are adaptable and quick to learn and who will be
proactive , not reactive . In short , they seek candidates suited
for what an MIT report defined as “ the agile workplace ”  
(  )  . 
According to the QAA subject benchmark statement
for Art and Design 2008 ( 
academicinfrastructure / benchmark / statements / ADHA08 . 
pdf )  , the educational system is required to satisfy two sets
of criteria : 
1 . Provide academic research skills ( transferable skills )  . 
2 . 	
Provide employable skills ( motivation , initiative , 
self-directedness , adaptability , reliability , teamwork , 
communication skills , enterprise and entrepreneurship , 
resourcefulness , problem-solving , organisational skills , 
ability to plan and carry out with quality , goal setting
and timekeeping , project management , ability to apply
knowledge in new context , determination to see things
through , business awareness , work experience , subject
specific skills )  . 
Why is PBL the Answer to Current and Future
Academic Requirements
Negotiating two seemingly incompatible sets of skills
of academic research and employability may appear
unlikely . In fact , given the appropriate teaching method , 
the incompatible skills turn out to be complementary , 
not oppositional ( Harvey and Knight , 1996 ; Pedagogy for
Employability Group , 2004 )  . PBL ’ s unique properties make
it an ideal candidate for delivering those contrasting sets
of expectations . 
It does this by providing an intellectual content ( not
well-defined stimulus ) that needs to be negotiated in a
group setting . The nature of the content and the process
requires students to think across conceptual frameworks , 
to frame questions and set learning goals , and to source
and organise new information . But it also requires them to
think flexibly and adaptably , to work collaboratively and to
communicate their ideas to their group members . Thus
it requires a balanced contribution between collective work 
( enhancing people skills ) and individual work ( encouraging
entrepreneurship and independent research skills )  . PBL
is particularly beneficial for the arts and humanities as
it is uniquely suited to divergent creative thinking while
providing a framework for independent research
and investigation . 
The beauty of the method , if appropriately applied , is that
it is “ the making of independent thinkers and reflexive
researchers ”  ; and it creates them through “ doing ”  , not
through giving a PowerPoint presentation about “ how
to become autonomous researchers ”  . It is no mean feat
in a target driven educational system that is focused on
achieving “ learning objectives ”  . 
Examples of Problems
Please note that the examples are indicative . They can
be replaced by others , and can consist of text , diagrams , 
DVD clips , pictures or any combination . The corpus of PBL
problems can be updated often or left as it is . The nature of
the process requires new thinking by each group even with
the same stimuli . 
The sources for problems can range from media ( printed
and electronic )  , films , stories , daily life , etc . Many of the best
problems stem from a triggering article or incident that
captures the imagination as we recognise within it elements
appropriate to our learning objectives . 
It is important to remember that PBL problems are
genuinely open-ended and not prescriptive . You might have
something in mind when you put together various stimuli
and it might be that the students would follow the same
path . But it is also possible that they will be inspired to take
a different journey . Indeed , various groups might
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
234
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
follow different routes in response to the same stimuli . 
We are partly in a position of literary author or artist who
produces a work of art and releases it for others to engage
with it . Whatever they use it for , it will be a voyage of
discovery , and the route is just as valuable as the end result . 
I provide below a few potential examples : they can be
updated , modified or indeed expanded , but they need
to retain a slightly ambiguous nature and not in any way
be obvious . Since we take a back seat in the discussion , 
which is student led , it is easier to resist the temptation to 
 “ correct ” the students ’ interpretations and explorations . 
I have chosen examples using word and image but video
clips can be used as well . 
Sample Problems
1 . 	
This problem addresses the complexity and
interconnectedness of ethical problems involved in
trying to address even a single variable in isolation . 
Problem no . 1 : Are materials “ smart ”  ? 
Research commissioned by the Department for
Environment , Food and Rural Affairs ( DEFRA ) in
December 2007 reported the following : 

There is increasingly more clothing being produced
•
from fair trade and organic materials , particularly organic
cotton , though it is still a niche market . 

The combination of CAD and seamless knitting
•
technologies can enable the delivery of a whole
garment while allowing the product to remain digital
until final manufacture , thus decreasing the waste and
environmental impact caused by the production of
clothing . CAD is primarily used to reduce the production
time of the garments and to further improve their quality
and overall performance . 

The majority of energy expended during the clothing
•
lifecycle occurs in the use stage due to washing , including
the heating of water and drying of clothing . 

Fibre surface coating is one such technology that can
•
be designed to reduce the need for frequent garment
washing , thereby reducing the energy consumed . 
However , there is no data on whether consumers are
washing clothing that uses this technology any differently
from normal clothing . 

Non-synthetic materials such as cotton ( organic or not ) 
•
have a heavy carbon footprint and high water footprint : 
they consume large amounts of water during their
cultivation , require more intense washing and much
longer drying times than synthetic materials such as
polyester . 

Substituting cotton with polyester eliminates use of
•
pesticides . According to the World Health Organization 
( WHO )  , blood poisoning from pesticide exposure
among cotton workers accounts for 20 , 000 deaths every
year . 

Organic cotton has the highest toxicity impact during its
•
production stage rather than in its raw material growth . 

While pesticides are not used to produce polyester , 
•
other chemicals are used which could be as harmful to
the environment as pesticides . Non-synthetic materials
can release methane at end-of-lifecycle stage that can
potentially contribute to the overall climate change
impact of the clothing lifecycle . 

• The Independent reported on 23 September 2008 that
Arctic scientists found that arctic ice meltdown exposed
the millions of tons of gas methane beneath the Arctic
seabed whose release is a time bomb “ 20 times more
damaging than carbon dioxide ”  . 

The majority of waste clothing and textiles is not reused
•
or recycled , with a significant amount ending up in landfill . 

CBS news reported in November 2002 that fur
•
manufacturers responded to accusations by the charity
for ethical treatment of animals , PETA , by criticising fake
furs , which do not degrade for at least 600 years as an 
 “ eco-disaster ”  . 
2 . 	
The second problem addresses the problematics and
paradoxes of fast fashion . 
Problem no . 2 : Eco-talk is cheap , but what about
eco-fashions ? 
An internet blog quoted MEP Syed Kamal as saying that
it is misleading to blame fast fashion for unethical work
conditions .  “ If you see a piece of cheap clothing in a shop it
doesn ’ t mean the workers are being exploited ,  ” he said ,  “ What
it could mean is that the cost of production in that country
is much cheaper and you have to remember that we are
creating jobs for people in poorer countries by buying goods
from them ”  . 
235
Dan Welch of Ethical Consumer magazine said :  “ it ’ s too easy
to blame cheap fashion : the manufacturing costs of clothing
are so marginal , there ’ s no simple equation between price on
the rack and poor conditions in the supply chain , which means
even buying from a more expensive label is no guarantee that
its high street collections have been made ethically ”  . 
De Spiegel wrote in March 2008 that ,  “ Rising costs and
regulation have led to shutdowns and restructurings in China like
those that tore through America ’ s heartland . What can Western
companies do when China ’ s factory workers start demanding
better wages and conditions ? Easy - just transfer production to a
cheaper country . China ’ s loss is Vietnam ’ s gain ”  . 
3 . 	
The third problem deals with the critique of the eco
movement as serving big business in the guise of an
ethical agenda . 
Problem no . 3 : Green consumption or greenwash ? 
Consumers have embraced living green , and for the most
part the mainstream green movement has embraced green
consumerism . But even at this moment of high visibility and
impact for environmental activists , a splinter wing of the
movement has begun to critique what it sometimes calls 
 “ light greens ”  . 
Critics question the notion that we can avert global
warming by buying so-called earth-friendly products , 
from clothing and cars to homes and vacations , when the
cumulative effect of our consumption remains enormous
and hazardous .  
 “ There is a very common mind-set right now which holds that
all that we ’ re going to need to do to avert the large-scale
planetary catastrophes upon us is make slightly different
shopping decisions ,  ” said Alex Steffen , the executive editor
of Worldchanging . com , a website devoted to sustainability
issues . 
The genuine solution , he and other critics say , is to
significantly reduce one ’ s consumption of goods and
resources . It ’ s not enough to build a vacation home of
recycled lumber ; the real way to reduce one ’ s carbon
footprint is to only own one home . 
George Monbiot writes in the Guardian in July 2007 : 
In the name of environmental consciousness , we have
simply created new opportunities for surplus capital . Ethical
shopping is in danger of becoming another signifier of social
status . I have met people who have bought solar panels and
wind turbines before they have insulated their lofts , partly
because they love gadgets but partly , I suspect , because
everyone can then see how conscientious and how rich they
are . We are often told that buying such products encourages
us to think more widely about environmental challenges , but
it is just as likely to be depoliticising . Green consumerism
is another form of atomisation - a substitute for collective
action . No political challenge can be met by shopping . 
Problem no . 4 : fashion victims
The fourth problem addresses the various contradictory
meanings contained in the expression fashion victims , using
this illustration showing factory workers and catwalk
models : 
References
Anderson , L . W . and Krathwohl , D . R .  ( eds .  )  ( 2001 ) ATaxonomy
for Learning , Teaching , and Assessing : A Revision of Bloom ’ s
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives , NewYork : Longman
Bauman , Z .  ( 2007 ) Liquid times : Living in an age of
uncertainty , Polity Press
Brabazon , T .  ( 2007 ) The university of google : Education in a 
( post ) information age , Aldershot : Ashgate
Billig , M .  , Condor , S .  , Edwards , D .  , Gane , M .  , Middleton , D . 
and Radley , A . R .  ( 1988 ) Ideological dilemmas , London : Sage
Bloom , B .  , Englehart , M .  , Furst , E .  , Hill , W .  , and Krathwohl , D .  
( 1956 ) Taxonomy of educational objectives : The classification
of educational goals . Handbook I : Cognitive domain , NewYork , 
Toronto : Longmans , Green
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
Credit : MiletteTseelon Riis
236
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Buckingham , D .  ( 2008 ) Battle in print : Beyond technology : 
Rethinking learning in the age of digital culture http :  /  / www . 
battleofideas . org . uk / index . php / 2008 / battles / 886 / 
Edens , K . M .  ( 2000 ) Preparing problem solvers for the 21st
Century through problem-based learning College Teaching , 
48 ( 2 )  , 55-60
Halavais , A .  ( 2008 ) Search engine society , Polity Press
Harvey , L .  ( 2003 ) Transitions from higher education to work , 
Sheffield : Centre for Research and Evaluation , Sheffield
Hallam University
Harvey , L . and Knight , P . T .  ( 1996 ) Transforming Higher
Education , Buckingham : Society for Research into Higher
Education ( SRHE ) and Open University Press
Kirschner , P . A .  , Sweller , J . and Clark , R . E .  ( 2006 )  ‘ Why
minimal guidance during instruction does not work : An
analysis of the failure of constructivist , discovery , problem-
based , experiential , and inquiry-based teaching ’  , Educational
Psychologist , 41 ( 2 )  , 75–86
Knowlton , D . S . and Sharp , D . C .  ( 2003 ) Problem-based
learning in the information age San Francisco : Jossey-Bass
Harvey , L .  , Moon , S . and Geall , V .  ( 1997 ) Graduates ’ work : 
Organisation change and students ’ attributes , Birmingham
Centre for Research into Quality ( CRQ ) and Association
of Graduate Recruiters ( AGR ) 
Maudsley , G .  ( 1999 )  ‘ Do we all mean the same thing by 
 “ Problem-Based Learning ”  ? A review of the concepts and
a formulation of the ground rules ’  , Academic Medicine , 
74 ( 2 )  , 178-185
Oker-Blom , T .  ( 1998 )  ‘ Integration of Information Skills In
Problem Based Curricula ’  , 64th IFLA General Conference , 
August 16–21 
Otting , H . and Zwaal , W .  ( 2006 )  ‘ Critical task characteristics
in problem-based learning ’  , in Industry and Higher Education , 
20 ( 5 )  , 347-357
Pedagogy for Employability Group ( 2004 )  ‘ Pedagogy for
employability ’  , The Higher Education Academy http :  /  / www . 
heacademy . ac . uk / assets / York / documents / ourwork / tla / 
employability / id383_pedagogy_for_employability_357 . pdf
Prensky , M .  ( 2001 )  ‘ Digital natives , digital immigrants , Part
II : Do they really think differently ?  ’ On the Horizon , NCB
University PressVol . 9 No . 6
Ryan , G . L .  ( 1997 ) The development of problem solving and
self-directed learning ability in problem based learning , Sydney , 
NSW : University of Sydney
Savin-Baden , M .  ( 2005 ) Challenging research in problem-
based learning , Open University Press
Schmidt , H . G .  , Vermeulen , L . andVan der Molen H . T .  
( 2006 )  ‘ Long term effects of problem-based learning : A
comparison of competencies acquired by graduates of a
problem based and a conventional medical school ’  , Medical
education , 40 , 6 , 562-567 . 
com / journal / 118729476 / abstract ? CRETRY = 1 & SRETRY = 0
Schmidt , H . G .  , Loyens , S . M . M .  , Van Gog , T . and Paas , F .  
( 2007 )  ’ Problem-based learning is compatible with human
cognitive architecture : Commentary on Kirschner , Sweller , 
and Clark ’  ( 2006 ) Educational Psychologist , 42 , 2 , 91 – 97
Seldon , A .  ( 2007 ) Blair ’ s Britain : 1997-2007 , Cambridge : CUP
Smith , C . A . et al .  ( 1995 )  ‘ Problem-based learning and
problem-solving skills ’  , Biochemical Education , 23 ( 3 )  , 149-52
Sternberg , R . J .  ( 2008 ) Interdisciplinary problem-based
learning : An alternative to traditional majors and minors , 
Liberal Education , 94 ( 18 )  , 12-17
Tseëlon , E .  ( 2001 ) Study resource pack for a PBL curriculum , 
University College Dublin
Yorke , M . and Knight , P .  ( 2004 ) Embedding employability
into the curriculum , Buckingham : The Society for Research
in Higher Education and the Open University Press http :  /  / 
www . heacademy . ac . uk / assets / York / documents / ourwork / tla / 
employability / id460_embedding_employability_into_the_
curriculum_
237
Collaborating Across Universities and Industry to
Offer Online Educational Opportunities for Social
Responsibility
Marsha A . Dickson , University of Delaware , Suzanne Loker , Cornell University , and Molly Eckman , Colorado State
University , USA
Dickson @ udel . edu , sl135 @ cornell . edu , eckmanm @ cahs . colostate . edu
1 . Level PG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required N / A
6 . Type of activity Course outlines and learning goals , Institutional
approach
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered Campaigns , Companies , Consumers , Corporate
social responsibility , Environment , Globalisation , Multi-
stakeholder initiatives , Pedagogy , Supply chains , Workers ’ 
rights , Working conditions
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
238
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Summary
A project funded by the US Department of Agriculture , 
Socially Responsible Apparel Production and Sourcing is
described as a model of collaboration across universities
to develop and disseminate online courses focused on
social responsibility to post-baccalaureate students and
industry professionals . Ten online courses were developed
and are initially being offered to students from our three
universities . In the future , they will be offered to students
from any university or from industry through the University
of Delaware . We discuss the types of courses created , 
their format , the challenges of offering courses across
universities , and how we are sustaining their offer beyond
the funding period . 
The courses were defined to encompass issues of social
responsibility in the apparel industry as follows : 
1 . Apparel supply chains and social responsibility . 
2 . Socially responsible apparel : Global policy . 
3 . Sustaining global apparel supply chains . 
4 . Culture and work in the apparel industry . 
5 . Apparel consumers and social responsibility . 
6 . 	
Bringing social responsibility to apparel
corporate culture . 
7 . Current initiatives for apparel industry labor compliance . 
8 . 	
Worker-centric social responsibility for the
apparel industry . 
9 . 	
Redesigning green apparel : Design , sourcing
and packaging . 
10 . Producing environmentally responsible apparel . 
Collaborating Across Universities and
Industry to Offer Educational Opportunities for
Social Responsibility
In 2002 , aware of the efforts leading apparel brands and
retailers were making to improve labor standards and
working conditions , as well as environmental sustainability
in their global supply chains , Dr . Marsha Dickson , University
of Delaware , realized that students going into the
industry as designers , buyers , merchandisers , or product
development and sourcing professionals , needed to be
part of the efforts to improve the lives of workers . Dickson
convened Dr . Suzanne Loker from Cornell University and
Dr . Molly Eckman , Colorado State University , and other
colleagues to collaborate on this initiative . The United
States Department of Agriculture provided a funding
opportunity through its Higher Education Challenge
Grant program that encouraged development of curricula , 
teaching materials and instructional delivery systems
for addressing international educational needs . Thus , we
proposed to the federal agency a project to develop a
core set of Internet-based post-baccalaureate courses
and learning materials focused on “ Social Responsibility in
Textile , Apparel , and Footwear Industry Supply Chains ” for
joint delivery to graduate students in our three institutions ’ 
apparel programs . 
The specific objectives we set for the project included : 

Objective 1 : Developing a core set of Internet-based
•
courses providing competencies for socially responsible
textile , apparel , and footwear industry supply chain
management . 

Objective 2 : Developing a portfolio of multimedia case
•
studies incorporating multinational perspectives on social
responsibility in textile , apparel , and footwear industry
supply chains . 

Objective 3 : Delivering and assessing outcomes of the
•
courses at the three partner institutions . 
Representatives of industry were very supportive of
the plan to create graduate courses addressing social
responsibility in the apparel industry . For example , Dusty
Kidd , Vice President of Compliance for Nike , stated in a
letter of recommendation that ,  
 “ Prof . Marsha Dickson is a leading academic in the field
of CSR and its application to the textiles and apparel field . 
The vision put forth in her proposal recognizes the need
to develop a system of competencies in the field and to
integrate CSR issues into business decision-making , which is
precisely the vision companies like Nike are driving toward . 
The reality is that the largest share of people working in CSR
roles in companies like Nike come from related fields but not
out of a CSR course of study , since few , if any exist . If such
a field of study opens , the industry will have access to a job
candidate pool not only for the special functional areas of
CSR , but also for related fields of work where an appreciation
of CSR is important in business decision-making : supply
chain management , pricing , materials management and
related fields . This drives at the heart of a very large need in
the industry , which is to ensure all business managers have
an understanding of CSR and apply “ balanced scorecard ” 
concepts to their business operations .  ” 
239
Similarly , Doug Cahn , Vice President of Human Rights for
Reebok , wrote that ,  
 “ At Reebok , I have been tasked with the primary responsibility
for building a global team of policy analysts , project managers , 
technical experts and field monitors to address workplace
conditions in our supply chain . It has become clear to me
that few institutions of higher education have taken on the
task of education and training in these areas .  .  . Scholarly and
vocational education at a graduate level can play an important
role in supporting corporations to meet their obligations to
social responsibility . Each of the proposed course offerings .  .  .  .  
[ reflects ] precisely the topics that are timely , much needed and
credible in the business community ”  . 
Additionally , SeniorVice President of Manufacturing , 
Sourcing , Distribution , and Logistics at Liz Claiborne , Bob
Zane reported that ,  
 “ With much of the manufacturing taking place in
underdeveloped and third world countries , questions and
concerns continue to be raised about conditions encountered
by workers . While a host of agencies , industry associations , 
labor organizations and NGOs have demonstrated great
interest in the field , there has been little scholastic or academic
involvement . Given the importance of the subject , and its far
reaching ramifications , we feel that all constituencies would
be well served by the development of an appropriate course
of study , at the post-baccalaureate level . To the extent that
industry leaders and other concerned parties benefit from
enhanced knowledge and balanced perspective , so will the
cause of workers around the world be furthered .  ” 
The project was funded by the US Department of
Agriculture in 2004 and we have made excellent progress
toward these goals . 
Development of the Courses
Toward the first objective , we developed learning goals
for the courses we would create based on 22 in-depth
interviews with corporate executives and leaders of
non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ) involved with
global issues of social responsibility and environmental
sustainability . These interviews confirmed the need to
incorporate learning about macro factors ( e . g . political , 
cultural , economic ) that influence the ability to implement
social responsibility programs , as well as to address
the specifics of labor compliance in the workplace and
environmentally sustainable design and production . 
As we carried out the interviews with executives and
leaders of NGOs , we realized that it would be better
to create several short , 1-credit courses with focused
topics , rather than the more typical 3-credit courses we
had originally envisioned . There was an obvious need
for working professionals to take the courses , as well
as traditional graduate students who would be joining
the industry upon completion of their education , and
we believed the 1-credit courses would provide greater
flexibility for their enrollment . 
We developed course syllabi for ten 1-credit courses
each focused on a particular topic associated with social
responsibility in textile , apparel , and footwear supply chains . 
The Office of Educational Innovation and Evaluation at
Kansas State University developed and administered
an online survey of industry experts to review the
importance of the objectives of the courses , and the extent
the objective would be met by planned activities for each
1-credit course . All eight industry experts who participated
agreed that the objectives included in each syllabus were
important and that students would meet the objectives
with the planned course activities . 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
240
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
The courses we developed : 
Apparel Consumers and Social Responsibility
Examines the role of consumers in improving working
conditions , labor standards , and environmental stewardship
in apparel factories worldwide . Factors and groups
motivating consumer action are explored , including the
influence of personal characteristics , market opportunities , 
and activist and other pressure groups . 
Apparel Supply Chains and Social Responsibility
Examines challenges for social responsibility in the context
of structure , relationships and long-standing practices
and methods in apparel business . Analyzes structural and
competitive issues of supply chains such as ownership , 
globalization , and outsourcing . 
Bringing Social Responsibility toApparel Corporate Culture
Importance of leadership , the role of inspirational
leadership , and the opportunities for making a difference
will be explored , analyzed and applied . Social change is the
emphasis of this course - how individuals can help build a
socially responsible workplace . 
Culture and Work in the Apparel Industry
Examines the interrelationships between cultural
characteristics , employment / work practices and social
responsibility . Examples of industry practices that reflect
the effects of culture on business practices are addressed . 
Current Initiatives for Apparel Industry Labor Compliance
Evaluates the effectiveness of current initiatives for
improving working conditions and labor standards in
factories around the world . Explores codes of conduct
and new trends for achieving long-term improvements in
compliance to internationally recognized labor standards . 
Producing Environmentally Responsible Apparel
Examines environmentally responsible apparel production
and practices as philosophy , process , and competitive
business strategy . Analyzes sustainable production in
the context of a business ’ s physical plant , materials , and
resource use . 
Redesigning Green Apparel : Design , Sourcing and Packaging
Examines challenges to environmental stewardship in the
design , sourcing , and packaging of apparel , textiles , and
footwear products . Explores innovative practices , visionary
leadership , and social change strategies for redesigning 
 ‘ green ’ in the context of the design and sourcing roles of
apparel business . 
Socially Responsible Apparel : Global Policy
Political and profit interests that influence socially
responsible decisions and policy for the global textile and
apparel industry are considered . Factors analyzed include
ethics , economics , government policies , international
labor standards , environmental regulations , and company
priorities . 
Sustaining Global Apparel Supply Chains
This course examines the responsibility of businesses for
sustaining economic / social development in the global
apparel industry . An historical perspective of the role of
the industry in economic development provides a context
for evaluating current issues concerning sustainable
development . 
Worker-Centric Social Responsibility for Apparel Industry
Examines the rights of workers . Explores obstacles in
meeting , and methods for assuring , worker rights , including
freedom of association . Consideration is given to how to
effectively engage with workers . 
We incorporated into the courses a wealth of information
gained through research involving a variety of first-hand
experiences with the topics . We conducted interviews with
individuals who work for multinational corporations , NGOs
and labor groups , and factory management in the United
States and off-shore ; made observations in numerous
factory visits in various regions of the world , including
China , Guatemala , Hong Kong , India , Thailand , Turkey , 
andVietnam ; participated in the decision-making and
leadership of the Fair Labor Association , an organization
that focuses on improving labor conditions in apparel and
footwear factories ( Dr . Marsha Dickson is on the board of
directors of this organization )  ; and analyzed corporate and
NGO reports , and editorial and news reports from the
international press , as well as scholarly journals . 
241
The following learning goals were established for students
taking the full set of courses : 
1 . 	
Evaluate how apparel , textile , and footwear businesses
address principles for human rights , labor standards and
environmental stewardship , and how they can more
effectively address them in the future . 
2 . 	
Analyze the responsibility of business and individuals ( i . e . 
moral , ethical ) toward human rights labor standards , and
environmental stewardship . 
3 . 	
Recommend various strategies for how they / we
can effect change in the apparel , textile , and
footwear industries . 
Format and Delivery of the Courses
We elected to develop web-based courses to enhance
accessibility to graduate students and working professionals , 
without geographical considerations . Ease of access
through the Web opens the doors for reaching a larger
number of students pursuing degrees at colleges and
universities without the resources or expertise to offer
comprehensive training in social responsibility . Additionally , 
offering the courses through the Internet encourages
critical thinking by moving learning beyond memorization
or even comprehension of facts . The Web offers the
opportunity for flexible learning pathways through the
use of text , video , interactive communications , and links to
additional sources of information . This medium encourages
students to absorb basic information in a manner
appropriate to their learning style , and also encourages
them to take the initiative to pursue particular interests
in greater depth . The interactive nature of the Web and
email engages and encourages peer-to-peer interaction and
learning while considering a range of perspectives , possible
solutions , and rationales for decisions , while enabling
worldwide discussions . In addition , this format enables us
to easily update the courses on the topics that are evolving
quickly so that students have access to the most up-to-date
information . 
We chose to use case studies as one pedagogical tool for
encouraging advanced students to think critically about
the complex topics . Case studies encourage students to
extend the application of theory to the world outside
the classroom , improving their ability to solve problems
using knowledge , concepts , and skills ( McKeachie , 1986 )  . 
Presenting case studies on the Web offers additional
educational benefits , including incentives to learn , as well as
new and flexible learning methods ( Hayden and Ley , 1997 ; 
Owston , 1997 )  . 
Toward objective 2 and in preparation for teaching the
courses , we developed all new learning materials including
the following : 

Narrated PowerPoint lectures ( nine to ten lectures
•
per course )  . 
Book chapters for background reading . 
•

Reading worksheets to guide reading and engage
•
students in critical thinking about the readings ( two to
four worksheets per course )  . 

Questions for threaded online discussions among
•
students and the instructor to discuss course content , 
integrating and building on current and previous course
material , adding new / diverse perspectives , and stimulating
thought and further discussion ( four to five discussions
per course )  . 

Proposition statement assignments to recommend
•
strategies for effecting change in the apparel industry 
( one per course )  . 
We have written 11 case studies . Additionally , we recorded
and edited 27 videos , some of which are available
through Cornell University ’ s e-clips ( see elsewhere in this
Handbook )  , to augment lectures from interviews with a
variety of business professionals , and NGO leaders . We
anticipate the development of a few more case studies , a
variety of additional videos , and specific learning materials
over the coming year in order to fill in the gaps we have
noticed in teaching the courses for the first time . 
While refereed publications were not part of the
objectives of the project , we nonetheless found the need
and opportunity to write for publication as part of this
collaborative effort . The most significant publication is the
textbook Social Responsibility in the Global Apparel Industry 
( Fairchild Books , 2009 ) that will provide a foundation of
knowledge for all the courses . We also conducted a few
different small research projects to develop material for the
courses and publications are forthcoming in the Journal of
Business Ethics and Business and Society . 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
242
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Challenges of Offering Courses across Universities
Determining how to actually offer the courses by one
instructor to students at three institutions was challenging . 
We had to resolve the following : 

How students would gain access to a course taught
•
•
by an instructor at a university in which they were not
enrolled ( e . g .  , Cornell students taking a course offered by
Dr . Dickson at the University of Delaware )  . 

Whether and how to provide students with a uniform
•
• 
 “ look and feel ” for the courses so that technical
difficulties of navigating the course websites would
be reduced . 

Where the courses would be housed ( i . e .  , on one server
•
•
at one institution )  . 

How the instructor teaching the course would be paid
•
•
for teaching students enrolled from another university . 

What instructional delivery system would be used
•
• 
( e . g .  , Blackboard , WebCT )  . 

Whether student credits would be transferred from
•
•
one university to another , or whether all students would
enroll at their home institutions . 

Whether the courses would be required of students at
•
•
the three institutions or whether they would
be electives . 

How much to charge students for enrolling in the
•
•
courses and how to collect or find funding given notable
differences in tuition among the institutions . 
For the initial course offerings , the University of Delaware ’ s
division of Professional and Continuing Studies ( PCS ) 
agreed to host the courses on its server and to use its
award winning UDOnline platform for delivery of the
courses . PCS also facilitated electronic access for students
from all three institutions . After consideration of a number
of proposals , we made arrangements through PCS for
faculty to be paid for each student in the class , regardless
of the home institutions of the students . Pay for faculty was
deducted from course tuition for University of Delaware
students enrolled through UDOnline . Cornell paid access
fees and instructor costs to the University of Delaware
for its students through grant funding . Colorado State
University paid access fees and for faculty instruction from
a portion of the tuition revenue earned from students
enrolling in the courses . For the initial offering of the
courses , students registered through their home institutions
and paid tuition rates at those institutions ; courses were
accepted by curriculum committees at all three institutions
so no transfer of credit was required . We decided to
maintain a similar look and feel for each course and utilize
the WebCT instructional delivery system . 
Participation has been consistent at the University of
Delaware ( UD )  , probably because the courses are
combined into a certificate that adds a distinguishing
credential to students ’ transcripts , and includes the
possibility of direct enrollment into the certificate program . 
As well , UD is requiring a portion of the courses in its
Master of Science in Fashion Studies . Participation at
Cornell University has been strong as well , enhanced
by flexibility in the master ’ s program and faculty
encouragement of students to take advantage of the
unique opportunity . Colorado State University student
participation is lower , probably because the university
requires that students pay extra to enroll in courses taught
through the Internet . 
The support of administrators and faculty at the three
institutions has also influenced the project . Strong
administrative support is necessary to “ make things
happen ”  . Implementation of the courses at the University
of Delaware was facilitated since Dr . Marsha Dickson is a
department chair and had the active support of University
of Delaware ’ s assistant vice provost for professional and
continuing studies . The faculty in Dr . Dickson ’ s Department
of Fashion and Apparel Studies also fully embraced
social responsibility and sustainability as a programmatic
focal area and readily incorporated the courses into
the department ’ s Master of Science degree . Cornell
administrators facilitated payment of additional fees in a
unique way so as not to negatively impact students taking
the courses . 
Toward objective 3 , during the 2007 / 08 academic year we
taught seven of the1-credit courses through the Internet , 
and the remaining three courses were offered for the first
time in Fall 2008 . A total of 127 student credit hours were
generated and the average course enrollment was 13
students . The highest enrollment was 21 students . 
Student learning from courses that were taught in Fall 2007
was evaluated by the Office of Educational Innovation and
Evaluation at Kansas State University . An online survey
measured the extent of students ’ perceived abilities in key
content areas covered in each course ; students agreed
that they have the expected abilities . As well , the survey
243
measured the usefulness of the various course resources 
( e . g .  , lectures , readings , discussions )  ; students agreed that
was useful . The additional courses have been evaluated in
the same way and analysis of student learning is underway . 
Sustaining the Courses beyond the Funding Period
As of January 2009 , all of the courses we have developed
will be taught through the University of Delaware . 
Students from any university or from industry who want
to register for the courses will enroll through UD . This
facilitates a much broader access and gives Cornell and
CSU students a small financial advantage while providing
for the continuation of the course offerings . The University
of Delaware was identified as the best place to house the
courses because of the high level of technical and academic
support for the project available with UDOnline . Faculty
who initially developed the courses will be hired by UD on
a contract basis should they wish to continue teaching the
courses . Dr . Marsha Dickson has also developed a list of
additional individuals from industry and academia who can
teach the courses as needed . The University of Delaware is
actively marketing the certificate and is moving to develop
executive education offerings based on these and other
materials related to social responsibility . 
References
Hayden , M . A . and Ley , C . J .  ( 1997 )  ‘ Collaborating with
technology : Teaching a class on the World Wide Web ’ in
Journal of Family and Consumer Sciences , 89 ( 2 )  , 25-27
McKeachie , W . J .  ( 1986 ) Teaching tips : A guidebook for the
beginning college teacher ( 8th Edition .  )  , D . C . Heath
and Company
Owston , R . D .  ( 1997 )  ‘ The World Wide Web : A technology
to enhance teaching and learning ?  ’ in Educational Researcher 
( March )  , 27-33
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
244
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Educating for a Socially Responsible Fashion
Industry at AMFI , Amsterdam
Patricia Brien , Linnemore Nefdt , Jan de Vries and Jan Piscaer , AMFI – Amsterdam Fashion Institute , 
The Netherlands
p . brien @ hva . nl , l . d . nefdt @ hva . nl , j . de . vries2 @ hva . nl and j . b . m . piscaer @ hva . nl
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To develop independent learning , self-directed thorough exploration of complex dilemmas involving problem- solving
•
•
skills as well as teamwork , communication and high cognitive skills . 
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Whole university
5 . Length of time required N / A
6 . Type of activity Course outlines and learning goals
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing , Pedagogy
8 . Topics covered All
245
The Amsterdam Fashion Institute ( AMFI ) is a unique
institute for about 1300 students that offers courses
in Fashion & Branding , Fashion & Design , and Fashion 
& Management . It is the only fashion institute in the
Netherlands that prepares students for managerial
professions in the whole fashion demand and supply
chain . AMFI ’ s objective is to deliver graduates who meet
the demands for sustainable development in the fashion
industry . This aim came about as an initiative from the
above authors who were the original members of the
SustainabilityThinkTank at AMFI . Together with the support
of the Director Liesbeth in ’ t Hout , who started in late
2005 , and the DHO1 
, an atmosphere of awareness building
and forward thinking was fostered . Globally there has
been a clear shift in mentality concerning the environment
and the attitudes towards the livelihoods of people
working in the global and agricultural economies ; it is no
longer possible for those in the Western world to close
their eyes to the environmental crisis and the plight of
farmers and workers throughout the developing world . 
An increasing number of consumers in the US ( 26% or 50
million Americans according to Ray and Anderson back in
2001 ) 2
express serious ecological and planetary concerns
and want reassurance that their money is not supporting
bad environmental practice or unfair and unsafe work
conditions . The fashion industry is waking up to its role in
the situation and educators need to prepare students to
think in a creative and decisive manner concerning ‘ People , 
Planet and Profit ’ when it comes to designing and developing
strategy for the fashion industry and achieving , even going
beyond , targets in the global fashion supply chain . 
At AMFI , our objectives are to make students aware of the
people and planet in their first year , in order to develop
students ’ capacities for environmentally and people-friendly
attitudes in the long-term . Each year we build upon the
curriculum so that , at completion of their degree , students
will be integrated into thinking within a ‘ green mentality ’  . 
This green mentality is not only about attitude , but also
business and design savvy . 
In the Foundation year , all Branding , Design and
Management students are given lectures about the ‘ Triple
P ’ approach ( People , Planet and Profit )  . Lectures in social
trends and intercultural awareness highlight workers ’ 
rights using industry case examples as researched by the
Clean Clothes Campaign and the International Labour
Organisation . Back-up media like the films China Blue , Slow
Poison , and lectures by visiting speakers from labour
rights organisations such as May Wong from the Hong
Kong Globalisation Monitor , bring a realistic perspective to
the courses . 
In terms of the planet , our BEYOND GREEN sustainability
day - with lectures by experts , academics , entrepreneurs
and designers like Katherine Hamnett , Peter Ingwersen 
( NOIR ) and Susanna Lee ( Central St Martins , London ) 
- gives expert witness to the environmental wrongs
committed by the larger fashion industry - like the
drying out of the Aral Sea ( Katherine Hamnett speaking
at Beyond Green Symposium , 2007 ) - and innovative
concepts from within the industry for lessening our
environmental impact . Students are expected to write a
chapter about applied ethics in their project reports . 
In the second and third years , we look to refine theTriple
P approach with further lectures , case studies , projects and
films in all three disciplines . An Inconvenient Truth , Wal-Mart : 
The High Cost of Low Price and The Corporation are films
that we use ; and the BBC series , Blood Sweat and Tears , 
will likely be screened together with Panorama ’ s The Devil
Wears Primark . In the Beauty , Bodies and Fashion block
for second years , students are asked to reinvent the visual
language of ‘ green ’ for the fashion industry . In a block of
study called Jeansworld , students had to create a collection
of jeans , and one of the requirements was that the
production-process and materials should all be sustainable
and people-friendly . 
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
1
Dutch national network for sustainable development in higher education . 
2
Ray , P . and Anderson , S .  ( 2000 ) The Cultural Creatives : How 50 million people are changing the world , NewYork : Three Rivers Press
246
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
In 2008 , the BEYOND GREEN symposium was extended
to one week and the format shifted to workshops in order
that theory became practice . A hands-on approach is seen
as crucial to developing a can-do creative mentality with
fashion students . Applied sustainability will be assessed in
the students ’ projects . 
An increasing number of students choose a subject
connected with sustainable development for their final
4th
year thesis / project . For example , one student chose to
develop a plan for G-Star ’ s corporate responsibility strategy , 
while another worked on how to market niche 100%
organic fashion design stores throughout Holland . Other
students are currently working on theses which take ‘ green ’ 
and ‘ labour ’ issues as their key focus , and we project that
the number will grow as sustainability becomes a normal
part of creative design , management and marketing . 
AMFI is now working towards a curriculum where
sustainability is approached holistically from day one
and integrated into standard assessment criteria for all
assignments , projects and theses . We look to alter the
perception that a ‘ green mentality ’ is something unusual
or inconvenient in the fashion industry to something that
simply is and , more importantly , is embedded and seen
as the norm . The importance of making sustainability
accountable by the students means going beyond a type of
educational ‘ code of conduct ’ into the more concrete realm
of industry standards or , in this case , educational standards . 
247
New Course Units on Ethical Fashion
Caroline Gilbey , Pathway Leader , BA ( Hons ) Fashion , University of the Creative Arts , Epsom Campus , UK ; 
Heather Pickard , Director of Programmes , BA ( Hons ) Fashion Management , and Dilys Williams , Director , 
Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion , University of the Arts , UK
CGilbey @ ucreative . ac . uk , h . pickard @ fashion . arts . ac . uk , 
d . williams @ fashion . arts . ac . uk
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators C . Some knowledge of discipline required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students C . Some knowledge of discipline required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Course outlines and learning goals
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular , Design , Marketing
8 . Topics covered Companies , Consumers , Corporate social responsibility , 
Ethical initiatives / brands , Globalisation , Supply chains , 
Trade , Working conditions
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
248
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
We are including two new course units related to ethical
fashion as we hope they will inspire you and highlight
what is currently out there . In addition to these units , 
you can find information about how other colleges and
universities ( mainly in the UK ) are approaching ethical and
sustainable fashion at www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org / 
ethicalcourses . 
London College of Fashion : 
Ethical Fashion Elective Unit
Heather Pickard , Director of Programmes , BA ( Hons ) 
Fashion Management , and Dilys Williams , Director , Centre
for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion , 
University of the Arts , UK . 
Heather Pickard h . pickard @ fashion . arts . ac . uk
Dilys Williams d . williams @ fashion . arts . ac . uk
This unit is offered to second year BA ( Hons ) students at
the London College of Fashion . Alongside the main course
units , students have the opportunity to select a number
of elective units , to enable them to contextualise their
knowledge base and specialist skills in preparation for their
final projects . The unit offered in the second term of the
second year from January 2009 will introduce students
to the challenges that companies now face in operating
commercially and in an ethical way . Students examine the
use of ethical principles and their application across the
fashion industry in the context of wider academic debate
and social policy . The unit will also provide a coherent
framework in which to introduce relevant aspects of design
processes , critical path management , buying culture and
overall considerations of corporate social responsibility . 
In the unit , students will be challenged to demonstrate : 

•
• Knowledge of the academic debate surrounding
the alignment of commercial interests and ethical
commitments within the fashion industry . 

An application of the key macro factors such as
•
•
PESTEL ( political , economic , social , technological , 
ethical / environmental and legal ) and corporate social
responsibility impacting on the fashion supply chain . 

Recognition of how fashion retailers can meet the ethical
•
•
and environmental expectations of consumers and other
stakeholders . 

An awareness of current company practices and
•
•
suggested initiatives to enhance ethical practices within
the fashion industry . 
University of the Creative Arts : 
Global Fashion Outlook
Caroline Gilbey , Lecturer , University of the Creative Arts 
( Epsom ) 
CGilbey @ ucreative . ac . uk
Students on the BA ( Hons ) Fashion Management and
Marketing course at University of the Creative Arts 
( Epsom ) take a mandatory course unit in their second year
of study calledThe Global Fashion Outlook . This explores
the new global fashion market and the impact of this on
small and / or local manufacturing communities . It explores
the ways in which changes and practices related to fast
fashion and western phenomena present both challenges
and opportunities for the future . Students consider the
ways in which global fashion impacts on cultural , social , 
ethical , ergonomic and environmental contexts . 
Outline Syllabus1
Global sourcing : myth , reality and opportunity
•
•
Co-location , hidden and visible costings
•
•
The end of quota
•
•
Transformation of China
•
•
Responsible buying
•
•
Supplier selection
•
•
Overseas versus domestic sourcing
•
•
Retailer / supplier relations and the balance of power
•
•
The impact of globalisation and brand complacency
•
•
Eco-design , ethical PR
•
•
Turning ethical fashion into a key profit driver
•
•
1
The course was offered for the first time in the autumn term 2008 and is subject to
alteration
249
Student Experiences of Raising Ethical Issues
during Placement
Caroline Gilbey , Pathway Leader , BA ( Hons ) Fashion , University of the Creative Arts , Epsom Campus , UK
CGilbey @ ucreative . ac . uk
1 . Level UG
2 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by educators A . No background knowledge required
3 . Pre-requisite knowledge required by students A . No background knowledge required
4 . Number of students Any number
5 . Length of time required Adjustable
6 . Type of activity Placement related
7 . Discipline Business , Cross-curricular
8 . Topics covered Companies , Corporate social responsibility , 
Multi-stakeholder initiatives , Purchasing practices , 
Supply chains , Working conditions
Follow Up / Related Activities
Fashioning an Ethical Industry has produced a Handbook for students on placement , Piecing it Together : Understanding
Ethics on Placement . See fashioninternships / placements / for more information . 
Objectives / Learning Outcomes

To share students ’ experiences of raising ethical issues during placement . 
•
•
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
250
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
Fashion Enterprise students on the University of the
Creative Arts ( Epsom ) BA ( Hons ) Fashion degree
relate theory to practice by working in partnership with
industry for the duration of their final year . The students
are on placement full-time for four weeks and then have a
series of lectures to support a two day a week placement . 
They produce a final year company report based on their
placements and the lectures , in which they investigate
the changing balance of power in the retailer / supplier
relationship . The idea is that students are able to identify
closely with the brand identity , customer profile , sourcing
policy and retailing strategy of the business prior to designing
a collection for them , which they do in the next unit . 
The objectives are for students to : 

comprehend business structures on a corporate and
•
•
departmental level ; 

understand the critical path from initial concept through
•
•
to customer ; 

demonstrate self-confidence and clear
•
•
communication skills ; 

critically evaluate company practices and markets
•
•
through research . 
As well as using film and role play as teaching mechanisms , 
guest speakers are invited in to talk to the students
and raise awareness of issues such as corporate social
responsibility . Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( FEI ) and the
EthicalTrading Initiative have both contributed to the
programme . Students found the FEI role play on buying
power1
excellent as a way of highlighting the impact of
buying decisions on factory workers . The exercise also
proved effective in highlighting the complexity of the
issues and pressures that have resulted in the current
manufacturing climate . 
Students discussed codes of conduct and corporate social
responsibility with their industry mentors directly . Many
mentors were unsure about their company ’ s stance on
these issues , about whether they even had a code of
conduct ; or , in cases where the mentor did know of the
existence of a code of conduct , what the content of the
code actually was . 
Students were generally frustrated by their industry
mentors ’ reluctance to discuss the issues of sustainability . 
Many of them were brushed off by their mentors who
may have felt vulnerable being asked to confront some of
the questions raised . Smaller companies felt particularly
vulnerable as they were less likely to have the resources to
follow up on manufacturing practices or to have their own
corporate social responsibility team . 
All the students were concerned that there was no real
incentive for companies to apply stricter adherence to a
code of conduct . Because there is no certification system , 
and no government incentive for companies to adhere to
a code of conduct , it remains a matter of choice ; and in
today ’ s commercial world of fast fashion , many will
choose speed , turnover and profit over conscientious
ethical production . 
1
resources / teachingmaterials / buyingpower / 
251
FULL LIST OF CONTRIBUTIONS
DESIGN
18	On teaching empathy		
SueThomas , RMIT University , Australia
23 Slow fashion			
Kate Fletcher , London College of Fashion , UK
26 Designing slow fashion
Kate Fletcher , London College of Fashion , UK
29 The elephant in the room : Contextualising the
ethical within fashion excellence
MoTomaney , Central St Martins and UCA , UK
33 Collaborating with fair trade producers : Design
and trends
Toni Hicks , University of Brighton , UK
36 Customised denim project with further education
students studying BTEC National Diploma Art & 
Design ( Fashion & Clothing ) 
Maria Skoyles , Oxford and CherwellValley College , 			
UK
38 Clothing care calculator : An interactive tool to
evaluate environmental impact
Katie Dombek-Keith and Suzanne Loker , 
Cornell University , USA
41 Style showdown
Sara B . Marcketti and Sara J . Kadolph , Iowa State
University , USA
45 Design piracy : A constructive controversy
Sara B . Marcketti , Iowa State University , USA			
				
49 Cotton Cultivation and Sustainability
Südwind Agentur , Austria
53 Ideas for design briefs
Fashioning an Ethical Industry and
Abbie Price , R . A . J . E , UK
BUSINESS
63 Global sourcing decision case study
		
Minjeong Kim , Oregon State University , Leslie Davis-Burns , 
Oregon State University , Marsha A . Dickson , University of
Delaware and Haesun Park , Louisiana State University , USA
70 Globalization and supply chain working conditions
Rachelle Jackson , STR Responsible Sourcing , USA
77 Student book club : The travels of a t-shirt in the global
economy
Joy Kozar , Kansas State University , USA
82 Buying power role play : How decision-making in the fashion
industry impacts on working conditions
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
83 Ethical Trading Initiative case studies to address impacts of
purchasing practices on working conditions
EthicalTrading Initiative , UK
86 What price a living wage ? 
Doug Miller , University of Northumbria , UK
90 Ideas for business related assignments
Chloe Mason , London College of Fashion , 
and Jacqueline Shorrocks , NottinghamTrent University , UK
92 Book summary : Social responsibility in the global apparel
industry
Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware , Suzanne Loker , Cornell
University , and Molly Eckman , Colorado State University , USA
MARKETING
101 Ethical issues in fashion marketing
RosemaryVarley , London College of Fashion , UK
108 Sourcing ethically : Learning through presentations
Claire Orwin , De Montfort University , UK
112 Visual display and merchandising for an ethical fashion industry
Connie Ulasewicz , Assistant Professor , Apparel Design 
& Merchandising , San Francisco State University , USA , 
Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , 
PeoplewearSF , and Fashion Group
252
SUSTAINABLE FASHION : A HANDBOOK FOR EDUCATORS
FULL LIST OF CONTRIBUTIONS
CROSS-CURRICULAR
120 Reading lists according to theme
Caryn Simonson , Chelsea College of Art
and Design , UK
125 e-clips [ http : eclips . cornell . edu ] A video clip database including
socially responsible apparel businesses
Suzanne Loker , Cornell University , USA
128 Moral development				
Andrea Egger-Subotitsch , abif , Austria
133 Encouraging independent research through examining
contentious issues
Sarah McDonnell and Colin Wilson , 
Northumbria University , UK
137 Implementation of an introductory college course / curriculum : 
globalization and labor in textiles
Stacey Skold and Wendy Weiss , University of Nebraska-Lincoln , 
USA
143 Thinking globally , acting locally : School project
Dorothea Odörfer , Modeschule Hallein , Austria
EthicalTrading Initiative , UK
INTERACTIVE ACTIVITIES
152 All together now : Piecework on an assembly line Südwind
Agentur Österreich , Austria
154 Journalists ’ journey through the world of garments
Südwind Agentur Österreich , Austria
170 Ethical fashion introductory workshop : 
Toolkit for trainers
Anna Paluszek , Polish Humanitarian Organisation , Poland
176 Quiz : Introducing the garment industry
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
179 I agree / I disagree : Exploring attitudes to the social and
environmental impact of the garment industry
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
181 Labels and initiatives
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
186 Garment industry initiatives to address
working conditions
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
194 Fashioning the future – where will
fashion be in 2020 ? 
Nina Baldwin , Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of
Fashion , UK
196 Responsibilities of consumption : 
Educational activities plus course outline , reading lists and
essay titles
Hannah Higginson , Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
PEDAGOGY AND INSTITUTIONAL APPROACHES
213 An institutional approach to
sustainable fashion education
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , UK
219 Proposed learning goals for social responsibility and
sustainability
Marsha Dickson on behalf of Educators for Socially Responsible
Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , USA
222 Approaches to research and writing for
BA dissertations relevant to Fashioning
an Ethical Industry
Caryn Simonson , Chelsea College of Art and Design , UK
229 Problem-based learning : The perfect tool
for a creative curriculum
Professor EfratTseëlon , Chair in FashionTheory , School of
Design , University of Leeds , UK
237 Collaborating across universities and industry to offer online
educational opportunities for social responsibility
Marsha Dickson , University of Delaware , Suzanne Loker , Cornell
University , and Molly Eckman , Colorado State University , USA
244 Educating for a socially responsible fashion industry at AMFI , 
Amsterdam
Patricia Brien , Linnemore Nefdt , Jan deVries and Jan Piscaer , 
AMFI , The Netherlands
247 New course units on ethical fashion
Caroline Gilbey , University of the Creative Arts ( Epsom )  , and
Heather Pickard and Dilys Williams , London College of Fashion , 
University of the Arts , UK
249 Student experiences of raising ethical issues
during placement
Caroline Gilbey , University of the Creative Arts ( Epsom )  , UK
Fashioning an Ethical Industry , a project of Labour Behind the Label
Fashioning an Ethical Industry ( FEI ) is an innovative education project of Labour Behind the Label , which works
to support the efforts of garment workers around the world to defend their rights . FEI works with educators
and students of fashion related courses in the UK to give an overview of how the fashion industry positively and
negatively impacts on working conditions in garment manufacture ; and to inspire students - as the next generation
of industry players - to raise standards for garment workers in the fashion industry of the future . 
This Handbook is just one small part of the work that we do . FEI also runs training for educators , as well as
student workshops . We organise high profile conferences and networking opportunities for educators and
students . We also support educators looking to integrate issues relating to working conditions in garment
manufacture into their teaching , and provide teaching resources . For more information , please see
faq /  # 
Fashioning an Ethical Industry is part of a consortium of organisations in Austria , The Netherlands , Poland and the
UK who are funded by the European Union to work with fashion colleges . 
To join the Fashioning an Ethical Industry mailing list please visit
mailinglist / 
A : 10 -12 Picton Street , Bristol , BS6 5QA , UK
T :  + 44 ( 0 ) 117 944 1700
E : info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
W : www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org
Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business
Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business ( ESRAB ) is an international consortium of faculty and graduate
students whose teaching , research and services focus on social responsibility and sustainability . ESRAB is a means
for faculty to reach out to colleagues with similar interests , for empowering faculty as scholars , for creating
visibility for our scholarship on campus and beyond , and for contributing solutions to society ’ s problems stemming
from the apparel business . 
Major areas of focus include : a ) labour standards and working conditions , b ) environmental sustainability , 
c ) body image and disordered eating , and d ) consumer issues and materialism . 
ESRAB was founded in 1999 by a small group of faculty in the United States . ESRAB now has over 80 members
from 32 states in the United States and 7 foreign countries . Most members are educators at colleges and
universities with programs in apparel design and fashion merchandising , thus we are educating the apparel
industry ’ s future leadership . 
ESRAB has been especially effective in introducing issues of social responsibility to others in the profession and
identifying best practices for teaching about those issues . We have hosted numerous special topic sessions at
professional conferences . Annual meetings provide members with an opportunity to share their work and network
with others for development of new research and educational projects . Two special issues of the Clothing and
Textiles Research Journal focusing on social responsibility have been published with ESRAB members serving as
guest editors . 
To join Educators for Socially Responsible Apparel Business ( ESRAB )  , please contact Dr . Marsha Dickson , President . 
A : University of Delaware , Department of Fashion & Apparel Studies , 211 Alison West , Newark , DE 19716 , USA
T :  + 1 302-831-4475
E : Dickson @ udel . edu
W : www . huec . lsu . edu / esrab / 
 “ The fashion industry NEEDS this handbook . Without it , the designers of tomorrow
and the tutors that teach them would not be so well placed to make changes towards
sustainability .  ” 
Dr Kate Fletcher , Reader and Designer in Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion .  
 “ This publication provides a proactive and open way in which to integrate sustainability
into fashion education thereby future-proofing designers , education and industry .  .  . This
publication is exactly what we have had at the top of our wish list .  ” 
Dilys Williams , Director , Centre for Sustainable Fashion , London College of Fashion .  
 “ This collection of teaching strategies , activities and case studies provides teachers and
industry with the tools to transform the apparel industry by inspiring and galvanizing the
next generation of professionals in the social and environmental responsibility movement . 
An international group of professors contributed their best ideas for engaging others in
the issues and creative solutions for a more ethical and responsible apparel industry . The
Handbook ’ s easy accessibility and creative and provocative strategies will help educators
around the world introduce social and environmental responsibility in a broad array of
courses , choosing and adapting activities to individual interests and teaching style .  ” 
Dr Suzanne Loker , Professor Emerita , Department of Fiber Science & Apparel Design , Cornell University .  
 “ I have been teaching fashion industry courses from a social responsibility perspective for a
number of years and am delighted that there is now a publication for educators .  .  . designed
from a social responsibility perspective .  ” 
Leslie Burns , Professor and Department Chair , Oregon State University-USA .  
 “ At last a publication that brings together for the first time teaching activities , case-studies
of experience of teaching about sustainability and course outlines and reading lists - all
written by educators - so that tutors in fashion , but also other disciplines , can engage with
their students on those issues which are challenging the industry now and in the future .  ” 
Doug Miller , Inditex / ITGLWF Professor in Ethical Fashion , School of Design . 
10 -12 Picton Street , Bristol , BS6 5QA , UK | T :  + 44 ( 0 ) 117 944 1700 | E : info @ fashioninganethicalindustry . org
www . fashioninganethicalindustry . org
