10 great films set in Shanghai 
The most populous city proper on Earth , and the birthplace of film in China , Shanghai has inspired countless Chinese and foreign productions . As golden-age epic The Spring River Flows East is released on DVD , we chart some of its most glittering appearances . 

23 February 2017

By John Berra


Lust , Caution ( 2007 ) 
With its turbulent history and reputation for glamorous excess , Shanghai ’ s depictions on screen range from piercing social realism to wildly exaggerated spectacle , where China ’ s past , present and future merge within a multicultural hub . 

It was in Shanghai that motion pictures were first introduced to China , when a programme brought by a Lumière representative was shown in the entertainment quarter of Xu Garden in 1896 . The domestic film industry developed in 1920s Shanghai , where local technicians were trained by visiting Americans . Since then , political forces have repeatedly dismantled and rebuilt the city . Its early cinematic appearances serve as a record of a lost society , while recent films set in the ‘ Paris of the East ’ are still in thrall to its cosmopolitan past , whether telling contemporary stories or recreating history . 

Get the latest from the BFI

Sign up for BFI news , features , videos and podcasts . 

Email
Your email .  .  . 
Sign up
As the main place of production in the first golden age of Chinese cinema , Shanghai prompted the leftist social commentary of such classics as The Goddess ( 1934 )  , Scenes of City Life ( 1935 ) and Street Angel ( 1937 )  . The Spring River Flows East ( 1947 )  , newly released on BFI DVD , would prove to be a landmark of the second golden age , with its sweeping account of the hardship that gripped the city during the Japanese occupation from 1937-45 . 

Buy The Spring River Flows East on BFI DVD
Today , Beijing serves as the industry ’ s base of operation , but Shanghai ’ s enduring appeal continues to seduce local and international filmmakers alike . Shanghai Film Park , built in 1992 , has hosted such period pieces as Temptress Moon ( 1996 )  , Everlasting Regret ( 2005 ) and Lust , Caution ( 2007 )  , while , beyond the soundstage , Shanghai ’ s futuristic architecture has featured in Code 46 ( 2003 )  , Looper ( 2012 ) and Her ( 2013 )  . These structural developments have occurred in tandem with Shanghai ’ s renewed status as a city of luxury culture , which has made it the ideal location for crowd-pleasing romances like The Longest Night in Shanghai ( 2007 )  , Driverless ( 2010 ) and Say Yes !  ( 2013 )  . 

Here are 10 titles that illustrate Shanghai ’ s immeasurable capacity for stimulating the cinematic imagination . 

The Goddess ( 1934 ) 
Director : Wu Yonggang


The Goddess ( 1934 ) 
The Goddess is a classic of Chinese cinema ’ s golden age , with a powerful performance from silent era superstar Ruan Lingyu as the nameless ‘ goddess ’ of the title who works as a prostitute to support herself and her son . When the red light district is raided , she flees from the police and hides in the house of an opportunistic gambler ( Zhang Zhizhi ) on the condition that she spend the night with him . This turns into a long-term arrangement as the gambler threatens to harm her child if she tries to run away . 

This heartbreaking social commentary from the leftist Lianhua Film Company signals its critique by cutting from the glorious night-time Shanghai skyline to the tragic heroine wandering the streets in search of clients . The company further railed against the city ’ s inequality and lack of compassion with Cai Chusheng ’ s dramas Song of the Fishermen ( 1934 ) and New Woman ( 1935 )  , the latter of which starred Ruan in her final performance before negative press attention caused her to commit suicide at the age of 24 . 

The Shanghai Gesture ( 1941 ) 
Director : Josef Von Sternberg


The Shanghai Gesture ( 1941 ) 
The last Hollywood production that Josef von Sternberg would complete , The Shanghai Gesture is a typically expressionistic and seedily intoxicating film noir , which imagines the ‘ Pearl of the Orient ’ as a hedonistic playground for lost souls . The doomed heroine here is Poppy ( Gene Tierney )  , a privileged globetrotter who gets addicted to gambling at a 1930s Shanghai casino run by the formidable ‘ Mother Gin Sling ’  ( Ona Munson )  . Meanwhile , the proprietress is caught in a land battle with Poppy ’ s father , the English entrepreneur Sir Guy Charteris ( Walter Huston )  . It all culminates in the most tragic Chinese New Year ever committed to celluloid . 

John Colton ’ s original play took place in a brothel , but the Hays Office required the story to be relocated to a casino – one of many changes imposed to make this lurid tale acceptable for popular consumption . Nonetheless , this is still an unsparing descent into decadence , with the hazy atmosphere suggesting the illicit activities that were deemed off-limits by the censors , while Poppy ’ s name and the dead-eyed expression of Egyptian con artist ‘ Doctor ’ Omar ( Victor Mature ) sneakily imply their characters ’ off-screen opium habits . 

The Spring River Flows East ( 1947 ) 
Directors : Cai Chusheng and Zheng Junli


The Spring River Flows East ( 1947 ) 
The Spring River Flows East is an epic melodrama that chronicles the trials and tribulations of a Shanghai family around the Second Sino-Japanese War . Released in two parts – ‘ Eight Years of Turmoil ’ and ‘ Before and After Dawn ’ – it was touted as China ’ s answer to Gone with the Wind ( 1939 )  , with emblematic personal struggles set against the backdrop of tumultuous then-recent history . It broke box office records by combining grand Hollywood style and Chinese patriotism at a time when audiences were clamouring for high-quality productions that reflected their own experiences . 

In 1931 , teacher Zhang Zhongliang ( Tao Jin ) marries factory worker Sufen ( Bai Yang )  , but he flees to Chungking when the Japanese invasion begins . After a bout of disillusionment , he reinvents himself as a businessman and marries society hostess Wang Lizhen ( Shu Xiuwen )  . Meanwhile , his real family barely manages to survive in Shanghai , and when Zhongliang finally returns in 1945 following the Japanese surrender , his betrayal has a devastating impact on the wife he has forgotten . 

The film ’ s title is derived from a Tang Dynasty poem that asks :  “ How much sorrow can one man bear ?  ” However , Sufen is the one who truly suffers while Zhongliang prospers , leading to her tragic fate at the Huangpu river . 

Buy The Spring River Flows East on BFI DVD
Fist of Fury ( 1972 ) 
Director : Lo Wei


Fist of Fury ( 1972 ) 
Set during the Japanese occupation of Shanghai , Fist of Fury had a nationalistic message that cemented Bruce Lee ’ s stardom in Asia following the breakthrough success of The Big Boss ( 1971 )  . He takes on the role of folklore hero Chen Zhen who , upon learning that his martial arts teacher Huo Yuanjia has died suddenly from ‘ pneumonia ’  , refuses to accept the official cause and seeks revenge on the rival Japanese dojo that he believes to be responsible . 

There are copious symbolic moments in which Chen fiercely reclaims Chinese national pride . Returning a funeral ‘ gift ’ to the Japanese dojo – a banner bearing the insult “ Sick Man of East Asia ” – Chen defeats the students and their sensei , then forces pieces of the banner into their mouths to make them eat their words . Later , Chen is denied entry to Huangpu Park based on a sign that reads :  “ No Dogs and Chinese allowed ”  . Mocked by a group of Japanese men , the fighter beats them up and swiftly destroys the sign . Although the film acknowledges the reality of such retaliation by ending with the hero about to be gunned down by the International Settlement ’ s police force , the closing freeze frame of Chen ’ s furious flying kick immortalises his defiance . 

Shanghai Triad ( 1995 ) 
Director : Zhang Yimou


Shanghai Triad ( 1995 ) 
Shanghai Triad is a sumptuous 1930s-set underworld saga that finds Zhang Yimou operating within pulp genre trappings but further enables the Fifth Generation figurehead to critique China ’ s outmoded hierarchies and propensity for corruption from the relatively safe distance of a period piece . Adapted from Li Xiao ’ s novel Rules of a Clan , its principals are 14-year-old gang recruit Tang Shuisheng ( Wang Xiaoxiao )  , his powerful employer Boss Tang ( Li Baotian ) and alluring cabaret singer Xiao Jingbao ( Gong Li )  , who is Boss Tang ’ s mistress . Over the course of eight eventful days , a series of betrayals occur that strikingly illustrate the human consequences of attaining status in a rigidly structured system . 

Told from Shuisheng ’ s impressionable point of view , Shanghai Triad initially seduces the viewer with its vibrant period recreation . Zhang uses his flair for bold colours – seen particularly in the depiction of Boss Tang ’ s lavish lifestyle and the fancy nightclub where Jingbao performs – to make membership of this underworld highly desirable . Steadily , though , it becomes apparent that such ostentatious pleasures only serve to masquerade societal falsehoods and compromises , as embodied by the manner in which Boss Tang manipulates others to maintain public ‘ face ’ and the longings of the seemingly materialistic Jingbao for the honest simplicity of her rural upbringing . 

Flowers of Shanghai ( 1998 ) 
Director : Hou Hsiao-hsien


Flowers of Shanghai ( 1998 ) 
The events of Hou Hsiao-hsien ’ s feverishly atmospheric Flowers of Shanghai occur within the confines of four brothels ( or ‘ Flower Houses ’  ) in the British Concession of 19th-century Shanghai , which are exquisitely lit with oil lamps by master cinematographer Pin Bing Lee . Hou ’ s emphasis on routine completes the ‘ closed world ’ effect , with the serving of tea and the preparing of opium pipes used as recurring motifs . The main narrative concerns a love triangle between Master Wang ( Tony Leung )  , his lover of several years ( Michiko Hada ) and interloper Jasmin ( Vicky Wei )  , the fallout of which is captured in detached long shots that reveal every telling gesture . 

Hou ’ s limited use of sets , restricted field of vision and vague sense of time passing are typical of his evocation of history , with the period explored in microcosm as a series of necessary exchanges between the controlling madams who run the brothels , the gentlemen clients and the delectable courtesans . Within this outwardly polite but inwardly violent power struggle , it is the latter who must become the most conniving players in a game that revolves around emotional fluctuations , intense physical desire and a barely suppressed yearning for freedom . 

Suzhou River ( 2000 ) 
Director : Lou Ye


Suzhou River ( 2000 ) 
Filmed when Shanghai was in the throes of globalisation as part of a government initiative to restore its international status , Lou Ye ’ s hypnotic noir is at once a record of sudden urban transformation and a sensuous take on the city ’ s enduring romantic essence . Its doomed lovers are motorcycle courier Mardar ( Jia Hongshen ) and businessman ’ s daughter Moudan ( Zhou Xun ) whose romance is tragically curtailed when a kidnapping scheme goes awry . Mardar believes he has lost the love of his life until he encounters bar performer Meimei ( also played by Zhou ) who is Moudan ’ s exact double . 

Suzhou River is justifiably famous for its arresting opening montage in which the videographer captures footage of Shanghai ’ s redevelopment while travelling down the titular waterway by barge . It also takes in the dilapidated factories along the creek and the seedy after-hours establishment where the blonde-wigged Meimei swims around an aquarium dressed as a mermaid for drunken spectators . Like fellow Sixth Generation members Wang Xiaoshuai and Zhang Yuan , Lou focuses on young inhabitants of the metropolis who are being pushed to its social-economic margins . With the dreamlike Suzhou River , however , Lou eschews the stark realism of his contemporaries in favour of a tantalisingly blurred recollection of the recent past . 

The White Countess ( 2005 ) 
Director : James Ivory


The White Countess ( 2005 ) 
A sadly overlooked entry in the celebrated Merchant Ivory canon , The White Countess is a finely observed study of displacement in which the paths of former US diplomat Todd Jackson ( Ralph Fiennes ) and exiled Russian countess Sofia Belinskya ( Natasha Richardson ) cross in late-1930s Shanghai . Jackson has lost his family in a terrorist bombing that left him blind while Sofia has been reduced to bar work , but when a racecourse bet pays off handsomely , Jackson opens an upscale nightclub and makes Sofia his main hostess . It proves to be a roaring success , but the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War threatens to rupture this elegant cocoon . 

Although filmed entirely in China , the production encountered problems in Shanghai as its surviving pre-war architecture is now overshadowed by looming skyscrapers . Instead , much of the period was recreated on soundstages built for local film and television dramas or shot on locations in regional areas . The interiors of the hotels and elite gentlemen ’ s clubs are meticulously designed , but the film ’ s aesthetic triumph is Jackson ’ s titular nightclub , which aspires to be a place for all nations only to be left deserted when the Japanese invasion begins . 

Lust , Caution ( 2007 ) 
Director : Ang Lee


Lust , Caution ( 2007 ) 
The first half of Ang Lee ’ s impeccably crafted wartime espionage thriller takes place in Hong Kong in 1939 , where resistance recruit Wong Chia Chi ( Tang Wei ) pretends to be the wife of a trading company owner in order to seduce married secret police chief Mr Yee ( Tony Leung ) so that her fellow patriots have a chance to assassinate the traitor . Their operation is abruptly curtailed but gets a second chance three years later in Shanghai , by which time Yee has become a senior agent in the puppet government established by the Japanese . The city ’ s bustling streets , darkened hotel rooms and boutique shops become spaces for a deadly game of romantic betrayal . 

Rich in period detail from private mahjong games to crowded alleyways and chic coffee houses , this tensely erotic adaptation of Eileen Chang ’ s haunting novella builds to a masterfully executed climax at a jewellery store on West Nanjing Road , an area famous for its luxury goods . On a rare excursion without his bodyguards , the infatuated Yee presents his mistress with a gorgeous pink diamond ring , a romantic gesture that forces the emotionally conflicted Chia Chi to make a final decision regarding her loyalties as members of her resistance cell are lying in wait . 

Legend of the Fist : The Return of Chen Zhen ( 2010 ) 
Director : Andrew Lau


Legend of the Fist : The Return of Chen Zhen ( 2010 ) 
This handsomely mounted piece of escapism recycles the sets from the Hong Kong historical action film Bodyguards and Assassins ( 2009 ) as a stage for the heroic exploits of legendary fighter Chen Zhen ( Donnie Yen ) in 1920s Shanghai . Returning to China after helping the Allies in France during the First World War , Chen assumes the identity of a comrade who was killed in action in order to assist an underground resistance movement in preventing the Empire of Japan from invading China . 

Andrew Lau does well to marshal the film ’ s potentially conflicting tones : Chen ’ s escapades are choreographed with comic book panache as Yen dons a black costume ( referencing Bruce Lee via his Kato outfit ) to thwart various Japanese assassins , while the final reel swells with the nationalistic feeling that is typical of period adventures tailored for the mainland China market . Legend of the Fist plays fast and loose with Shanghai ’ s history , using its mix of night-time glitz and political instability as a splashy backdrop for a rousing chapter in the Chen Zhen mythology . 