A Design framework for enabling sustainability in the clothing sector 
SANTOS , Aguinaldo dos ; Federal University of Paraná , Brazil ; asantos @ ufpr . br 
CESCHIN , Fabrizio ; Brunel University London , College of Engineering , Design and 
Physical Sciences , Department of Design ; Uxbridge , UB8 3PH , United Kingdom ; 
fabrizio . ceschin @ brunel . ac . uk 
MARTINS , Suzana Barreto ; State University of Londrina , Brazil ; 
suzanabarreto @ onda . com . br 
VEZZOLI , Carlo ; Politecnico di Milano , INACO Department , Unit of Research Design 
and System Innovation for Sustainability ( DIS )  , Italy ; carlo . vezzoli @ polimi . it 
Aguinaldo dos Santos is Professor at the Design Department and Design Post-graduate 
Program , Federal University of Paraná ( UFPR )  , in the city of Curitiba , Brazil . Since 
2003 he is the coordinator of the Design & Sustainability Research Center at UFPR . Car 
Mechanic Technician – ( SENAI / PR , 1984-1986 )  , Civil Engineer ( UFPR , 1988 – 1992 )  ; 
MSc on Civil Engineering ( UFRGS , 1993 - 1995 )  ; PhD on Operations Management - 
University of Salford , England ( 1996 – 1999 )  ; Post-doctored on Sustainable Design – 
Politecnico di Milano ( 2008 / feb-2009 )  . His main research interests sustainable design , 
with a focus on solutions for low-income families and on product-service systems . His 
editorial , referee and ad-hoc activities includes journals such as Ambiente Construído 
( São Paulo )  , Construction Management & Economics , Design em Foco , Estudos em 
Design , Product ( IGDP )  , Journal of Disaster Resilience on the Built Environment and 
Journal of Construction on Developing Countries . At CNPq ( Brazilian Funding 
Agency ) he has coordinated the high committee on Design . He is on the Advisory 
Board of the Sustainable Maker Project ( 2013-2016 )  , sponsored by the European 
Community . His recent projects include : Leapfrogging the low-income consumer on 
energy and water consumption ( funded by FINEP / CNPq )  ( 2008-2013 )  ; product-service 
system for rainwater harvesting on low-income houses ( funded by CNPq / Tigre – 2009-
2011 )  ; Kits do-it-yourself for low income housing ( funded by FINEP / CNPq - 2005–
2008 )  . He has been the Chair of the 7th Brazilian Congress on Design Research & 
Development ( 2006 )  ; 1st International Symposium on Sustainable Design ( Curitiba - 
2007 )  ; 2nd International Symposium on Sustainable Design ( São Paulo – 2009 ) and the 
1st Symposium Paranaense de Design Sustentável ( Curitiba , 2010 )  . 
Dr Fabrizio Ceschin is a Lecturer in Design for Sustainability within the Design 
Department , in the College of Engineering , Design and Physical Sciences , Brunel 
University London . He holds a BSc and MSc degrees in Industrial Design awarded by 
Politecnico di Milano in Italy . In 2006 he joined the Design and Innovation for 
Sustainability research group ( Design department of Politecnico di Milano ) as research 
assistant . In 2009 he started his doctoral research in Design at Politecnico di Milano , 
and in 2012 he obtained his Ph . D . degree . He was research fellow at Politecnico di 
Milano before joining Brunel University London in September 2012 . Fabrizio is 
specialised in Design for Sustainability , and in particular in the elaboration of strategies , 
methods , and tools to enable companies , public institutions , NGOs , communities to 
tackle sustainability challenges at different levels : product level ( Life Cycle 
Assessment , Ecodesign )  , Product-Service System level ( new service propositions , 
sustainable business models , value chains etc .  )  , and social innovation level ( design for 
grass-root innovations )  . Within this framework he took part in several national and 
international research projects , funded by the European Commission , national 
institutions , small and medium enterprises , and multinational enterprises . His most 
recent book ‘ Sustainable Product-service Systems : Between Strategic Design and 
Transition Studies ’ has been published by Springer ( 2014 )  . 
Dr Suzana Barreto Martins is professor and researcher at the Design Department of 
the State University of Londrina , UEL , Brasil . Post-doctorate on Sustainable Design - 
Federal University of Paraná ; Doctorate in Industrial Engineering - Federal University 
of Santa Catarina ; Master of Ergonomics and Speciality in Materials and Textile 
Processes - National Autonomous University of Mexico UNAM ; Undergraduate in 
Industrial Design ; Federal University of Paraná . Researcher in Design and 
Sustainability , with emphasis on sustainability applied to clothing and fashion industry 
focused on technological innovation in processes and new materials . Coordinator of : 
Working Group Fashion , Sustainability and Inclusion of the Colloquium of Fashion ; the 
research group in CNPq ( Brazilian Funding Agency ) Design , Sustainability and 
Innovation ; and the research projects Design for sustainability applied for textile 
Industry with emphasis on technological innovation in processes and new materials 
awarded ( 2012-2015 )  , with Araucaria Foundation promoting and some patents 
deposited with potential innovation ; and Interdisciplinary model of innovation and R & 
D in new materials , products and businesses from waste focusing on Design for 
Sustainability ( 2015 to date )  , at UEL . Member of Scientific Committees Congress in 
Design , Ergonomics and Sustainability and has been coordinator of 1st International 
Symposium on Sustainable Design ( Curitiba - 2007 )  ; 2nd International Symposium on 
Sustainable Design ( São Paulo – 2009 ) and the 3th , 4th , 5th Symposium Paranaense on 
Sustainable Design ( Curitiba , 2012-2014 )  . 
For 20 years Carlo Vezzoli has been researching and teaching on design for 
sustainability . At the Design department of the Politecnico di Milano University he is 
professor of product Design for environmental Sustainability and System Design for 
Sustainability as well as head of the research group Design and Innovation for 
Sustainability ( DIS ) and of the lab Design and Sustainability ( de . SOS )  . Among others , 
he is founder of the Learning Network on Sustainability ( LeNS , www . lens . polimi . it 
funded by 2 bioregional projects of the European Commission )  , which is a worldwide 
multipolar network of networks of design schools covering all continents , with the aim 
of diffusing design for sustainability with an open and copyleft ethos . His book Design 
for Environmental Sustainability ( London : Springer , 2008 ) has been published in 
English , Italian , Portuguese , Chinese and Spanish . His most recent book ProductService System design for Sustainability ( London : Greenleaf , 2014 )  , will be soon 
published even in Chinese and Thai . 
Abstract 
This article discusses general strategies to enable environmental sustainability within 
the clothing sector , providing a framework for decision makers involved in the 
development of programs and policies for this sector . It initially revises the 
environmental impact of the clothing system and determines its key environmental 
sustainability priorities . The framework involves five evolutionary strategies for 
enabling sustainable consumption and production : 1 ) environmental improvement of 
flows throughout the supply chain ; 2 ) environmental redesign of existing clothes ; 3 ) 
design of new clothes intrinsically more sustainable ; 4 ) design of cloth-service systems 
and 5 ) promoting life styles towards sufficient consumption . The practical implications 
of each strategy is analysed based on correspondent ex-post-facto case studies identified 
in Brazil , using data collected through literature review and desktop research . 
Keywords 
Sustainability ; Design ; Clothing ; Fashion . 
Introduction 
The current pattern of production and consumption within the textile and clothing 
industry in Brazil and elsewhere is still based on a continuous supply of products to a 
market characterized by increasingly faster cycles of fashion trends . According to 
Bhardwaj and Fairhurst ( 2010 )  , the fashion industry is witnessing three to five midseasons fashion launches , which put pressure on suppliers to develop and deliver 
fashion apparel in increasingly smaller batches with reduced lead time . The result is 
increasingly shorter life cycle of products in an industry that has already a significant 
environmental impact , particularly on the phases of dyeing , drying and finishing , with 
and intensive use of chemical products and natural resources ( De Brito et Al . 2008 ; 
Lakhal et Al . 2008 ; Caniato et Al . 2012 ; Jorgensen and Jensen , 2012 )  . 
In general the clothing sector worldwide is a very distributed and heterogeneous sector 
with a globalised network of suppliers , where production and consumption take place in 
different countries and sometimes different continents . Driven mainly by the search for 
lower production costs , many companies in the sector are increasingly relying on 
suppliers from other parts of the world to manufacture their products or carry out phases 
of its manufacturing process ( Jacobs , 2006 )  . One of the consequences to the 
environment of such practices is an increase on transport related energy consumption 
and emissions . 
According to the World Trade Organization ( 2008 )  , the clothing / textile sector accounts 
for 9 . 3% of world ’ s employees and 4% of worldwide exports . The wide range of 
stakeholders in this sector includes : cultivators and natural fibres production companies ; 
fibres manufacturing companies ; textiles and garments manufacturing companies ; 
packaging companies ; wholesale dealers ; retail stores ; consumers ; washing , drying and 
ironing equipment manufacturers ; tailors and maintenance / repair centres ; clothing 
donation centres ; collection and disposal centres ; consumers associations and NGOs 
( Caniato et Al . 2012 )  . Hence , with such wide social and economic capillarity , the sector 
is under severe scrutiny by governments and consumers . As a result , it is not uncommon 
to witness clothing corporations establishing their manufacturing operations on 
developing countries as a strategy to avoid the economic consequences of more strict 
environmental and employment regulations . 
When compared to the above general patterns of the sector , the Brazilian clothing and 
textile sector presents some very peculiar characteristics that can be considered as 
opportunities for achieving more sustainable practices . The country is one of the few 
western countries where all stages of the clothing supply chain can be found within the 
country boarders , from fibre production to semi-processed products ( yarn and fabrics 
with their finishing processes ) and final products . It is fourth on apparel production and 
fifth on textile production . Paradoxically , its share on the world trade is relatively small , 
with less than 0 , 5% , occupying the 23rd position on the ranking of exporters . Indeed , 
almost the entire production focuses on the internal market ( ABIT , 2013 )  . 
The movement towards sustainability in Brazil has been driven by a growing number of 
professionals and leaders on the sector , as well as government legislation , fuelled by the 
rise of customer expectations on environmental and social issues . A clear demonstration 
of this change was the fact that in 2007 the first edition of the São Paulo Fashion Week 
put a great emphasis on sustainability . In that event , one of the largest in South 
America , the immediate effect of such emphasis was the integration of themes such as 
 “ eco-friendly ”  ,  “ organic ”  , and “ fair trade ” on the innovation agenda of the sector . 
However , the effective advances towards sustainability are still quite limited . 
The challenge is complex and it is exacerbated by the fact that sustainability is still an 
evolving concept , particularly on the issue of how to implement it in practice . In order 
to support the development of programs and policies for the sector , the present paper 
proposes a general framework for action towards sustainability , providing a road map 
for decision makers . The proposal is exemplified by means of four Brazilian cases 
studies . 
Environmental sustainability priorities in the clothing system 
There are demands and opportunities to enhance the level of environmental 
sustainability in every single stage of the clothing supply chain , with different 
environmental priorities at each stage . Understanding the causes and symptoms , as well 
as the dynamics of the environmental impacts , is a fundamental step to improve the 
sustainability performance of the sector . With this purpose , some of the key 
environmental issues affecting this supply chain are described below : 
• Pre-production ( material production )  : 
o For natural fibres , the key impacts are from the growing of fibre crops 
( including small to large scale farming ) and their processing . The 
impacts include : land use ; water use ; toxicity from pesticide , herbicide 
and fertilizer use ; soil erosion ; reduced biodiversity and ecosystem 
damage . The use of fertilizer , pesticides and herbicides is responsible of 
impacts such as significant energy use ( in fertilizer / pesticides / herbicides 
production )  , generation of emissions to air , water and waste . In cotton 
production , for example , about 40% of the cotton is transformed into 
fibre , and the remaining seed is transformed into eatable oils and animal 
feed . This means that in a plantation where there is a conventional use of 
agro toxics ( e . g . fertilizers , herbicides , pesticides )  , part of the chemical 
products remains concentrated in the seeds that will be transformed into 
cooking oils and animal feed , with direct consequences on human health 
as well as the ecosystem . For wool fibre production , we should consider 
the additional impacts of sheep farming . The key impacts of this include 
methane emissions and the use of sheep-dip chemicals ( e . g . 
organophosphates ) with significant toxicity and pollution impacts ( Defra , 
2007a ; 2007b )  . 
o For man-made fibres the impacts occur mostly on extraction and 
processing . Whilst cotton and wool manufacturing requires large 
quantities of water and pesticides , synthetic fibres are extracted from 
non-renewable resources , requiring considerable amount of energy 
( Myers and Stolton , 1999 )  . The impacts of synthetic fibres derived from 
petrochemicals include depletion of fossil fuels , energy and water use , 
emissions to air ( e . g .  : GHG gas nitrous oxide )  , effluent and ( hazardous 
and non-hazardous ) waste generation ( Defra , 2007a ; 2007b )  . On this 
respect Muthu et al .  ( 2012 ) concluded that acrylic was the least preferred 
fibre in terms of environmental impact and ecological sustainability . 
• Production : according to Allwood et Al .  ( 2006 )  , around 55% of the world 
production of fibres for clothing and textiles are synthetic ( Jorgensen and 
Jensen , 2012 )  . Fibre manufacturing involves processes such as spinning , 
weaving and knitting , which use large amount of energy and water , generating 
effluent , air pollution and waste . In addition , fibres can be subject to dyeing , 
bleaching , printing and finishing , which consume large volumes of water , 
energy and chemicals , releasing air emissions and generating effluent and 
( hazardous and non hazardous ) waste ( Defra , 2007a ; 2007b )  . 
• Distribution and Retail : the environmental impact on this stage is mainly due to 
packaging ( material and energy ) and transport . Transport can occur by sea in 
large freighters and / or by truck . Hence , environmental impacts include resource 
depletion ( fossil fuel use )  , GHG emissions and air pollutants from ships ’ and 
vehicles ’ exhausts . At the retail shops , the main impacts are associated with 
building operations : electricity , heating , and lighting . Impacts include resource 
depletion ( fossil fuels )  , emission of GHGs , waste generation and small volumes 
of water use ( Defra , 2007a ; 2007b )  . 
• Use : washing , drying , dry cleaning and ironing result in energy , water and 
chemicals use , generation of effluent and hazardous waste . Detergents and other 
washing substances generate effluent with phosphate concentration causing 
eutrophication impacts . For dry cleaning , the use of solvents ( e . g . 
perchloroethylene ) can cause the generation of Volatile Organic Compounds 
( VOCs ) and solvent waste ( Defra , 2007a ; 2007b )  ; 
• Disposal : at the end of their lifespan clothes can : go to landfill , or be incinerated ; 
be recycled ( into lower value products e . g . mattresses , wipes , carpet underlay , 
automotive components )  ; be reused ( resold or donated to charity associations )  . 
In all these cases we need to account the environmental impacts related to the 
associated processes ( Defra , 2007a ; 2007b )  . The sector has been already pointed 
out as the fastest growing waste stream ( Fisher et Al . 2008 )  , with around 20% of 
all textile products resulting in waste ( Textile Exchange , 2012 )  . Although some 
waste is diverted towards charity shops and second-hand businesses , this market 
is saturated and the lack of quality of donated garments often makes their reuse 
impossible ( Armstrong et Al . 2014 )  . 
Of course it must be highlighted that the impacts described above can vary sensibly in 
relation to the specific processes included in the system . A lot of variables influence 
those processes . For example : the types of fibre used ; the way in which garments are 
produced ; the washing and drying modalities ; the lifespan and the frequency of use ; etc . 
Nevertheless it is possible to identify in general terms the activities , along the whole life 
cycle , that are responsible of the main environmental impacts . 
Based on the overview of the clothing sector ’ s environmental issues , it emerges that the 
main environmental impacts are in the production of clothes ( including fibres and 
fabrics )  , and in the washing , drying , and ironing of clothes . On the basis of these 
considerations it is possible to delineate the priorities , in terms of environmental 
sustainability , that should be followed to orient the clothing sector towards 
sustainability ( Vezzoli and Ceschin , 2008 )  : 
• Life span optimisation ( HIGH priority )  : the optimisation of clothes ’ life span 
brings about a potential reduction in the quantities of clothes produced and 
disposed of . In other words , the less frequently a consumer purchases clothes the 
less frequently fibres , textiles and clothes have to be manufactured , distributed 
and disposed of . Life span optimisation can be reached through the extension of 
the clothes ’ life span ( and in this case clothes would be extensively used )  , and 
through the sharing of clothes ( and in this case clothes would be intensely used )  . 
• Energy consumption reduction in use ( HIGH priority )  : reduction of the energy 
related to washing , drying and ironing . This can be obtained through ( Fletcher , 
2008 )  : improving efficiency and control of washing , drying and ironing 
equipments ; realizing fabrics and clothes that cause less impact when they are 
laundered ( e . g . they can be cleaned without washing or through washing at low 
temperature )  . User habits can change in the direction of more energy efficiency 
practices . In such circumstances Design can foster such changes in order to 
enable their wider dissemination . In Brazil , for instance , the activity of ironing is 
 “ disappearing ” from the habits of low income consumers , as shown on the study 
of NDS ( 2014 )  , presenting an opportunity to expand the offer of clothes that do 
not require ironing ; 
• Conservation / biocompatibility ( HIGH priority )  : use of renewable resources , and 
use of resources biocompatible in the disposal phase . 
• Resources consumption reduction in pre-production and production ( MEDIUM 
priority )  : reduction of material and energy required to manufacture fibres , 
fabrics and garments . This can be reached by the selection of fibres that use 
lower amount of resources , and / or by improving the efficiency of the 
manufacturing processes . 
• Waste minimisation / valorisation ( LOW priority )  : facilitation of the recycling of 
raw materials to provide inputs to the manufacture of other goods ; and / or 
facilitate the incineration ( with energy recovery ) of disposed clothes . 
• Toxicity reduction ( LOW priority )  : reducing the toxicity in pre-production ( due 
to pesticide , herbicide and fertilizer )  , production ( due to dyeing , bleaching and 
printing processes )  , and use ( due to detergents )  . 
• Transportation reduction ( LOW priority )  : reduction of the transportation needed 
to move raw materials from the growing / extraction places to processing 
companies , and to move finished products from the production centres to retail 
stores . 
Optimizing the life span of clothing artifacts , understood here a high priority , affects 
directly a fundamental problem for achieving a sustainable clothing system : 
overconsumption . Bianchi and Birtwistle ( 2007 , 2010 ) point out that overconsumption 
is stimulated by design through fast fashion , resulting in short-term use of clothing 
products , psychological obsolescence and premature disposal ( Bianchi and Birtwistle , 
2010 ; Birtwistle and Moore , 2007 ; Armstrong et Al . 2014 )  . Therefore , design activity 
can be considered as both a source of environmental problems as well as a potential 
source of solutions to tackle the same problems . Focusing on the solution side of this 
equation , the next section presents a framework of generic strategies to improve the 
sustainability of the clothing system from a design point of view . 
Research Method 
The research adopted a non-systematic literature review and an ex-post-facto ( or “ afterthe-fact ”  ) multiple case studies as the main research method . This consists of a research 
in which the investigation starts after the fact has occurred without interference from the 
researcher . This research method was chosen since it was assumed by the researchers 
that sustainable solutions often take a long time to be implemented in the real world , far 
beyond the conventional time frame of research funding bodies . 
The selection of case studies adopted a “ pattern matching ” approach where the 
researchers looked for “ literal replications ” of the theory ( Yin , 2013 )  . In this process , 
the empirical evidence was considered to be a “ literal replication ” when observed 
results matched the theoretical predictions . The unit of analysis was the practice
observed in each case study that corresponded to the generic strategy described in each 
level of the theoretical framework . Information gathered through literature review and 
desktop research enabled to substantiate the pattern matching findings . 
Generic strategies to enable sustainability in the clothing system 
This section presents an evolutionary view on the strategies on Design for 
Sustainability , ordered according to their potential environmental impact as well as the 
behaviour change required from final consumers . The model was built by adapting the 
same generic framework proposed by Santos ( 2009 ) to the peculiarities of the clothing 
sector . 
Figure 1 : An evolutionary progression of strategies towards environmental sustainability in the 
clothing sector . 
Level 1 : Environmental improvement of flows throughout the supply chain 
Description 
This strategy is aimed at improving the environmental performance of operations flows 
( materials and information ) as well as process flows ( people and machines )  , in order to 
make them more efficient in terms of use of material and energy , without any change in 
the product itself . The product represents the constant on the production system , and the 
focus is on redesigning processes and operations throughout the entire supply chain to 
be more resource efficient , to prevent pollution and waste generation . In other words the 
aim is to intervene on processes / operations in order to reduce , per each manufactured 
product , the content of inputs ( materials , energy , water , etc .  ) and output ( solid waste , 
waste water , emission to air , etc .  )  . 
In practice design professionals are not usually involved in the decision making process 
related to improve the supply chain environmental performance . General approaches to 
achieve this goal include ( UNEP , 1993 ; European Commission , 2003 ; Fletcher , 2008 )  : 
• reducing / optimising the number of processing steps ( e . g . merging three 
processing stages : de-sizing , scouring and bleaching into a single process )  ; 
• reducing / optimising the amount of consumables in the manufacturing stage ( e . g . 
introducing automated dosing and dispending systems for chemicals )  ; 
• choosing “ clean ” processing chemicals ( e . g . selecting chemicals based on 
minimizing overall lifecycle risk )  ; 
• reducing energy and water consumption ; 
• reducing waste in production : this includes waste related to overproduction , 
inventory , repair / rejects , motion , transport , inefficient processing , waiting ( Imai , 
1997 ; Shingo , 1989 ; Santos et Al . 2008 )  . 
Government restrictions on the use of chemicals in the clothing sector have contributed 
to the implementation and diffusion of the above mentioned practices in many 
countries . Eco-labelling ( ex : Global Organic Textile Standards , Ecolabel , Global 
Reporting Initiative -GRI- , Apparel and Footwear Sector Supplement ) is one of the 
strategies that has produced results since it does stimulate both the supply and the 
demand side to reduce environmental impacts on different stages of the life cycle . 
Usually it involves establishing limits on the use of substances that are harmful to the 
environment in the production , use and waste handling ( EU , 2009b ; Jorgensen and 
Jensen , 2012 ) 
Level 1 can have a limited effect on consumption patterns as it is more focused inwards 
at the company and its supply chain . Although there is a great potential for improving 
sustainability from this perspective , it must be highlighted that its contribution to 
effective environmental improvements is limited if the final consumer is not aware 
about such practices and does not take it into consideration when choosing a product . In 
fact , if we look to the priorities identified in the previous section we can easily note that 
intervening exclusively on operation and process flows leads to improvements on 
resources consumption reduction in production ( MEDIUM priority )  , and Toxicity 
reduction in production ( LOW priority )  . Also , it has to be underlined that there is not 
anyenvironmental gain in relation to the higher priorities ( i . e . cloth life span 
optimisation and energy resources reduction in use )  . Furthermore , higher efficiency in 
the flow of processes can lead to a rebound effects in terms of the environmental impact 
of clothing since reduced costs and shorter lead time could stimulate even further 
consumption levels ( Niinimäki and Hassi , 2011 )  . 
Case study 
Most companies in the clothing sector operating in competitive environments have 
already embraced the idea of implementing lean operations , both internally as well as 
throughout their supply chain . Bruce et Al .  ( 2004 ) have analysed textile companies and 
have identified various evidences of such trend . One of the case studies carried out by 
them focused on a large fibre manufacturing company ( 16 . 000 employees )  , with 
production facilities based in Germany , Netherlands , UK , USA , Brazil , Italy and 
Poland . Its market focus range from sportswear companies to hotel chains , with 
products ranging from antimicrobial fibres to interior textiles . Branding is used 
extensively , and brands are being licensed to other products , such as soaps . This 
company supplies fibres to its customers , who in turn convert the fibre into end user 
products , such as sportswear , apparel , furnishing products . 
As the international competition increased , the company initially focused on adding 
value to its products since the production costs of their competitors was considerably 
cheaper . However , as the international competition , particularly from Turkey and China , 
began to produce technically complex products , the company was forced to search for 
even higher levels of performance on its operations . In order to implement a pull 
production system , thus reducing waste , the company set up a research group to 
proactively work to shortening lead times to six months rather than their current timescale of more than a year ( Bruce et Al . 2004 )  . Moving from “ push production ” towards 
 “ pulling production ” contributed to reducing waste in the supply chain . However , the 
driver on this case was clearly not environmental but economic , withstanding the 
competition from low-cost producers . 
Level 2 : Environmental redesign of the existing clothes 
Description 
This strategy attempts to improve environmental efficiency with the selection of low 
impact materials and energy sources without changing the cloth design itself . In relation 
to the clothing sector we are talking of a mere environmental redesign of existing 
clothes , through the substitution of existing materials with the ones characterized by a 
lower impact . The main interventions at this level are related with the selection of 
materials characterized by a-toxicity , naturalness , recyclability , biodegradability and 
renewability . On this level there is no need for fundamental changes in the consumer 
life style and related consumption habits ; nevertheless , it relies on the appropriated 
judgement of the user in order to choose products with environmentally responsible 
materials . 
When considering the environmental performance of product ’ s materials it is crucial to 
keep a life cycle perspective . The issue of naturalness , for instance , carries a certain 
level of ambiguity since it has been and still is accepted by many that a “ natural ” 
material has by de-fault a lower environmental impact than synthetic materials . This 
argument , as it is understood now , is wrong ; for example a polyester fibre can have a 
lower impact than cotton fibre ( Vezzoli & Manzini , 2008 ; Fletcher , 2008 pp 6-7 )  . 
Biodegradability is another issue that , similarly to naturalness , has raised many 
misinterpretations . In fact , even if it is important to have materials that can return to 
compounds found in nature , for many products biodegradable materials might pose the 
problem of a shorter lifespan ; this in turn generates new productive and distribution 
processes in order to replace the discarded product ( Vezzoli and Manzini , 2008 )  . 
Environmental redesign is the most common sustainability strategy adopted by the 
clothing sector and has been characterized mainly by the substitution of non-renewable 
materials for renewable materials . General examples of intervention at this level 
include : 
• selection of natural plant fibres organically cultivated ( e . g . using organic cotton 
instead of traditional cotton can reduce the overall toxicity by 93% ( Allwood et 
Al . 2006 )  )  ; 
• selection of fibres with lower environmental impact , considering the textile 
requirements and the local resources availability ( e . g . using bamboo fibres is 
more environmentally beneficial if the plant is cultivated locally )  ; 
• use of recycled fibres , from post-industrial waste or after-consumption waste : 
when these residues are not in conditions of being sold or being reused as 
clothes , they can be recycled . In this case textile waste should be catalogued 
according to their typology , colour , and weight and later disassembled in 
separated parts , thus allowing subsequent use in production . If this material is of 
good quality , it can be mixed with virgin staple fibres for wiring and weaving . If 
that is not the case , the textile material is recycled and can still be used for 
stuffing cushions , pillows , mattresses , linings of carpets etc . In the case of afterconsumption , wasted clothes that are still in good conditions can be directed to 
charity institutions , second-hand stores and vintage stores . In case garments are 
not suited for reuse , they can be sent by those institutions to textile recycling 
companies ; 
• selection of fibres that require less manufacturing processes when transformed 
into fabrics ( e . g . naturally coloured cotton does not require to be bleached or 
dyed )  ; 
• selection of fibres that wash well at low temperatures and dry quickly , or fibres 
that require a lower frequency of washing ( e . g . fibres with coatings providing 
anti-microbial properties to the garment and therefore reducing the frequency of 
washing )  . 
Muthu et Al .  ( 2012 ) pointed to organic cotton as the textile material with the least 
environmental impact , followed by flax textile ( linen )  , conventional cotton and viscose . 
Indeed , organic cotton is derived from a renewable resource ; it is a biodegradable fiber ; 
it consumes less energy during the manufacturing process ; it emits less CO2 and 
generates less damage to human health , ecosystem quality and resources depletion . 
However , consumer adherence to such information should not be taken for granted . In 
Fisher et Al .  ( 2008 ) study , when participants were presented with a variety of examples 
of low environmental impact clothing ( e . g . organic , recycled , redesigned ) they 
continued to evaluate the items using conventional criteria such a price , purpose and 
fashion . 
The effectiveness of interventions on clothing design might depend on changes on the 
user behaviour and consumption decisions not only on the point of sale but also 
throughout the cloth life cycle . Changes of behavior include , for instance , using 
washing machines with frontal lid since they usually demand less energy and less water 
than the ones with top lid ; or by using cold water in the laundering process as much as 
possible ; or employing phosphate-free powder detergents ( to prevent from excessive 
weed formation in the rivers and lakes and from the water transport )  ; or by avoiding to 
operate the washing machine below its normal operating levels . 
Interventions on this level bring about improvements mainly on reducing the resources 
consumption in pre-production and production ( MEDIUM priority )  , and reducing the 
toxicity ( LOW priority ) in the same stages . For example an organic and naturally 
coloured cotton does not need herbicide and fertilizer ( resources and toxicity reduction 
in pre-production )  , and does not need to be bleached and dyed ( resources and toxicity 
reduction in production )  . But there could be other environmental improvements . In fact 
it is possible to : reduce transportation ( LOW priority )  , e . g . selecting a local fibre ; 
minimize waste ( LOW priority )  , e . g . re-using post-industrial scraps ; and even reduce 
energy consumption in use ( HIGH priority )  , e . g . using fibres that can be washed at 
lower temperatures . 
It is clear that the potential environmental improvements on Level 2 are also limited , but 
without doubts they offer greater opportunities for effective environmental performance 
improvements than Level 1 . In fact the environmental gain in this level affects the flow 
of operations and processes and can go beyond that by affecting the entire life cycle of a 
given product . 
Case study 
The Döller Company ( Brazil ) is located in the Itajaí Valley ( Santa Catarina , Brazil )  , 
considered as the biggest textile region of the world in terms of concentration of textile 
industries . The company manufactures textile articles for bedroom , kitchen and bath . 
Beyond conventional staple fibres of natural origin as cotton , or synthetic with natural 
origin ( e , g , viscose ) or derived from oil , Döller Company has also been producing in 
considerable scale articles made of bamboo cellulose ( in particular table and bath 
towels , and robes )  . This material has been used in the production of plain fabrics for 
clothes , with a wider range of options on its colour palette . 
As to the use of the fibre of bamboo for manufacturing the textile articles , it would be 
possible to relate a priori some advantages of its use . It is a regenerated cellulose fibre 
extracted from the pulp of bamboo , produced without chemical additives . The fabrics , 
plain or knotted ( mesh )  , elaborated with bamboo fibre threads , are extremely soft at 
touch , light , and excellent in avoiding wrinkling . The material have also some 
additional positive functional characteristics : it is characterised by a high level of 
absorption of humidity ( being up to four times more absorbent than the cotton fibre )  ; it 
has a natural antibacterial property that provides a coolness sensation ( in addition to 
inhibiting the bad odour )  ; and it is thermodynamic , that is , in the heat it provides the 
sensation of cool , and in the cold the sensation of warm . 
Döller employs this raw material on its products with the declared objective of targeting 
the market of ’ the environmental conscientious ’ consumer , which is still considered a 
niche in Brazilian market today . The resultant clothing aims at achieving superior 
environmental performance and , most importantly , it aims at having superior functional 
performance when compared with conventional solutions . 
However , it is important to mention that these efforts lack of technical-scientific 
endorsement . In fact there is little understanding on : the actual implications of bamboo 
on fauna and flora ; the CO2 impacts of the distances for transportation ( the current raw 
material still comes from China !  )  ; and the chemical processes required for treatment . 
An accurate Life Cycle Analysis would be required to enable further understanding on 
the environmental implications of the use of this material by Döller . 
Level 3 : Design of new clothes intrinsically more environmentally sustainable 
Description 
Considering a given demand for higher environmental efficiency , this strategy attempts 
to develop new products that could provide better environmental performance ( Vezzoli 
and Manzini , 2008 )  . It is a design approach that takes in consideration the whole life 
cycle of the product , and it is aimed at reducing all the inputs ( materials and energy ) and 
output ( environmental effects ) within all processes , from the pre-production , 
production , distribution , to use and disposal phases . 
General concepts aligned with this innovation level include reduction in the number of 
 ’ necessary ’ clothes through the design of multi-purpose clothing , extending cloth 
durability ( Jensen , 2010 )  , and extending the emotional attachment of people to their 
clothes : 
• transformable / multi-purpose clothes : it implies that garments could be used in 
many different ways , reducing the number of clothes a person need to buy to 
satisfy the same clothing need ; 
• durable clothes : it can be achieved by producing classic clothing that do not go 
out of trend and can be combined with other items over a longer timespan 
( Jensen , 2010 )  . On this respect , the study of Niinimäki ( 2011 ) shows that the 
biggest consumer dissatisfaction in the area of clothing is related to the low 
quality of garments in the use and maintenance stages . 
• empathic clothing design and production : extending the emotional linkage 
between people and garments has the potential of extending their lifespan 
( Niinimäki and Hassi , 2011 )  . Enabling customization is one way of achieving 
this emotional linkage . As Chapman ( 2009 ) points out , through customization , 
users can create personal meanings and form attachments to products ; 
• designing one-size / unisex cloth : it contributes to maximise their shareability , a / o 
to facilitate adaptation to the user physical growth ( see for example the work of 
Amy Twigger called “ Keep and Share ” at www . keepandshare . co . uk )  ; 
• designing clothes that require less energy and materials to be produced or 
maintained : see for example some clothes realized by Strada ( 1998 ) without the 
use of any seam . Besides of material and process specifications , designing 
modular clothes can lead to less laundry ( by facilitating the detachment of the 
parts that get soiled )  , and easier maintenance / repair ( through the possibility of 
substituting parts that have a greater probability to wear out )  . 
This approach demands a wider set of competencies for the company and the designer , 
since it involves more variables and more complexity . At the same time it is potentially 
capable to bring greater improvements than the previous levels that focused solely on 
the efficiency of operations / processes and on the selection of materials . On this 
innovation level solutions begin to tackle more fundamental issues that are also linked 
to consumer lifestyle and consumption behaviours . 
Interventions at this level can bring about improvements on reducing the resources 
consumption in production ( MEDIUM priority ) since , for instance , it can contribute to 
reduce and optimise production processes . Environmental benefits are also related to the 
possibility of extending cloth lifespan ( HIGH priority )  , e . g . through designing modular 
clothes where parts that get worn out can be easily substituted . In addition it could be 
possible to intensify the cloth use ( HIGH priority )  , e . g . by designing unisize / unisex 
garments . Potential environmental gains can happen also by reducing the energy 
consumption for washing ( HIGH priority )  , e . g . by designing clothes that allow the 
detachment of the parts that usually get a higher level of dirt ( avoiding the need of 
washing the entire garment )  . 
Case study 
Designer Mucci ( 2008 ) has developed a set of clothing solutions based on Design for 
Sustainability principles . Using three-dimensional modelling as a design tool , the 
designer has been able to achieve zero percentage of waste during manufacturing 
(  ’ moulage ’  )  . Using simple folds , creases and a few sewing , and with the adoption of the 
 ’ moulage ’ technique , the product has a perfect fit to the body of the user . Furthermore , 
the product was designed to allow its use on both sides , thus offering flexibility in terms 
of colours and functional usage ( being suitable for both evening events as well as casual 
activities )  . 
The product was designed to tackle the issue of aesthetic obsolescence . Furthermore , it 
adopted a cascade approach for recycling ( Santos et Al . 2006 ) has been adopted , 
facilitating the possibilities for re-use or reprocessing of each part . The packaging , when 
necessary , was designed using the Japanese ’ furoshiki ’ technique that uses folding and 
moorings on a square fabric to produce an easy to assemble solution . Hence , the 
packaging can have an extended life on the transportation of other goods . 
Level 4 - Design Cloth-Service Systems 
Description 
Cloth-service system can be understood as the result of an innovative strategy that shifts 
the centre of business from the design and sale of clothes alone , to the offer of clotheservice systems that are together able to satisfy a particular demand of satisfaction 
( UNEP , 2002 )  . This strategy is environmentally promising because it can potentially 
lead to “ a systemic minimization of resources , as a consequence of innovative 
stakeholder interactions and related converging economic interests ”  ( UNEP , 2002 )  . 
Clothing product are resource-intensive artefacts and their environmental impact is 
enhanced by overconsumption . Eliminating the fashion effect from the clothing industry 
might be impossible since beyond the provision of technical functions , clothes are also 
used as an extension of one ’ s identity , a medium for communicating with society ( ex : 
social class , status , opinions , gender and age )  ( Kaiser , 1990 ; McCracken , 1990 ; 
Armstrong et Al . 2014 )  . The problem nowadays is the rate of fashion cycles , 
exacerbated by the increased perception of clothes´ disposability . On this context , the 
provision of a mix of clothes and services present itself as an alternative to conventional 
business , leaving behind the dominant model centred on selling clothes and moving 
towards systems able to offer first and foremost the “ clothing ” itself and its qualities . In 
general terms this means shifting the social perception of quality from the ownership of 
new products ( clothes , washing machines , irons , etc .  ) to the satisfaction of fulfilling a 
particular demand of satisfaction ( e . g . having clean clothes )  ( Vezzoli and Ceschin , 
2008 )  . 
It contributes to dematerialize part of the consumption by moving the focus from 
product provision to satisfaction provision . This vision is achieved by integrating 
services associated to clothes that enhance the value perception and , at the same time , 
reduce the need for increasing material consumption . It implies a technical-productive 
reorganization that can generate more significant socio-environmental benefits than the 
previously presented strategies . 
Examples of interventions at this level include : 
• rental and care centres , by which users do not need to be concerned with 
laundry and maintenance any more : clothes are leased from these professional 
centres , which take care of all maintenance activities such as washing , cleaning , 
ironing , and repair . People do not own clothes any more ( except some pieces for 
sentimental reasons and underwear )  , and they are free from any maintenance 
concerns ( Vezzoli and Ceschin , 2008 )  ; 
• collective exchange and maintenance centres by which users don ' t have to do the 
laundry and other clothing maintenance activities in your own home , but in 
nearby places , together with friends or neighbours in local centres . Furthermore 
these collective clothing care centres can also offer other social functions like a 
cafe , a hobby-room or a kindergarten ; in this way clothing care is integrated into 
work , leisure and other household activities , and offers opportunities to meet and 
spend time with people ( Vezzoli and Ceschin , 2008 )  . 
Because clothing-service systems bring about changes at system level , it can potentially 
lead to radical environmental improvements , contributing mainly to the reduction of 
energy consumption in use ( HIGH priority )  , and in the optimisation of clothes life span 
( HIGH priority )  . Continuing with the previously mentioned examples , the possibility 
for exchanging clothes or borrowing them leads to an intensification of the clothes ’ use , 
reducing purchase and home storage ( in this way the potential environmental gain is due 
to the use intensification of clothes and appliances : less clothes and appliances are 
needed at the same time in the same place )  . Moreover the use of services brings the 
opportunity of making economically viable the implementation of environmentally 
benign laundry and maintenance processes . 
Clearly the most fundamental challenge for applying this strategy in the real world is to 
move people away from the notion of “ ownership ” and all associated cultural values . 
However , there is a growing number of examples of companies that are taking the 
initiative of implementing innovative business solutions that are aligned with this view . 
These companies are taking advantage of the benefits of a closer relationship with the 
client required by product-service systems . This continuous relationship demands 
different and wider competencies than just manufacturing and distribution capabilities . 
In this approach the company needs to learn how to manage a continuous relationship 
with the client , creating channels for feedback and integrating this feedback on the 
product-service development / improvement . 
Setting up clothe-service systems might require the re-introduction of traditional 
services . In the study made by Fisher et Al .  ( 2008 ) participants in the UK reported the 
perception that services for clothing repair were uncommon and highly dependent on 
skill level , opportunity for quick and cheap replacement , and the affordability of the 
service . Some felt incentivized to alter or repair items to which they were particularly 
attached whilst others were engaged in repurposing the function of a garment . 
However , the implementation of Business-to-Customer product-service systems is 
hindered by several barriers ( Vezzoli et Al . 2015 )  . The very logic of the clothing 
industry infrastructure is a major barrier to a wider adoption of cloth-service systems 
since the industry is designed to consume a growing amount of resources given that 
material consumption is understood as inseparable from revenue generation ( Armstrong 
et Al . 2014 )  . Another barrier is the potential scepticism consumers may have about 
cloth-service systems adoption , such as doubts about the motives of the company or its 
ability to deliver the promised results ( Rexfelt and Ornäs , 2009 ; Schrader , 1999 ) and 
issues associated with hygiene ( Catulli , 2012 )  . 
Case study 
Atmosfera , a company based in São Paulo and operating in different cities of Brazil , 
offers services to industries , hospitals and hotels by supplying uniforms and providing 
hygienic cleaning , clothing management , and maintenance services . Atmosfera is the 
biggest leasing and textile cleaning company of Brazil and is part of Elis Group , leader 
in the European market of industrial laundry . 
The company calls its clothe-service system as “ intelligent system for uniforms ”  . It 
provides this solution in combination with a wide range of clothes for working spaces : 
for low or high temperatures ; flame repellent ; environmental hazardous conditions ; 
reflective and antistatic . The company elaborates professional clothes for each activity . 
Each cloth is personalised with the trademark of the client company and identified with 
bar codes or RFID chips , enabling the monitoring of each piece to know , for example , 
how often it was washed , if needs repair and if it is time to be replaced . Periodic 
hygienic cleaning of the uniforms is also provided by the company . The sanitization 
process is completely automated and controlled to ensure quality and preserve the 
uniforms cloth , reducing losses for damages . 
According to the company the inspection of each item helps their clients in case they are 
subject to external audits on health and safety as well as environmental management . 
The company produces detailed reports to monitor and control the status of the clotheservice system . Furthermore , in order to foster the environmental practices the company 
have initiatives to educate and their families but the community at large . 
With its services , Atmosfera contributes not only to prevent the discarding of garments , 
but also promotes the reuse of its products and the reduction of post-use clothing waste , 
generating savings to its clients when compared with conventional approaches to obtain 
uniforms ( Atmosfera , 2015 )  . 
Level 5 : Changing Life Styles towards Sufficient Consumption 
This strategy attempts to develop activities in a cultural sphere that could promote new 
qualitative criteria regarding the perception of satisfaction and , thus , modify the 
demand–supply structure towards ’ sufficient consumption ’  . It is not the same as 
consumption efficiency ( Level 2 , 3 e 4 ) which is aimed at achieving a given level of 
satisfaction with less input ( e . g . boiling only the exact amount of water needed for a cup 
of coffee , switching off unneeded lights , carpooling )  ( Alcott , 2008 )  . However , even 
with ’ less input ’ individuals might still be consuming far beyond what they really need . 
 ’ Sufficiency ’  , in contrast , means lowering utility or welfare of a person as close as 
possible to his / her individual needs ( e . g . not having the cup of coffee , not using 
ambience lighting , not taking the car )  . Earth resilience at local and global level is one of 
the key parameters to determine the level of sufficient consumption even though there is 
no consensus on how to perform such evaluation . 
This ‘ sufficiency ’ level cannot emerge without a change on the complex dynamics of 
socio-cultural structures of our society . In this case , the focus is not as much on the 
introduction of recent technological or managerial solutions , but on promoting new 
qualitative criteria on satisfaction that at the same time are economically viable , socially 
acceptable and culturally attractive ( Vezzoli and Manzini , 2008 )  . 
This level requires radical change in mindset and breakthroughs on new lifestyles and 
business processes . Hence , the proposal ( and implementation ) of new sustainable 
scenarios for the consumption and production of clothing implies the promotion of 
radically new different cultural values compared with conventional paradigms . The 
limited capability of an individual or an isolated organization is overcome by 
articulating the change through collaborative network . 
This last level deals with the solutions that effectively change lifestyles , particularly 
regarding clothing ( and fashion )  . Some practical measures include avoiding the use of 
clothe driers ; employing the use of the natural drying under the wind and the sun ; 
avoiding ironing ( hanging the clothes soon after washing it or using fabrics that do not 
wrinkle , for example )  . 
Changing clothing lifestyles might imply to have a wardrobe filled with more classic 
styles in complementary colors , allowing diverse combinations even within the same 
week , making it possible always to have a different appearance every day . It is 
recommended , therefore , to aim at transcending the short lasting feature of the fashion , 
searching for a balance between contemporaneous and extra-temporal fashion . Lined up 
with this recommendation , Kazazian ( 2005 ) suggests favoring the repair and the 
maintenance in order to delay the obsolescence of the product . 
To make possible this strategy , it is necessary that the consumer poses a different 
attitude towards clothing in order to enable the wide adoption of sufficient consumption 
into society . Simple initiatives and attitudes can help its viability such as : to destine old 
pieces of clothing to charity institutions or recycling companies ; to make sure that 
discarded shoes are tighten together ; to store clothes and accessories of fashion and 
clothing in dry places in order to avoid potential damages ; to make use of vintage stores 
and buy used clothes whenever possible ; to privilege the purchase of recycled clothes 
elaborated with staple fibres and materials . It is important to emphasize that all these 
measures should be based on the paradigm of ‘ sufficient consumption ’  , otherwise the 
adoption of conventional consumption patterns might simply increase and result on 
even higher environmental impacts ( e . g . the consumer having more clothes than before 
but all coming from recycling processes )  . 
Conclusion 
The Brazilian case studies have shown that the strategies on the proposed framework 
can be a driver for profound innovations , both at product as well as at system level . 
From innovative solutions aimed at the introduction of easier repair process of clothes 
to new eco-efficient business models , sustainability demands consumers and producers 
to move out from their comfort zone . 
Each level of the framework provides the foundation to an easier implementation of the 
subsequent level , which might suggest that a sequential implementation should be the 
natural approach to realize it in practice . Companies willing to implement a clothservice system ( Level 4 )  , for instance , need to have already some competence on ecodesign ( Level 2 and 3 ) in order to obtain effective results . Nevertheless , it is also 
possible to admit that a company , with the appropriate setting , can jump these levels 
( leapfrog )  . Clearly , further research is required in order to identify methods , criteria and 
tools to determine the most appropriate level that a given company should operate as 
well as how it should progress within the proposed framework . 