Beloved Bollywood singer Lata Mangeshkar dies at 92
AFPPublished February 6 , 2022 199
Singer Lata Mangeshkar answers questions at a press conference in Mumbai , India , April 28 , 1999 . — AFP / File
Bollywood superstar singer Lata Mangeshkar , known to millions as the “ nightingale of India ” and a regular fixture of the country ' s airwaves for decades , died on Sunday at the age of 92 . 

She passed away in a Mumbai hospital after being admitted to its intensive care unit on January 11 with Covid-19 symptoms .  
 
 “ I am anguished beyond words ,  ” India ' s Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote on Twitter .  “ The kind and caring Lata Didi has left us . She leaves a void in our nation that cannot be filled .  ” 


Prime Minister Imran Khan said the subcontinent had lost " one of the truly great singers the world has known "  ,  
 
 " Listening to her songs has given so much pleasure to so many people all over the world ,  " he said . 

Public broadcaster Doordarshan announced a state funeral and two days of national mourning for the singer after news of her death broke . 

Mangeshkar was born in 1929 and started her musical training early under the tutelage of her father Deenanath , singing in his theatrical productions when she was just five . 

Her father ' s death when she was only 13 forced her to take on the role of breadwinner to support four younger siblings , and the family eventually moved to Mumbai in 1945 . 

There she pursued a career as a playback singer , recording tracks to be mimed by actors , and her high-pitched voice soon became a staple of Bollywood blockbusters . 

In a move reflecting her huge following , she was invited by the government to sing a patriotic tribute to the soldiers killed in the 1962 Indo-China war at India ' s Republic Day commemorations in January 1963 . 

Her rendition of “ Oh the People of my Country ” reportedly moved then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru to tears . 

In the following decades , composers and film producers alike vied to sign the prolific Mangeshkar for their movies .  
 
 “ I composed keeping Lata Mangeshkar ' s range and voice quality in mind ,  ” composer Anil Biswas said of her in an interview published in the “ Encyclopedia of Hindi Cinema ”  .  
 
 “ She had a wide range , and one could think of more complicated melodies than with the earlier untrained singers ,  ” he added .  
 
 ' Stalwart of Indian culture ' 
Together with her younger sister Asha Bhonsle — a superstar in her own right — Mangeshkar dominated Bollywood music for more than half a century and is considered by many to be the Indian film industry ' s greatest-ever playback singer . 

Mangeshkar was not shy about taking a stand when it came to raising her prices or asking for a share of the royalties earned on her songs . 

Her longevity and discipline saw her lend her voice to teenage actresses who were 50 years her junior . 

Critics complained that her dominance left little room for newer singers to thrive but her audience remained loyal , ensuring that her songs ruled the charts . 

She was also known for her quirks , such as never singing with her shoes on and always writing out each song by hand before recording it . 

Mangeshkar was in 2001 awarded the Bharat Ratna , India ' s highest civilian honour , and received France ' s Legion d ' Honneur in 2009 in recognition of her contribution to Indian music and cinema . 

A school dropout in her hometown of Indore who said she only attended classes for one day , Mangeshkar was fluent in several languages . 

She sang in more than 1 , 000 films , in addition to recording devotional and classical albums . Her oeuvre spanned around 27 , 000 songs in dozens of languages including English , Russian , Dutch and Swahili .  
 
 ' End of an era ' 
Pakistan politicians also expressed condolences on the legendary musician ' s passing with Information Minister Fawad Chaudhry likening her death as " the end of an era in music "  . 

He said Mangeshkar ruled the world for decades and the " magic of her voice " would live on . 

PML-N President Shehbaz Sharif said the world lost a " singing legend who mesmerised generations with her melodious voice "  .  
 
 " The people of my generation grew up listening to her beautiful songs that will remain part of our memory . May she rest in peace ,  " he tweeted . 

PPP Senator Sherry Rehman said Mangeshkar had such a vast repertoire of music that it was " impossible to choose even five favourite songs "  . 